The CY707A gene codes for this molecule's namesake 8-hydroxylase and is the first step of its
degradation. This compound can be activated by oxidation to phaseic and dihydrophaseic acid, and
one precursor to this molecule is synthesized by NCE decarboxylase, which cleaves a C40 zeaxanthin
precursor to xanthoxin. It helps prevent dessication of roots during soil compaction, and during
water stress signals the guard cells to collapse and close stomata. Its opposed in its most important function
by gibberelin, and in that role suppresses the synthesis of alpha-amylase and upregulates the synthesis of
storage proteins. For 10 points, name this plant hormone responsible for seed dormancy.
ANSWER: Abscisic Acid
Umezawa et al showed that the signaling of this molecule is regulated by protein phosphatase 2C. The
pathway for the synthesis of this compound begins with a zeaxanthin precursor and ends with the cleavage
of a C40 carotenoid into xanthoxin, which is finally oxidized to this molecule; that process of this
molecule's synthesis is called the MEP pathway. Functions of this hormone include promoting gene
transcription for proteinase inhibitors in response to wounding and producing a-amylase in order to act
against the effects of gibberellins. It also plays a major function in regulating the closure of the stomata. For
10 points, name this plant hormone that is sometimes called dormin, which is responsible for the inhibition
of seed germination, fruit ripening and budding.
ANSWER: abscisic acid [accept abscicin II; accept dormin before read]
Sometimes produced in pathogenic fungi, this substance was first researched as two different names.
Production of this compound comes from the oxidation of an aldehyde with a similar name, and it is
synthesized from the compound violaxanthin. Originating in the chloroplasts, it is released in times of stress
as an inhibitory response; doing so rapidly, as it moves with the transpiration stream in the xylem. Its
release signals growth and accumulates storage protein in seed through gene expression. Most notably, it
causes the falling of leaves during winter dormancy, and is largely found in dormant plants or buds. The
main inhibitor of stem growth, FTP, name this phytohormone that regulates the opening and closing of the
stomata in plants under water.
ANSWER: Abscisic acid or ABA (accept dormin before it is used)
Taylor and Smith's hypothesis that this substance was formed from a degradation of xanthophylls was
repudiated by a study that found it generated in mature strawberry plants placed in a carbon dioxide
atmosphere for 10 days. This substance tends to be lacking in corn mutants that suffer from vivipary, and
like its antagonist, it probably derives from isoprenoids. When guard cells encounter this molecule they tend
to open their calcium channels. Increased levels of this substance tend to be present in the winter and in
drought conditions, as it serves to force closure of stomatas in order to save water. Sometimes called the
"stress hormone", for 10 points, name this plant hormone that acts as an antagonist to gibberellin by
inhibiting seed germination.
ANSWER: abscisic acid [or ABA or abscisin II or dormin]
The biosynthesis of this hormone has been studied with the fungi Cercospora rosicola and Cercospora
cruenta. The cytochrome P450 CYP707A encodes an enzyme that catabolizes this hormone in Arabidopsis.
Unlike many isoprenoids, this hormone is not synthesized from mevalonic acid; rather, its precursors are
synthesized by the MEP pathway. This hormone is derived from IPP and DMAPP and its immediate
precursors include xanthoxin and a namesake aldehyde. It is predominantly catabolized by a namesake 8-
prime hydroxylase. It was first identified by Frederick Addicott and associates. This hormone is present in
high levels in severe drought conditions because it triggers the closing of stomata. It is antagonistic to
auxins and gibberellins. For 10 points, identify this plant hormone that promotes seed dormancy and
inhibits growth.
ANSWER: abscisic acid [or ABA; or abscisin II; or dormin; prompt on abscisate]
This compound is synthesized by the isomerization and breakdown of violaxanthin, with the product
xanthonin then being oxidized to yield this molecule's aldehyde, though its only committed precursor is
zeaxanthin. First isolated by Addicott in cotton, it prevents the synthesis of kinetin and, as a shock hormone,
can stimulate closing of the stomata in response to stresses like freezing temperatures. It also prevents the
synthesis of a-amylase, thus countering gibberellins, while a better known function led to it being called
dormin by its discoverers. For 10 points, name this inhibitory plant hormone responsible for bud dormancy
and so named because it causes the "cutting" of leaves from plants.
ANSWER: abscisic acid [accept ABA or abscisin II; prompt on abscisin; do not accept "abscisin I"]
The impact of an overdose of this substace is tracked using a Rumack-Matthew nomogram, and if caught
quickly an overdose of this chemical can be treated with Mucomyst. Classified as an anilide
analgesic and antipyretic, this chemical is combined with Oxycodone to make Percocet or with
Hydrocodone to make Vicodin. It can be given on an alternating every three hour basis with Ibuprofen.
Name this active ingredient in Tylenol.
ANSWER: acetominophen (accept paracetamol, prompt on Tylenol)
A group of proteins which catalyze the transfer of this functional group bind to this group using a
bromodomain and include the MYST and Gcn5 families. This functional group is removed from a
certain class of proteins by the NAD+ dependent protein Sir2. This is the smallest functional group
which carnitine is capable of transferring across the mitochondrial membrane. The addition of this
functional group at the lysine residues of (*) histones is used to enhance transcription. This functional
group is transferred to oxaloacetate to form citrate in the beginning of the Krebs cycle, which takes as one
of its inputs this group bonded to coenzyme A. For 10 points, name this functional group with formula
CH3CO which, in a famous neurotransmitter, is bonded to choline.
ANSWER: acetyl [or ethanoyl]
Along with CO dehydrogenase, this molecule's namesake synthase participates in the WoodLjungdahl pathway, and this compound is the substrate that HAT enzymes use to modify lysine
residues on histones. One molecule of this compound is attached to ACP in the first step of fatty acid
synthesis. One complex that synthesizes this compound is the autoantigen in primary biliary
cirrhosis, and that complex contains a subunit that uses lipoic acid as a tether. Two molecules of this
compound are condensed in the first step of the mevalonate pathway, which synthesizes (*)
isoprenoids. One complex that synthesizes this thioester contains E1, E2, and E3 subunits. This molecule
reacts with oxaloacetate in the first step of the citric acid cycle. For 10 points, name this compound created
by pyruvate dehydrogenase, which consists of a two-carbon molecule bound to a certain coenzyme.
ANSWER: acetyl-CoA [prompt on "acetyl"]
This molecule is produced in the cytoplasm by ATP citrate lyase before being added to the growing
chain in fatty acid synthesis. In plants, this molecule can be converted into succinate via the glyoxylate
cycle. When too much of this molecule is release into the bloodstream, it forms ketone bodies and can lead
to ketosis. That can result from this molecule's release during beta oxidation. The enzyme dihydrolipoyl
dehydrogenase creates this molecule as a product. This molecule and a similar one are combined to form
mevalonate to begin cholesterol synthesis. A dehydrogenase converts a precursor into this molecule before
it enters the Krebs cycle. For 10 points, name this molecule, which is converted from pyruvate during
cellular respiration.
ANSWER: acetyl CoA [or acetyl coenzymeA]
The metabolism of this molecule is affected by the glaucoma drug physostigmine. One of this molecule's
receptors is opposed by atropine, which is extracted from deadly nightshade. The poison curare blocks
another receptor of this molecule; that class of receptors is attacked in the autoimmune disease myasthenia
gravis and is called muscarinic. Botulinum toxin inhibits the release of this compound, causing paralysis.
Reduced synthesis of this neurotransmitter, which is broken down by a namesake esterase, is often
postulated to cause Alzheimer's disease. Found in neuromuscular junctions, it is responsible for muscle
contractions. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter synthesized from a certain nutrient and a common
group often found linked to coenzyme-A.
ANSWER: acetylcholine
Diisopropyl phosphofluoridate binds to the enzyme that breaks down this molecule by forming a covalent
bond between the phosphorus and the hydroxyl oxygen of the serine residue of the active site, barring this
molecule's entry. Its receptor has a 43K cytoplasmic protein and 5 subunits of 4 transmembrane segments,
each with claw-like extracellular amino termini. The vasoline gap voltage clamp showed that it gates
channels permeable to cesium, sodium, and less so to calcium. Antagonized by alpha-bungarotoxin, it is
bound to nicotinic and muscarinic receptors. FTP name this neurotransmitter of the neuromuscular junction
synthesized from acetyl co-A.
ANSWER: acetylcholine
The basal nucleus of Meynert contains large amounts of this substance, and antibodies destroy this
substance's receptors in myasthenia gravis. Galantamine inhibits its breakdown. It has ionotropic
and G protein-coupled receptors called (*) nicotinic and muscarinic, respectively. This molecule is
released in pre- and post-ganglionic parasympathetic neurons, as well as at the motor end plates of skeletal
muscle. A deficiency of it was proposed as a cause of Alzheimer's disease, which is treated using inhibitors
of its namesake esterase. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter that mediates neuromuscular
interactions.
ANSWER: acetylcholine [or ACh]
Curare inhibits one of this compound's receptors. Pre-ganglionic (gang-glee-OHN-ick) fibers in
both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system use it. Botulism produces a toxin that
inhibits this compound. Its muscarinic (moo-skah-REEN-ick) receptors can be found in the heart
and stomach, while its nicotinic receptors are found in the nervous system. It is broken down in the
neuromuscular junction by a namesake esterase (ESS-tehr-ase), which is inhibited by nerve gas like
(*) Sarin. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter that causes muscle contractions.
ANSWER: acetylcholine (ah-see-till-KOH-leen) [or Ach]
Injection of an agonist for this compound into the pontine tegmentum stimulates REM sleep in certain
organisms, while cells producing this compound that project to the neocortex are primarily found in the
basal nucleus of Meynert. Del Castillo and Katz proposed the quantal release theory for this compound,
while cyanobacteria produce anatoxin-a which acts as an analogue of it. Eserine inhibits the breakdown of
this molecule, which is used during cataract surgery to constrict the pupil and whose receptors include
muscarinic and nicotinic varieties. A deficiency of it was theorized to cause Alzheimer's Disease. For 10
points, name this neurotransmitter that induces contraction of skeletal muscle.
ANSWER: Acetylcholine [accept Ach]
MuSK acts with rapsyn to colocalize receptors for this molecule when it binds to the proteoglycan agrin
found in the basal lamina. Binding of this molecule to those receptors causes a rotation of five
transmembrane M2 helices. Alpha-bungarotoxin blocks the activity of this molecule, which is broken down
by a namesake esterase rather than reuptaken in the synaptic cleft. The enzyme that catalyzes this molecule's
synthesis is at abnormally low concentrations in Alzheimer's patients. Black widow venom stimulates excess
release of this molecule, while botulinum toxin blocks its release; both result in paralysis. For 10 points,
name this molecule found at the neuromuscular junction.
ANSWER: acetylcholine[or ACh]
The uptake of this compound is inhibited by vesamicol. HC-3 inhibits the synthesis pathway of this
compound. Antagonists of this compound include alpha-bungarotoxin. Myasthenia Gravis results when
antibodies inhibit this molecule's nicotinic receptors. Muscarinic receptors of this compound are coupled
with G-proteins. Otto Loewi first identified this substance by placing two frog hearts in separate chambers
and measuring the effect of stimulating the vegas nerve on their contractile force. For 10 points, name this
first compound to be identified as a neurotransmitter, which is released at neuromuscular junctions and is
abbreviated AcH.
ANSWER: Acetylcholine [accept AcH before mentioned]
A special type of potassium channel called an M-channel is deactivated by a receptor of this molecule, and
a condition caused by a decrease in the density of receptors of this molecule can be diagnosed by Tensilon
testing or Single Fiber EMGs. That disorder is caused by the presence of antibodies against main
immunogenic regions of its receptors and is called Myasthania Gravis. Venom derived from cobras and
bungarotoxin act as antagonists to this neurotransmitter's receptors, and this molecule has two distinct types
of receptors whose agonists are nicotine and muscarine. This compound works by opening ligand gated ion
channels that allow sodium ions to enter muscle cells. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter that
regulates neuromuscular junctions.
ANSWER: acetylcholine [accept AcH]
An important source of studies of this neurotransmitter is the electroplax of Torpedo californica. Work by
Fatt and Katz revealed that discrete quanta of this molecule result in miniature end plate potentials. The
proteins agrin and rapsyn are involved in clustering receptors for it during creation of one type of synapse.
High levels of this molecule are found in the basal nucleus of Meynert. In both the sympathetic and
parasympathetic divisions, it is the neurotransmitter for preganglionic fibers. Unusually, its action is
terminated by direct enzymatic hydrolysis by a namesake esterase. Myasthenia gravis is caused by
antibodies blocking its nicotinic receptors, which are paired with muscarinic receptors. The synthesis of this
neurotransmitter occurs in a single step and is catalyzed by ChAT. For 10 points, identify this first
substance shown to be a neurotransmitter, which is found at the neuromuscular junction.
ANSWER: acetylcholine [or Ach]
This molecule's synthesis is inhibited by hemicholinium-3. Atropine is an inhibitor of one of this molecule's
receptors. Through calmodulin, this molecule can stimulate the release of nitric oxide. Myasthenia gravis
occurs when this molecule's nicotinic receptors do not function properly, and it also binds to muscarinic
receptors. This neurotransmitter activates sodium ion channels in muscle. This neurotransmitter is found in
lower amounts in people with Alzheimer's. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter, which causes skeletal
muscle movement and is synthesized from acetyl CoA.
ANSWER: acetylcholine [or ACh]
Its effectiveness is greatly limited by botulinum toxin, atropine, curare, and the antibodies involved in
myasthenia gravis. That disease can be treated by neostigmine, which increases its effectiveness by
stimulating its target nicotinic and muscarinic receptors. It plays a role in memory, though it is much better
known for its release from both sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons and its breakdown by a namesake
esterase. FTP, name this neurotransmitter that is necessary for proper muscle contraction.
ANSWER: acetylcholine
The Katz-Miledi experiement concerned its vesicular transmission. It is sometimes administered during
cataract surgery to contract the pupil; deadly nightshade's secretions of atropine were commonly used to
dilate the pupil by blocking its metabotropic class of receptors. The ionotropic class is attacked by
antibodies in myasthenia gravis, and is commonly called nicotinic, while its metabotropic receptors are
called muscarinic. Through binding to those receptors, G proteins can stimulate the synthesis of adenylate
cyclase, which catalyzes one step in the synthesis of cyclic AMP. When released in the pons Varolli, it
stimulates the onset of REM. Pirenzepine treats stomach ulcers by antagonizing its stimulation of stomach
acid secretion, and nerve gas works by preventing its hydrolysis, while one leading hypothesis suggests that
a decline in this leads to Alzheimer's disease. For 10 points, identify this neurotransmitter with a namesake
esterase, primarily responsible for neuron-muscle interaction.
ANSWER: acetylcholine
This compound is synthesized with the aid of a specific transferase, and its synthesis is inhibited by
hemicholinium-3. The basal nucleus of Meynert contains high concentrations of it, and it opens ligand-gated
sodium channels to produce one of its most notable effects. Edrophonium prevents its breakdown and thus
can be used as a diagnostic tool for myesthenia gravis. Botulin blocks the release of this compound, and a
decrease in levels of it in the brain is linked to Alzheimer's disease. For 10 points, what is this compound
that binds nicotinic and muscarinic receptors to generate muscule contractions?
ANSWER: acetylcholine
This molecule is found in high concentrations in the basal nucleus of Meynert. One class of receptors for it
is antagonized by the likes of mamba toxin and gallamine and contains five different members based on the
alpha subunit of their associated G proteins. Another class of receptors for it is ionotropic and is targeted
by auto-immune antibodies in myasthenia gravis. Its muscarinic receptors bind it at the end of
parasympathetic nerves, while the nictonic receptors for this molecule, whose release is blocked by
botulinum toxin, are found on muscle cells. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter depleted in
Alzheimer's disease, which is cleaved by its namesake -esterases.
ANSWER: acetylcholine
This condition is sometimes treated with azealic acid, and a namesake species of propionobacterium is
associated with it. A common treatment for this condition often causes angular chelitis of the mouth, and
this condition is characterized by the formation of comedos. Isotretinoin is a common treatment for severe
forms of this compound, which also can be treated using benzoyl peroxide. For 10 points, identify this skin
disease which causes the formation of pimples.
ANSWER: acne vulgaris [or cystic acne]
The functions of this protein are inhibited by toxins such as cytochalasins and phalloidin. The proteins
fimbrin and villin bind to this protein in filopodia and microvilli, and this protein forms structures with a
pointed end and a barbed end. This protein has a magnesium ion and an ATP molecule bound to it in its
globular form, which is converted to its fibrous form, and this protein composes structures in which calcium
binds to troponin so that cross bridges can form, the thin myofilaments. For 10 points, name this protein
which is paired with myosin in the sarcomeres of muscle tissue.
ANSWER: Actin
DNAse I binds this protein with very high affinity to prevent DNA auto-cleavage. Listeria
monocytogenes hijacks a cell's machinery for producing this protein. Phalloidin, the poison from the
death cap mushroom, inhibits the nucleation of this protein, which is catalyzed by the Arp 2/3
complex and by formins. When the intracellular concentration of this protein is intermediate
between two critical concentrations, treadmilling occurs. When monomeric, this protein is (*)
globular and prefixed by the letter F. ATP binds to this protein when it polymerizes into fibers that make up
the spindle apparatus in dividing cells. For 10 points, name this protein that makes up microfilaments and
slides along myosin during muscle contraction.
ANSWER: actin [or F-actin; or G-actin]
This protein forms aggregates in Hirano bodies. This protein is imaged using fluorescent
phalloidin, and in red blood cells it complexes with band 4.1 protein at the ends of spectrin. It binds
to catenins on the cytoplasmic side of adherens junctions. Upon binding to ATP, it switches from a
globular form to a more aggregation-prone form, which creates a helical string. This protein is
responsible for forming the mechanism that pinches cells apart in (*) cytokinesis, and it is also
responsible for extending pseudopods in amoebas. Polymers of this protein move closer together during
muscle contraction, due to myosin attaching to this protein and pulling. For 10 points, name this protein
that forms the thin filaments of the cytoskeleton.
ANSWER: actin [or thin filaments before mention; prompt on "filaments" before mention]
This protein is cross-linked by CH-domain proteins, and the Arp2/3 complex, cofilin, and band 4.1 are
among the proteins that bind to this protein. It undergoes treadmilling, in which G monomers are attached
to or detached from F filaments. This protein makes up eight to nine nanometer diameter cytoskeletal
components called microfilaments. For 10 points, name this most abundant protein in eukaryotic cells,
fibers of which slide across myosin fibers in muscle cells.
ANSWER: actin
In platelets, much of this protein is found attached to a peptide named Fx, which was found to be identical
to thymosin beta-4. Branching of this protein is stimulated by WASp proteins; the branch points are
occupied by a protein typically isolated due to its ability to bind profilin. CapZ is responsible for calciumindependent capping of the plus end of one form of this protein. A toxin from the so-called "angel of death"
mushroom, phalloidin, works by preventing this protein's filamentous F form from being depolymerized
into G monomers. Microfilaments are made up of this protein, which is absent in the H zone of a sarcomere.
For 10 points, name this protein that slides alongside myosin to produce muscle contractions.
ANSWER: actin
DC42, Rac, and Rho activates this protein in response to extracellular signals. Cofilin depolymerizes
and profilin helps regulate the binding sites of this protien, which comes in G and F forms and three
or more form a nucleus of this protein. CWASp activates Arp2/3 and create 70 degree branching in
polymers of this protein, which is capped by CapZ and tropomodulin. A calcium binding protein,
Troponin, is used to expose a site on this protein that allows for a certain ATP binding protein to move
along this protein. For 10 points, name this protein that associates with myosin in muscles in order for
muscle contraction and form the micro-filaments of the cytoskeleton.
ANSWER: Actin
The assembly and disassembly of filaments of this globular protein is regulated by gelsolin, which modifies
the viscous behavior of the cell. Vinculins anchor this intracellular protein at tight junctions. In pseudopods,
the formation of fibers made of this protein initially propels the pseudopod forward. This is the smaller of
two proteins that contracts to form the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis. In one structure, this protein is
absent from the H-zone. Also in that structure, which is the sarcomere, troponin is attached to this protein,
which makes up the thin fiber, and prevents it from binding to myosin. For 10 points, name this ubiquitous
protein that makes up microfilaments.
ANSWER: actin
This protein is bound by fascin in microspikes, and this protein binds to the cytoplasmic faces of
catenins in cadherin junctions. Depolymerization of this protein is prevented by phalloidin. By
catalyzing exchange of ADP for ATP on this protein, Profilin promotes its polymerization.
Polymerization of this protein at (*) lamellipodia allows cells to move. This protein is found in contractile
rings that allow for cell division. This protein which, along with intermediate filaments and microtubules,
makes up the cytoskeleton, and thin filaments are polymers of this protein. For 10 points, name this protein
that make up sarcomeres along with myosin.
ANSWER: actin
MreB is this protein's major prokaryotic homologue. This protein binds and inactivates DNase.
CapZ, a calcium-independent and lipid-dependent protein, caps and stabilizes the barbed positive
end of one of its forms. Bundles of this protein facilitate the formation of structures like (*) filopodia.
Units of the globular type of this protein assemble to form micro- and thin filaments, which, along with
thick filaments, form myofibrils and are absent in the H zone of the sarcomere. For 10 points, name this
protein that slides along myosin during muscle contraction.
ANSWER: actin
In the presence of calcium ions, the hydrophobic cleft between subdomains 1 and 3 of this protein is bound
to by gelsolin. The Arp2/3 complex causes branching in this protein and is activated by WASp/Scar
proteins. The ADF/cofilin family of proteins twists it, resulting in the loss of its phalloidin-binding site. A
steady state condition associated with nucleotide hydrolysis in this protein is called treadmilling. Its polarity
can be determined with S1 fragments, which give this protein's plus and minus ends a barbed or arrowhead
"decoration," respectively. Tropomodulins and CapZ cap its two ends. The globular, or G, form of this
protein is polymerized helically to form its F form. With microtubules, it is a key component of the
cytoskeleton, where it forms microfilaments. For 10 points, name this protein which forms the thin filament
in sarcomeres, where it is found with myosin.
ANSWER: actin
E. coli contains a protein called MreB which is an analogue to this protein. Phalloidin is a toxin found in
death cap mushrooms that interferes with this protein. Vinculin is a linkage protein that binds to this protein.
Formins facilitate processive assembly of these proteins at their barbed ends and long chains that consist of
this protein reach a steady state condition known as treadmilling. The F type of this protein has a distinct
polarity and contains a negative end which is capped by tropomodulin and a positive end that binds to the Z
disk. According to the sliding filament theory, the binding of ATP to myosin causes the myosin to release
its grip on this protein which is found in the thin filament of muscles. For 10 points, name this protein found
in the microfilaments of the cytoskeleton.
ANSWER: actin
Listeria has a surface protein that promotes assembly of this protein, which it then uses to transfer
within other cells. Proteins such as tropomodulins and CapZ prevent this protein from undergoing
the process of treadmilling. Cytochalasins and phalloidin are toxins that work by binding to this
protein, which comes in filamentous "F" polymers and globular "G" monomers. This most abundant
protein in animal cells makes up (*) cytoskeletal microfilaments. For 10 points, name this protein that
also slides along myosin in the power stroke of muscle cells.
ANSWER: actin
This protein binds p53 in a calcium-dependent fashion in order to help sequester p53 in the
cytoplasm during DNA repair. It is adhered to integrin by the protein vinculin at focal adhesion
plaques, and it is linked to cadherin by catenin. Complexes of it are disassembled by cofilin, and
CapZ blocks it from depolymerization or polymerization. The (*) "F" configuration of this protein is a
polymer of individual units of its "G" type, and this protein is the primary component of thin filaments,
which function in cytokinesis, cytoskeletal structure, and sarcomere shortening. For 10 points, name this
muscle protein that slides along myosin filaments during muscle contractions.
ANSWER: actin
Although six genes encode this protein in humans, some plants have over sixty genes for it. This
protein exhibits a phenomenon known as treadmilling, in which G monomers attach to the plus end
and detach from the minus end of its F filament. The most abundant intracellular protein in eukaryotic
cells, this protein is absent in the H zone of the sarcomere. For 10 points, name this protein that slides
along myosin to produce muscle contraction.
ANSWER: actin
The proteins CDC42 and Rac1 stimulate the formation of structures composed of this protein. Staining of
structures containing this protein is typically done with phalloidin derivatives. Lengthening of structures
made of this protein is promoted by formin, while its branching is caused by the Arp2/3 complex. This
protein's "barbed end," where polymerization typically occurs, can bind to the protein CapZ, which
prevents assembly. This protein's binding sites are blocked by tropomyosin bound to the troponin complex
within the sarcomere. For 10 points name this protein which is bound to by myosin during muscle
contraction, and which makes up the microfilaments of the cytoskeleton.
ANSWER: actin
This protein is imaged using conjugated phalloidin. Discovery of its complex with DNase I helped
determine its crystal structure. Microbes such as Vaccinia and Shigella can use this protein for motility
within host cells, although bacteria often have MreB, an analogue of this protein. Gelsolin and cofilin help
organize the assembly of this protein. This protein forms the light filaments of muscles, but it can be found
in almost all cells, where it forms part of the cytoskeleton. Types of this protein include G and F, depending
on whether it has been polymerized or not. For 10 points, name this protein that undergoes interactions with
myosin to cause muscle contraction.
ANSWER: actin [accept thin filaments until mention]
This phenomenon appears to move via "saltatory conduction" between nodes of Ranvier
(RAHN-vee-AY). Its generation is modeled by Hodgkin-Huxley kinetics, which includes overshoot due to
permeability of the cell membrane to sodium ions at its peak. Another of them cannot occur during a
neuron's absolute refractory period. For 10 points, name this all-or-nothing response of a neuron to a
depolarization.
ANSWER: action potential
The Fitzhugh-Nagumo model uses a negative differential resistance region to model it, though the HodkinHuxley differential equations are a more accurate mathematical representation of it. It proceeds smoothly
and slowly in the absence of myelin, but the presence of myelin causes it to travel quickly between the
nodes of Ranvier in a process called salutatory conduction. For 10 points, name this phenomenon regulated
by potassium and sodium cations, a wave of voltage that travels along a neuron membrane.
ANSWER: action potential
In one equation, e is raised to the power of this value over the temperature and the ideal gas
constant. That equation using this value solves for the rate constant of a reaction and is named for
Arrhenius. A (*) catalyst allows for a lower value of this quantity in a reaction. Once molecules surpass
this barrier, they can collide with other molecules and form new bonds. For 10 points, name this quantity
often symbolized "E sub a" that is the level of kinetic energy needed for a reaction to occur.
ANSWER: activation energy
This adjective is used to describe the highest layer of permafrost, which thaws during the summer.
When followed by "X", this word names special controls used by websites that effectively only work in
Internet Explorer. Sound waves are created for this type of noise cancellation. This adjective is used
for the site where a substrate binds and catalysis occurs on an enzyme. This adjective is also applied
to processes that use cellular energy to move chemicals across membranes against the concentration
gradient, which is this type of "transport". Name this adjective used to describe volcanoes that have
recently erupted, and are thus neither extinct nor dormant.
ANSWER: active [accept ActiveX]
This process is conducted by ABC class proteins which confer cells MDR. In one form of this process,
the electrochemical potential difference of secondary compounds are used instead of ATP
phosphorylation; that is the "secondary" form of this process. Enzymes that conduct this process
include the Calcium ATPase and (*) sodium-potassium ATPases, which conduct this process when they
move compounds from a low concentration area to a high concentration area. For 10 points, name this
process in which membrane proteins use energy to move compounds against their concentration gradient,
which is contrasted with its "passive" form.
ANSWER: active transport [prompt on answers only indicating "things moving into or out of cells," accept answers indicating "things moving into or out of cells against a concentration gradient" until "low"]
The primary kind of this process directly uses stored energy, while the secondary kind uses special
proteins to combine two events: antiporters pair the motions of two ions, while symporters use ion
diffusion to transport bulky molecules. The best known examples of this process occur with F-class
proton pumps, notably involved in ATP synthesis, and P-class pumps, which include the sodiumpotassium
pump. For 10 points, give the term for all processes which move molecules across a cell
membrane by consuming energy.
ANSWER: active transport [prompt on "transport against a gradient" or equivalents]
Dolph Schluter famously argued that this evolutionary process occurs along lines of least resistance.
Famous examples of this evolutionary occurrence include the occurrence of different marsupials in
Australia, and it often occurs after mass extinction events. A commonly studied example of this
evolutionary behavior occurred over a span of fifteen thousand years in the cichlids of Lake Victoria.
This process is evidenced by significant correlation between phenotype and environment, high trait
utility, and rapid speciation. For 10 points, name this form of rapid evolution that most famously occurred
in Darwin's finches, in which a single ancestral lineage quickly gives rise to many species that can occupy
different niches.
ANSWER: Adaptive radiation
Dogs with this disease may receive injections of prednisolone or DOCP. It affects levels of the enzyme 21hydroxylase and can rarely be caused by HIV or a certain kind of tuberculosis. Tests for this disease include
long CRH stimulation tests and characteristic symptoms include hyperpigmentation of non-exposed skin. It
results in insufficient secretions of the zona fasciculate and can result from withdrawal of glucocorticoid
hormones such as prednisone. For 10 points, inadequate secretion of ACTH by the pituitary gland or a
primarily adrenal insufficiency are the primary causes of what endocrine disorder that causes the adrenal
glands to produce insufficient amounts of cortisol?
ANSWER: Addison's disease [accept also hypocorticism or hypocortisolism or hypoadrenocorticism before "cortisol"; prompt on "adrenal insufficiency"]
Of the bases that form double hydrogen bonds in nucleic acids, this base is the only one that is a purine. In
RNA, this base bonds to uracil, while in DNA it bonds to thymine. A compound based on this base is the
most common energy currency of the cell, ATP. Name this nitrogenous base found in DNA commonly
denoted A.
ANSWER: adenine (do not accept adenosine; prompt A before "ATP" is read)
Two relatively uncommon ways to treat low levels of this hormone involve using demeclocyline or
chloropropamide, although it's more common for patients to receive a similar 8-lysine hormone from pigs.
The high level of the receptor for this hormone in the brains of male prairie voles compared to male
meadow voles may explain why the former are monogamous. This nine amino acid chain, like oxytocin, is
released into blood circulation through the posterior lobe and has a precursor synthesized in the
hypothalamus. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus arises when a certain organ doesn't respond to this hormone
through its V2 receptors. For 10 points, name this hormone, which results in more concentrated urine as it
causes the kidneys to conserve water.
ANSWER: ADH [or AVP or argipressin or antidiuretic hormone; accept Arginine vasopressin before "vasopressin"]
A modified version of this peptide is used to treat Von Willebrand disease. Among placentals, only
pigs have a lysine at the second to last position. This was the first neuropeptide shown to play a role
in the SCN. Unlike a similar protein, its third residue is phenylalanine. This hormone and its similar
counterpart are both synthesized by the magnocellular neuron cells in the paraventricular and
supraoptic nucleus of the (*) hypothalamus. Its V1 receptor promotes the vasoconstriction of smooth
muscles. Structurally similar to oxytocin and also released by the posterior pituitary gland, it triggers the
insertion of aquaporin 2 to increase the permeability of the distal tubule in the nephron. For 10 points, name
this hormone that causes the kidney to conserve water to establish water homeostasis.
ANSWER: ADH [accept anti-diuretic hormone; accept AVP; accept arginine vasopressin ; accept argipressin]
The insertion of AQP2 into the apical membrane is caused by this hormone's GPCR stimulating the
production of cAMP through the Gs protein. With CRH, this hormone is produced in parvocellular
neurons and, also with it, stimulates the secretion of ACTH. The movement of this hormone is
facilitated by neurophysin II. Deficiency of this hormone causes central diabetes insipidus. A
syndrome of inappropriate secretion of this hormone normally results in hyponatremia. This nonapeptide is
released from the posterior pituitary and is structurally similar to oxytocin. When bound to its V1 receptor,
this hormone promotes vasoconstriction, and it increases the permeability of the distal convoluted tubules.
For 10 points, identify this hormone that is downregulated by ethanol, thus making you have to pee a lot.
ANSWER: ADH [or arginine vasopressin; or anti-diuretic hormone; or AVP]
This disease is associated with the Taq1A polymorphism in the DRD2 gene. Patients with this
disorder show a decreased volume in the left side of the pre-frontal cortex, and a hypo-responsive
ventral striatum. One drug used to treat this disorder can be conjugated to lysine in a prodrug form.
The symptoms of this condition overlap with hyperkinetic disorder, though comorbidities can rule
that out. Sensory Processing Disorder can be misdiagnosed as this condition. About 50% of people
suffering from (*) Oppositional Defiant Disorder also have this condition. This condition occurs in
combined, predominantly inattentive, and predominantly impulsive variants. For 10 points, name this
psychiatric disorder which is often treated by amphetamine derivatives like Ritalin.
ANSWER: ADHD [or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder; or ADD; or Attention Defici Disorder]
Conivaptan and Tolvaptan are recently approved receptor antagonists of this compound, a derivative of
which is used to treat uremic platelet dysfuction. Small-cell lung carcinoma often secretes this hormone
inappropriately, which leads to euvolemic hyponatremia. In pigs, this hormone contains a lysine at the 8th
position rather than an arginine, and it is under-secreted in central diabetes insipidus. This hormone works
by inserting additional aquaporins into the membrane of the distal convoluted tubule and collecting duct.
This hormone, which like oxytocin is secreted by the posterior pituitary gland, is responsible for staving off
dehydration. For 10 points, name this hormone which is responsible for signaling the kidneys to retain
water.
ANSWER: anti-diuretic hormone [or ADH; or Vasopressin]
This substance is produced in the supraoptic nucleus, and an analog of it upregulates the release of von
Willebrand factor from endothelial cells. Inappropriate production of this hormone can be treated by
tolvaptan or conivaptan. Pigs contain a similar compound that has a lysine residue instead of an arginine
residue. Like ACTH, its overproduction is a symptom of small-cell lung cancer. Diabetes insipidus results
from a deficiency of this hormone. It consists of nine amino acids and is produced by the magnocellular
neurons of the hypothalamus. It inserts aquaporins into the collecting ducts of the nephron, and like
oxytocin is released from the posterior pituitary. For 10 points, name this hormone that helps the kidneys
reabsorb water.
ANSWER: anti-diuretic hormone [or ADH; or arginine vasopressin; accept desmopressin]
Corticosterone, in addition to regulating CRF, is the best-understood regulator of this hormone. The
presence of the 1a class of receptors for this hormone in the brain has been linked to social recognition and
affiliative behavior, while that of the 1b class is associated with aggression. It achieves its principal function
by promoting the release of aquaporins and, like aldosterone, increase in its production is caused by
angiotensin II. It is primarily produced in the supraoptic nucleus and, like the structurally similar oxytocin,
released from the hypothalamus via the posterior pituitary gland. For 10 points, name this hormone, which
constricts blood vessels and restricts water loss in the kidneys.
ANSWER: Antidiuretic Hormone [or ADH or Arginine Vasopressin or Argipressin]
Macrophages form crown-like structures around dead cells in this tissue. Hibernomas form
through the excessive growth of one type of this tissue. Mitochondria in this tissue express
uncoupling protein-1 in their inner membranes to dissipate the proton gradient. TNF alpha and
resistin are produced in this tissue. A hormone produced primarily by this tissue is encoded by the ob
gene. Non-shivering (*) thermogenesis is promoted by the brown kind of this tissue, which is most
abundant in newborns, while the white kind of this tissue is the primary source of leptin. Abdominal
deposits of this tissue are a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. It is removed by liposuction. For 10
points, name this kind of amorphous connective tissue which stores fat.
ANSWER: adipose tissue [or fat tissue before it is read; or brown fat before it is read; or white fat before it is read]
Treating myoblasts with PRDM16 can cause them to turn into one form of this tissue. When this
tissue is enzymatically digested and then centrifuged, the pellet formed at the bottom is a rich source
of various stem cells called the stromal vascular fraction. The mitochondria in one type of this tissue
can generate heat without shivering through the use of (*) thermogenin. Leptin is primarily derived
from this tissue, which when surrounding the organs is called visceral and serves as padding. This tissue
exists in brown and white forms, and excess amounts of this tissue increase risk of diabetes and heart
disease. For 10 points identify this type of tissue which the body uses to store energy as lipids.
ANSWER: adipose tissue [Accept anything along the lines of fat cells or adipocytes. Accept brown adipose tissue]
One condition affecting them can be diagnosed with a dexamethasone suppression test and results from the
over-production of a molecule in its zonas fasciculata and reticularis. Another condition can be mimicked
by eating too much licorice and affects their outermost zona glomerulosa. Besides Conn's and Cushing's
syndromes, their inner-most portions can develop pheo-chromo-cytomas, which overproduce
catecholamines. Plasma ion levels influence their production of aldosterone, while a namesake trophic
hormone stimulates the production of cortisol in their cortex. For 10 points, name these glands whose
medullas secrete their namesake hormone, also called epinephrine.
ANSWER: adrenal glands
One portion of this gland is divided into the zona reticularis, zona fasciculata, and zona glomerulosa. That
portion produces DHEA, aldosterone, and the stress hormone, cortisol. Other hormones produced by this
gland are secreted by the chromaffin cells of its medulla. That medulla also produces a compound which is
used to treat Parkinson's disease, dopamine. For 10 points, name this pair of endocrine glands which secrete
epinephrine, which is named for its position atop the kidneys.
ANSWER: adrenal glands
A group of compounds released by this organ is deficient in Addison's disease. Those compounds cause
reabsorption of sodium ions and are known as mineralcorticoids. This organ also releases a compound that
causes smooth muscle relaxation in the airways. This pair of glands sits atop the kidneys and secretes
aldosterone, along with a hormone released during high levels of stress. 10 points, name these glands that
secrete epinephrine, thus directing the body's "fight or flight" response.
ANSWER: adrenal glands
A small tumor arising in these glands is called a pheochromocytoma, and one section of these glands
contains layers called the zona glomerulosa, fasciculata. and reticularis. One section of this gland
responds to angiotensin by secreting the sodium-retaining hormone (*) aldosterone, while another
section of it secretes catecholamines. For 10 points, name these glands, whose cortex secretes cortisol and
whose medulla secretes epinephrine and norepinephrine.
ANSWER: adrenal glands
The rate of secretion of one hormone produced by this structure is primarily affected by the
concentration of angiotensin II. That hormone is responsible for controlling blood concentrations of
sodium and potassium and is known as aldosterone. Cushing syndrome occurs when this organ
secretes excess androgens and cortisol, while abnormally low levels of cortisol can result in Addison's
Disease. For 10 points, name these glands just superior to the kidneys, which consist of both a cortex
and an epinephrine- and norepinephrine-secreting medulla.
ANSWER: adrenal glands [or suprarenal glands; accept adrenal cortex until "glands"]
One part of this structure is divided into the zona glomerulosa, zona reticularis, and the zona fasciculate, the
last of which is stimulated by ACTH. When this organ is afflicted with Addison's disease or Cushing's
syndrome, it can sometimes lead to irregular production levels of cortisol. For 10 points, name these glands
made of the inner medulla and outer cortex, which are located above the kidneys and produce adrenaline.
ANSWER: adrenal gland [or suprarenal gland]
A tumor of this organ common in children produces increased homovanillic acid and can be
caused by amplification of N-myc, and these organs are enlarged in 21-hydroxylase deficiency.
Overactive tumors in one section of this organ cause Conn's syndrome. One section of these
organs contains three layers, called the zona reticularis, zona glomerulosa, and zona fasciculata.
One section of these organs secretes a hormone that increases secretion of potassium and whose
release is stimulated by angiotensin II. Another section of these organs secretes catecholamines
like norepinephrine and epinephrine. For 10 points, name these paired glands that contain a
cortex and a medulla and are located on top of the kidneys.
ANSWER: adrenal glands
One disease of this structure is tested for by administering synthetic tetracosactide, and another disorder is
marked by a swelling of the face, high blood sugar, and skin acne. This structure has zona reticularis and
zona fasciculata regions, the latter of which is stimulated by ACTH. Its overactivity causes Cushing's
syndrome, a result of high levels of a stress hormone. Its chromaffin cells secrete catecholamines, while its
cortex releases corticosteroids. For 10 points, name this pair of endocrine glands that secrete aldosterone,
cortisol, and epinephrine, named for its location above the kidneys.
ANSWER: adrenal glands
Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase is specific to this organ. Waterhouse-Friderichsen
syndrome causes this organ to fail, and pheochromocytomas localize to it. The cosyntropin test
measures its activity. Propanolol inhibits receptors named for this organ. This organ, which contains
the zonas reticularis, fasisculata, and glomerulosa, is hyperactive from an excess of (*) ACTH in
patients with Addison's disease. It is divided into the outer cortex and inner medulla. This organ makes
glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, and in addition, its chromaffin cells produce hormones in the "fight
or flight" response. For 10 points, name these glands that sit above the kidneys, which secrete a hormone
also known as epinephrine.
ANSWER: adrenal glands
The release of this catecholamine cannot be controlled in pheochromocytoma, and both it and an
unmethylated precursor are transported by VMAT1. While it triggers vasoconstriction in smooth muscle, it
dilates blood vessels in skeletal muscle. In the liver, its interaction with its beta-receptors causes glycogen
to be broken down into glucose for energy. Frequently used to treat anaphylactic shock and secreted by
glands that sit above the kidneys, for 10 points, identify this hormone and neurotransmitter responsible for
the "fight or flight" response.
ANSWER: adrenaline [or epinephrine; do not accept noradrenaline or norepinephrine]
Tumors of the structure that primarily secretes this compound can be detected using an MIBG scan.
Along with a related compound, this compound is secreted by pheochromocytomas. This compound
can be synthesized by phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase. Alpha and beta blockers work by
blocking a group of receptors named for this compound. This catecholamine hormone is the primary
secretion of the (*) chromaffin cells of the medulla of a certain gland. Food allergy emergencies can be
treated using an injection of this hormone via one of its namesake "pens." For 10 points, name this
compound central to the fight-or-flight response which is produced in namesake glands which sit atop the
kidneys.
ANSWER: epinephrine [or adrenaline; accept "noradrenaline" and "norepinephrine" before "phenylethanolamine" is read but do not accept or prompt on either afterwards]
Phenylethanolamine-N-methyl transferase is an enzyme that synthesizes this hormone present in both males
and females. This catecholamine is derived from the amino acid tyrosine in a pathway that also produces Ldopamine. Synthesized using tartaric acid, ACTH regulates the production of this hormone. Activating the
alpha-1, alpha-2, beta-1, and beta-2 receptors, it has a name that means "on the kidney" and is often used to
treat asthma and cardiac arrest. FTP, name this hormone that boosts oxygen in the brain and muscles, often
known as the "flight or fight" response, also known as epinephrine.
ANSWER: Adrenaline (Accept epinephrine until stated)
Abnormally high levels of this chemical are linked to pheochromocytoma
[fee-oh-chromo-"sigh"-toh-mah] and other tumors in the sympathetic ganglia. Its synthesis begins
when tyrosine is converted into L-DOPA. It is created by the body in response to high levels of (*)
histamine, and it is administered to victims of cardiac arrest and anaphylaxis. Heart rate is regulated by, for
10 points, what hormone responsible for the "fight or flight" response?
ANSWER: adrenaline (accept epinephrine)
The final step in the synthesis of this non-methyl-containing compound from a similarly-named compound
is catalyzed by PNMT. The action of this hormone, which isn't isoprenaline, is inhibited by beta blockers.
This substance is the primary one synthesized by chromaffin cells that lie interior to the zona reticularis;
those cells are found in a region called the "medulla". This catecholamine is injected intramuscularly to
initiate vasocontriction to alleviate the symptoms of anaphylaxis. For 10 points, name this hormone
produced by a namesake gland above the kidneys, which modulates the "fight or flight" response.
ANSWER: epinephrine [or adrenaline; do NOT accept "norepinephrine" nor "noradrenaline"]
One function of this hormone is to bind to alpha-one receptors in the liver to activate the
inositolphospholipid signaling pathway. Another of its functions sees it bind to beta receptors to activate the
adenylate cyclase signaling pathway, which spurs glycogenolysis in the liver. This hormone is released by
a namesake gland that sits on top of the kidneys. For 10 points, name this hormone that is often injected
into the hearts of cardiac arrest victims, and that spurs on the "fight or flight" mechanism when released
during stress.
ANSWER: adrenaline [or epinephrine; prompt on "epi"]
This molecule is produced from the methylation of its precursor via PNMT in chromaffin cells. This
catecholamine is metabolized by catechol-o-methyl transferase, and at high levels of this hormone, the beta
types of a class of G-protein coupled receptors mediate vasodilation. Synthesized using tartaric acid, this
hormone triggers increased lipolysis and gluconeogenesis. Its production is regulated by ACTH and it acts
on the sympathetic nervous system, resulting in suppressed digestion and pupil dilation. It is produced in the
medulla of glands above the kidneys. For 10 points, name this hormone responsible for the "fight or flight"
response.
ANSWER: adrenaline [or epinephrine; do not accept but do not otherwise reveal "noradrenaline" or "norepinephrine"]
Like glucagon, this hormone's binding to a GPCR results in the creation of cAMP as a "second
messenger," stimulating breakdown of glycogen and releasing glucose into the bloodstream. Injected into
patients to treat anaphylactic shock, this hormone binds to beta-1 receptors to increase heart rate and works
with a neurotransmitter whose name is this hormone's prefixed with "nor." For 10 points, name this
hormone that contributes to the fight-or-flight response and is sometimes called adrenaline.
ANSWER: epinephrine [or adrenaline before it is read]
This hormone is distinguished from other catecholamines (caa-tuh-COHL-uh-meenz) by having a methyl
(MEHthihl) group attached to its nitrogen atom. The action of this hormone is diminished by beta-blockers,
and though it is not glucagon (GLOO-kuh-gahn), its receptors in the liver work with adenylate cyclase (uhDEHN-uh-layt SI-klays) to increase the concentration of cyclic AMP, resulting in the conversion of
glycogen (GLI-koh-jehn) to glucose. Other effects of this hormone include the relaxation of smooth muscle
and an increase in blood pressure, explaining why it is often administered to patients suffering from
anaphylaxis (aa-nuh-fuh-LAAK-siss), asthma, and cardiac arrest. Famously mimicked by the herb ephedra
(uh-FED-ruh), name this hormone that dilates air passages, contracts blood vessels, and increases heart rate,
all as part of the fight-or-flight response.
ANSWER: epinephrine [accept adrenaline, prompt on epi]
This chemical was inhibited in drowning rats by Jim McGaugh at Cal-Irvine to impair their memory
of a safe platform's location, and its effects on the adenylate cyclase pathway increase glycogenolysis
in the liver. Inhibited by propranolol and other beta-blockers, it [*] isn't a neurotransmitter, but this
catecholamine acts on the sympathetic nervous system. Produced in namesake glands above the kidneys, for
10 points, name this hormone found in allergy medicine 'pens', a key hormone of the fight-or-flight
response to stressed situations.
ANSWER: adrenaline or epinephrine [do not accept "noradrenaline" or "norepinephrine"]
The last step in the synthesis of this compound involves a methylation by phenylethanolamine Nmethlytransferase, and this catecholamine can provide quick relief to patients with asthma by
dilating the bronchioles. Adrenocorticotropic hormone and the (*) sympathetic nervous system can
trigger the release of this compound, which then stimulates the secretion of a hormone that raises blood
glucose levels. Glucagon production can be initiated by, for ten points, what hormone, also known as
epinephrine, a "rush" of which is characteristic of the "fight-or-flight" response?
ANSWER: Adrenaline (accept epinephrine before mention)
Unlike its precursor molecule, it is not psychoactive. Its synthesis from that precursor involves
PNMT catalyzing the methylation of an amine group in chromaffin cells, which overproduce this
molecule in pheo-chromo-cytomas. Its binding to alpha receptors results in contraction of smooth
muscle, while its binding to beta receptors can result in lypolysis and smooth muscle relaxation,
especially in arteries leading to lungs and skeletal muscles. For 10 points, name this molecule behind the
"fight or flight" response, also known as epinephrine and produced in its namesake gland.
ANSWER: adrenaline [accept epinephrine before it's read]
This substance functions with adenylate cyclase to increase cyclic AMP. Though not dopamine, this
substance is also created from phenylaline and tyrosine, making it a catecholamine. When it binds to
alpha receptors, the contraction of smooth muscle occurs, while its interaction with (*) beta-receptors
causes the breakdown of glucose. This hormone is used to treat victims of cardiac arrest and is produced in
a namesake gland above the kidneys. For 10 points, name this hormone responsible for the "fight-or-flight"
response.
ANSWER: epinephrine [or adrenaline]
This disease is caused by a protozoan covered in a Variable Surface Glycoprotein (VSG), which allows it to
dodge the immune system. Indicated by Winterbottom's sign, a characteristic swelling of the lymph nodes in
the neck as well as progressive mental deterioration, it can be treated with various intravenous medicines,
including suramin and for late-stage cases, melarsoprol. Notable epidemics occurred in 1920 and 1970 and
more recently in Uganda in 2008. Also known as human trypanosomiasis, FTP, name this deadly disease
transmitted by the tsetse fly which does not actually cause its namesake drowsy symptom.
ANSWER: African sleeping sickness
Some early examples of these organisms had a hypocercal tail which increases their lift. Some
members of this superclass have larval stages termed ammocoetes and have a buccal funnel. The
"vertebrate hypothesis" holds that Cyclostomata, a group of these animals, is actually not
monophyletic. Some of these ostracoderms are members of Pteraspidomorphi, which possess an
armored head covering. The (*) Myxini order of these animals can tie themselves into a knot and are
sometimes called slime eels. One member of this order is characterized by their circular arrangement of
teeth which surround their mouths. They include hagfishes and lampreys and are less complex than their
bony and cartilaginous counterparts. For 10 points, name this class of fish that lacks a mandible.
ANSWER: jawless fishes [Accept "agnatha" or "agnathans" Prompt on "fish"]
Longterm sufferers of this disease can develop CMV esophagitis and mycobacterium avium complex.
Classes of drugs used to treat it include integrase inhibitors and fusion inhibitors. People who suffer from it
can display Kaposi (kuh-PO-see) sarcoma tumors in their mouths. This disease is caused due to a
destruction of CD4 T-helper lymphocytes by a retrovirus. Sixty-eight percent of its cases occur in
Sub-Saharan Africa. For 10 points, name this disease caused by the human immunodeficiency virus.
ANSWER: AIDS [or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; prompt on human immunodeficiency virus infection until it is read; prompt on HIV until it is read]
The early years of this condition were chronicled by Randy Shilts's And the Band Played On. Karposi's
Sarcoma frequently accompanies this disease, which is treated with HAART and AZT therapy and which
attacks CD4+ T lymphocytes. This disease is believed to have originated in chimpanzees in Sub-Saharan
Africa, where it is most prevalent today, and many of the initial infections occurred through blood
transfusions. For 10 points, name this sexually transmitted disease which attacks the immune system and is
caused by the HIV virus.
ANSWER: AIDS [or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome; or Acquired ImmunoDeficiency Syndrome; accept HIV or Human Immunodeficiency Virus until mentioned]
People with this disease often suffer from Kaposi's (kuh-"POSE"-eez) sarcoma. When first discovered, this
disease was called GRID, which was an acronym describing the population it was then most prevalently
discovered in. This disease can be treated with HAART, a cocktail of multiple anti-viral drugs. This disease
attacks helper T cells, leading to a weakening of the immune system. For 10 points, name this disease
caused by the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV.
ANSWER: AIDS [or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome; prompt on GRID before mentioned; prompt on Gay-Related Immune Deficiency before "GRID"; do not prompt on or accept "HIV"]
Glycoprotein 120 is exposed on the surface of the envelop of the virus that causes this disease. A
common tumor found in patients infected with the virus that causes this disease is Kaposi's Sarcoma. This
disease is caused by a retrovirus that destroys CD4 plus T-cells. For 10 points, name this autoimmune
deficiency disease caused by HIV.
ANSWER: AIDS [or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome prompt on "HIV"]
Species of these birds include the Laysan, Black-footed, Royal, and Amsterdam Island, which has a single
breeding colony with a small population. Like other pelagic seabirds, they possess tubular nostrils and salt
glands which allow them to drink seawater. They are primarily found in southern oceans, where they often
circle the globe, and their extremely narrow wings make it difficult for them to fly in calm weather. FTP,
name these birds, of which the Wandering species has the longest wingspan of any bird.
ANSWER: Albatrosses
It is not thiamine (THIGH-uh-meen), but this compound influences both retrograde and anterograde
(ann-TEH-roh-grade) amnesia in Korsakoff's (KORE-suh-koffs) Syndrome. A moderate amount of this
compound can lead to hepatic steatosis (stay-uh-TOH-sis), or fatty liver. Hepatitis and cirrhosis
(sih-ROH-sis) are caused by prolonged exposure to this compound, which is converted to acetaldehyde
(ah-sit-AL-dih-hide) by a namesake dehydrogenase (de-high-DRAW-gih-nase). A fetal syndrome may
develop if it is present in high amounts during pregnancy. This depressant is fatal if it comprises .45% of
the blood. For 10 points, name this compound whose abuse leads to intoxication.
ANSWER: alcohol [or ethanol or C2H5OH]
A study by Trune and Kempton linked this hormone and prednisolone to autoimmune hearing loss.
Spironolactone and eplerenone antagonize receptors for this hormone, and the Captopril suppression test
involves muting this hormone's production to investigate its hyperactivation. This hormone is oversecreted
in a form of hypertension called Conn's Syndrome, and both this and cortisol are deficient in Addison's
disease. By inducing angiotensin secretion, renin indirectly promotes this hormone's release from the zona
glomerulosa in a certain feedback system. Its primary purpose is to stimulate ion pumps. For 10 points,
name this hormone secreted from the adrenal cortex which promotes the reabsorption of sodium and water
in the kidneys.
ANSWER: aldosterone
It is produced by a cytochrome P450 isoenzyme with 18-hydroxylase activity. The prostaglandins PGE2 and
PGI2 of the macula densa stimulate the secretion of a peptide hormone which regulates the release of this
compound. The nonselective receptor antagonist to this compound, spironolactone, can control plasma
levels, unlike ACE inhibitors. Its over-expression is known as Conn's syndrome and can very rarely cause
hypernatremia. It is secreted by the endocrine secretory epithelium of the zona glomerulosa region of the
adrenal cortex and is regulated by conversion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin I by renin. For 10 points,
what is this cholesterol. derived from the steroid corticosterone, the primary regulator of water and salt
balance in the body?
ANSWER: aldosterone
This hormone's release is limited by atrial natriuretic peptide, while its action can be opposed by
compounds like spironolactone and amphenone. Its overproduction is known as Conn's syndrome, while its
underproduction is associated with Addison's disease. It acts on the kidneys as part of the renin-angiotensin
system, while its release from the zona glomerulosa to act on the collecting ducts and distal tubule results in
higher blood pressure and increased excretion of potassium ions. FTP, name the mineralocorticoid
produced by the adrenal glands to promote increased sodium ion and water reabsorption.
ANSWER: aldosterone
One type of these organisms uses laminarin as a food storage product, and another type from genus
Caulerpa is an invasive species. The cryptomonad type of these organisms has a nucleomorph and
underwent secondary endosymbiosis. Some of these organisms live with fungi in relationships known as
lichens. The substance agar is extracted from one type of these organisms, and red tide is an example of
their namesake bloom. For 10 points, name these photosynthetic organisms that include diatoms and
seaweed, and come in brown, golden, red, and green varieties.
ANSWER: algae [or alga]
James Lovelock formed his Gaia Hypothesis while examining a model organism from a class of these
creatures. These creatures include C. Reinhardtii and E. Huxleyi. These organisms contain a body known as
a lamina, which is always attached to a stipe, and rapidly increase in population during namesake blooms.
Cyanobacteria are called the "blue-green" type of these organisms studied in phycology, and examples of
this class include sargassum. For 10 points, name this class of protists that includes many dinoflagellates,
diatoms and kelp, an underwater predecessor to plants.
ANSWER: algae
The members of one major group of these organisms have a siliceous cell wall and are the diatoms. The
harmful type of this organism's namesake bloom can cause shellfish poisoning. The major component of
stromatolites is the remains of a group once thought to belong with these organisms; that group is now
known as cyanobacteria. A symbiotic relationship between a fungi and the green group of these organisms
is called a lichen. For 10 points, name these marine photosynthetic organisms which include seaweed.
ANSWER: algae [prompt on phytoplankton]
Glaucophytes are microscopic varieties of these organisms, and a lichen is composed of a fungus and one of
them. They are the only type of organism that contains chlorophyll C, which allows them to undergo
photosynthesis despite not being plants. Cyanobacteria are sometimes referred to as the "blue-green" type of
these organisms, and a red tide is an example of one of their namesake blooms during which they rapidly
proliferate. For 10 points, name this class of aquatic protists that includes chlorophyta, dinoflagellata, and
diatoms.
ANSWER: Algae [do not accept "cyanobacteria"]
The reproductive sites of these organisms can be found inside conceptacles. One member of this group
can cause root and crown rot and was the causative agent of the Irish potato famine. Agar was found in the
cell walls of one type of these organisms. Another type of them can exist in symbiotic relationships with
fungi known as lichen. Overgrowth of these organisms can cause red tides in their namesake blooms. For
10 points, name these protists, which come in brown, red, and green types, and carry out photosynthesis.
ANSWER: algae
A superstructure that contains several of these is found in peridin pigments, and a bundle of four of these
structures form a bromodomain. A structure that contains several of these structures between 50-degree
turns is known as the globin fold. These structures have a double minima at 208 and 222 nm on far-UV
circular dichroism spectroscopy, and Davydov solitons propagate along them. The introduction of glycine
into one of these motifs causes a significant entropy increase, and they appear in the third qudrant of a
Ramachandran plot. Occuring due to hydrogen bonding between every fourth amino acid, for 10 points,
name this protein secondary structure that often traverses membranes, the alternative to a beta sheet.
ANSWER: Alpha helix
These structures show a double minimum at 208 and 222 nanometers in CD spectroscopy. A
common DNA binding motif has two of these bridged by a turn. On a Ramachandran plot, this
structure appears on the negative x-axis in both the second and third quadrants. These structures
contain hydrogen bonds between the ith and i plus (*) fourth residue, which extends for 5.4 angstroms
per turn. For 10 points, name this protein secondary structure that is complementary to the beta-sheet.
ANSWER: alpha helix
These structures have a 3J Hahn coefficients of either 3.9 or 6.9 Hertz in NMR spectroscopy. Melting of
poly-lysine molecules are used to study the properties of these structures, transitions to which are studied by
the transfer-matrix-based Lifson-Roig model. A structure which contains two of these elements sandwiched
together has a characteristic heptad repeat. This structure displays sharp minima at 208 and 222 nanometers
in circular dichrosim spectroscopy. This structure is inferred when several residues clump in an area
between the 2nd and third quadrants of a Ramachandran plot. This structure has hydrogen bonds between
the ith and i-plus-fourth position, and has a pitch of 5.4 angstroms. For 10 points, name this protein
secondary structure which is contrasted with the beta sheet.
ANSWER: alpha helix [prompt on helix]
Two of these structures can interact with each other if a heptad repeat is present. These structures show
minima at 208 and 222 nanometers in CD spectroscopy, and the relative locations of their monomers are
displayed on Wenxiang diagrams. Due to their dipole moment they are often capped by a negative charge.
They occupy a stripe in the third quadrant of the Ramachandran plot. Seven of these structures that
spanning a membrane are found in G protein coupled receptors. Glycine is rarely found in them because of
the entropic cost. This type of structure is stabilized from hydrogen bonding between amino acids in
position i and i+4. For 10 points, name this common type of motif that is part of a protein's secondary
structure, often contrasted with the beta sheet.
ANSWER: alpha helix [prompt on helix]
Immunoblots of urea fractions from sufferers of it show that the misfolded TDP-43 protein is a major
component of UBIs and similar pathological molecules are found in FTLD-U sufferers. Mutations in the
SOD1 gene are found in some patients suffering from its familial variety which hurts their ability to attack
free radicals, while the elevated presence of BMAA in the diet of the Chamorro people of Guam increases
their risk of suffering from a complex of Parkinsonism and this disease. High levels of glutamate lead to
widespread motor neuron degeneration, but patients retain their cognitive abilities. For 10 points, identify
this disease, which Stephen Hawking suffers from and is also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.
ANSWER: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis or Lou Gehrig's Disease until mentioned
In the mouse model, a gain-of-function mutation of glycine 93 to alanine in SOD1 emulates this condition,
and in humans, mutant SOD1 genes account for about 20% of inherited cases. Though its pathogenesis
remains unclear, excess extracellular glutamate may incite neuronal apoptosis in patients, explaining the
action of the drug riluzole. Microglia are implicated in late-stage illness, during which severe dysphagia,
fasciculations, and denervation leading to muscle atrophy and death occur. For 10 points, identify this
progressive neurodegenerative disease that has affected the motor neurons of Stephen Hawking and Lou
Gehrig.
ANSWER: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [or ALS; prompt on Lou Gehrig's disease before mention]
This disease is the subject of the "dying-back" model, in which this disease spreads distal to proximal.
The main drug used to treat this disease acts upon tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium channels in order to
block stimulation of glutamate receptors; that drug is Riluzole. The G93A mutation in superoxide
dismutase 1 is a common cause of the familial form of this disease. The bulbar-onset form of this
disease begins with dysarthria and difficulty (*) swallowing, though most patients suffer from its limbonset form. Victims of this disease usually die from pneumonia or respiratory failure after the intercostal
muscles and diaphragm weaken, and For 10 points, name this neurodegenerative disease in which motor
neurons atrophy, whose most famous sufferer was Lou Gehrig.
ANSWER: ALS [or Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis; accept Lou Gehrig's disease till mention]
An alanine for valine point mutation in a copper/zinc superoxide dismutase called SOD1 has been
implicated in causing this disease. The only FDA-approved drug to treat this condition is Riluzole.
About a quarter of cases of this disease are classified as bulbar onset, while the rest involve limb
onset, usually presenting as numbness in (*) arms and legs. Both upper and lower motor neurons are
destroyed in this disease. For 10 points, name this degenerative motor disorder also known as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, though it's usually named for a baseball player.
ANSWER: Lou Gehrig's disease [or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or ALS before it is read; or motor neuron disease or MND]
Jorge Moll and Jordan Grafman showed a neurological link to this phenomenon via fMRI, showing that
engaging in this action leads to stimulation of the subgenual cortex. One type of this action was first
proposed by W.D. Hamilton and received its name of "greenbeard effect" after an example in The Selfish
Gene. The frequency of this action is governed by Hamilton's rule, and it explains why ground squirrels
subject themselves to potential harm to warn others of predators. FTP, name this behavior wherein one acts
to favor the reproductive success of others.
ANSWER: altruistic behavior (accept word forms like altruism; prompt on less precisely correct terms like self-sacrifice)
Gary Becker wrote a paper about egoism, genetic fitness, and this behavior. The green-beard effect,
which explains one type of this behavior, is based on a scenario in which this phenomenon is directed
towards people who share a trait. The creation of a sticky substance through the suicidal type of
this behavior has been observed in ants. Those types of this behavior are involved in the theory of
kin selection, which explains why this behavior is beneficial when directed at an organism's relatives.
Name this behavior that involves caring for the well-being of others, demonstrating selflessness.
ANSWER: altruism [accept word forms; prompt on kin selection before it is mentioned; prompt on selflessness]
The effects of this concept are represented by the a and b parameters of the Price equation, and Amotz
Zahavi used the handicap principle to explain this action in Arabian Babbler birds. Hamilton's rule can
determine when this action is favorable and the mutual grooming of primates is an example of the rare
reciprocal type. Most instances of this behavior are based on a high degree of relatedness leading to kin
selection, and well-documented examples include the sounding of alarm calls by ground squirrels and the
sharing of meat in wolf packs. Explaining why worker bees sting intruders even though they die as a result,
name this form of animal behavior in which an individual risks its own survival to benefit another member
of its species.
ANSWER: altruism
Viscous populations can show this behavior in the absence of kin selection, and Hamilton's rule is
used to determine when this behavior occurs in the context of kin selection. Humans commonly
practice the reciprocal type of this behavior. Well-known examples include prairie dogs calling
during the approach of a (*) predator, or giving alms to the poor. For 10 points, name this behavior in
which an individual's fitness is reducted in order to increase the fitness of another.
ANSWER: altruism
D. S. Wilson divided this concept into strong and weak forms, and this concept may also explain the
sterility of most female social insects. Hamilton's Rule, which governs the degree to which it occurs, has
been generalized as "kin selection" theory. Richard Dawkins argued that it was subject to "subversion
from within" in The Selfish Gene. For 10 points, name this activity in which an individual sacrifices its
own reproductive success for that of others, exhibited by prairie dogs giving off a warning signal instead
of running from predators.
ANSWER: altruism [accept word forms like altruistic]
Hansemann's work with dyed gelatin demonstrated the presence of two to six apertures in the septum of
these structures, which has a boundary formed by at least one of the secondary type of cells found here and
named after Kohn. DPLD is an affliction of these structures, while a lack of DPPC here may cause
atelectasis. Squamous cells account for most of its surface area, while the secondary type of cells found here
secrete surfactants to increase surface tension on these structures. Bronchioles lead to these structures,
diseases of which include emphysema and bronchitis. FTP, name these tiny sacs of air, the site of oxygen
and carbon dioxide exchange inside the lung.
ANSWER: alveoli
The development of one type of cells in these structures depends on the GM-CSF-dependent
activation of the transcription factor PU.1. A mutation in the SFTPB gene causes these structures'
namesake proteinosis. Proper function of these structures depends on a substance composed of the
proteins SP-A through SP-D as well as dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine and other (*) phospholipids.
That substance is synthesized in the lamellar bodies of their type II cells, is produced at insufficiently low
amounts in IRDS, and stabilizes these structures by reducing their surface tension. These structures are
destroyed in emphysema. For 10 points, name these structures which facilitate gas exchange with the blood,
small air sacs located in the lungs.
ANSWER: pulmonary alveoli [the singular is alveolus]
Contraction of myoepithelial cells results in the so-called "milk ejection" from one set of anatomical
structures with this name. Another set of anatomical structures with this name is lined with dipalmitoyl
phosphatidylcholine, or DPPC, a surfactant that prevents these structures from collapsing during
expiration. For 10 points, give the common name of these groups of small sacs, one found in the
mammary glands and one found in the lungs, the latter of which are the primary sites of gas exchange.
ANSWER: alveoli [accept alveolus; accept mammary alveoli or acini before "another"]
These structures feature Kohn's pores, and are lined with the surfactant DPPC. Infections of these
structures with fluids results in pneumonia. The most prominent structures with this name end a path from
the bronchi through the bronchioles. The breakdown of elastin in the walls of these structures characterizes
emphysema. For 10 points, name these sacs responsible for gas exchange in the lungs.
ANSWER: alveoli [or alveolus]
These structures are connected to their neighbors by pores of Kohn. Their type II cells secrete surfactants to
reduce surface tension and thereby prevent atelectasis, the collapse of the lung, and emphysema causes the
elastin in their walls to break down. Oxygen diffuses into the blood stream at, for 10 points, which
spherical sacs located at the ends of the bronchioles in the lungs?
ANSWER: alveoli [or alveolus]
Along with the glomerulus, these structures are destroyed in Goodpasture's Syndrome, and one group of
cells in these structures malfunctions in hyaline membrane disease. Laplace's Law is used to model these
structures, which are separated from each other by Kohn's Pores. Usually coated by surfactants, the walls of
these units break down in emphysema. They are located at the termini of the bronchioles and serve as the
interface between the respiratory and circulatory system. For 10 points, name these small sacs in the lung,
the site of gas exchange.
ANSWER: alveoli
One product produced by these structures contains two palmitoyl groups attached to a phosphatidylcholine.
One type of these structures form surfactant to lower surface tension, while the effect surface tension has on
their inflation can be described using Laplace's law. In emphysema, these structures are unable to collapse
properly and cause difficulty exhaling while in general, they are the primary site of gas exchange with the
blood. Meaning little cavity, for 10 points, name these structures found at the end of the bronchi, small
balloon-like sacs found in the lungs.
ANSWER: alveoli
Free radical peroxidation of apolipoprotein E has been linked to this disease and the drug Namenda
treats its symptoms by acting as an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist. It has recently been
discovered that individuals possessing a single mutated copy of the APP (*) gene are resistant to this
disease. It is commonly associated with the presence of abnormal microtubule-associated tau proteins which
form neurofibrillary tangles and beta-amyloid aggregates. For 10 points, name this neurodegenerative
disease associated with memory loss and dementia.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
It's not glaucoma, but the antibody bapineuzumab has been tested as a way to treat this disease. It
was named for a German psychiatrist who examined a woman named Auguste D. The amyloid
hypothesis proposes that beta-amyloid deposits cause this disease, while the cholinergic hypothesis
proposes it is caused by reduced (*) acetylcholine. It has debilitating effects on short-term and long-term
memory. For 10 points, name this most common form of dementia that is prevalent among older people.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease [or AD, prompt on dementia]
This disease is associated with abnormalities in the SORL1 gene and the presenilin 1 and 2 genes. It is
also strongly linked to the APOE4 allele. One hypothesis states that this disease is caused by
mutations on the APP gene. Another hypothesis states that this disease is caused by abnormalities in
a protein that helps to stabilize microtubules, the (*) tau protein, eventually leading to the formation of
neurofibrillary tangles. This disease leads to the formation of beta-amyloid plaques. One treatment for this
disease is Donepezil which increases acetylcholine production. For 10 points, identify this most common
form of dementia, a disease named for a German.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
Individuals with this disease exhibit a loss of locus coeruleus cells. The E allele of the apo-lipo-protein E4
gene increases the risk of this disease, which often results in a low level of acetylcholine in the brain. One
hypothesized cause of this disease is hyper-phosphorylated tau proteins, which form neurofibrillary tangles.
Another possible cause of this disease is the buildup of amyloid beta protein plaques. For 10 points, name
this neurodegenerative disease that causes over half of elderly dementia cases.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
One sign of this disease is paired helical filaments formed from tau protein. One explanation for this
disease attributes it to reduced synthesis of acetylcholine (uh-SEE-tul-KO-leen). The enormously frequent
development of this disease by age forty among those with Down syndrome lends credence to a hypothesis
that it stems from a precursor protein coded for on chromosome twenty-one. That hypothesis attributes this
disease to the buildup of amyloid (AA-mill-oid) beta plaques. For 10 points, name this common form of
dementia, which causes confusion and memory loss.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
Low acetylcholine (uh-SEE-till-KO-leen) levels in the brain are thought to cause this disease, in which tau
protein forms "tangles." It may also be caused by accumulation of amyloid (AMM-uh-loyd) beta plaques.
This disorder is often managed with the drug memantine (muh-MAN-teen). This disease kills neurons of the
hippocampus (HIP-oh-KAM-pus), causing dementia. For 10 points, name this neurodegenerative
(NUR-oh-dee-JEN-ur-uh-tiv) illness that leads to memory loss and decreased cognitive ability in the
elderly.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
One hypothesis regarding this disease states that it is caused by amyloid (AH-mih-loid) beta deposits.
Another hypothesis regarding it is called the "cholinergic" (koh-lin-URGE-ick) hypothesis which proposes
this disease is caused by a deficiency in acetylcholine (ay-ceet-al-col-leen), a neurotransmitter. Coming in
early and late onset varieties, this disease tends to create "neurofibrillary (nur-oh-FIB-rih-larry) tangles"
which clog up nerve cells within brain tissue. For 10 points, name this form of dementia, commonly found
in senior citizens.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
Hyperphosphorylation of tau proteins in this disease causes neurofibrillary tangles of microtubules. Plaques
of amyloid beta accumulate during the progression of this disease and the cholingeric theory of this disease
states that it is caused by a decrease in acetylcholine. This disease causes the death of neurons in the
hippocampus and is a form of dementia. For 10 points, name this disease that causes neural degeneration
and the loss of cognitive ability in the elderly, a disease that afflicted Ronald Reagan.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's Disease
The E4 allele of the ApoE gene is the largest genetic risk factor for this disease. According to one
theory it is caused by abnormalities in tau proteins. Another theory states it is caused by beta
amyloid deposits which would relate this disease to (*) prion related disorders like Creutzfeld-Jakob
disease. Another hypothesis states that it is caused by decreased production of acetylcholine. Patients of
this disease exhibit plagues and tangles in their brains along with a loss of long term memory. For 10
points, name this most common form of dementia, named for a German psychiatrist.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease [prompt on AD; prompt on dementia]
One possible diagnostic tool for this disease is Pittsburgh Compound B, a thioflavin derivative.
Tissue from sufferers of this disease shows apple-green birefringence under polarized light after
Congo Red staining. Genetic forms of it are linked to mutations in the gamma-secretase complex, and
it is also linked to the ApoE4 allele. One protein important in its pathogenesis is cleaved from APP
and forms peptides between 39 and 42 amino acids long. Another key protein in this disease binds to
microtubules and is named tau. Beta-amyloid (*) plaques are characteristic of this disease. It begins with
loss of executive functions and loss of motor skill and memory is inevitable. For 10 points, name this
neurodegenerative disease named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
A strong correlation has been developed between occurrence of this disease and the gene APOE, which is
responsible for lipoprotein catabolism. Some believe that the misfolding of proteins that stabilize
microtubules, called tau proteins, causes this disease, but most researchers suspect that the development of
plaques out of the two-molecule form of amyloid beta peptides is more influential. Thought to be caused by
acetylcholine deficiency, this is, for 10 points, what condition of dementia characterized by forgetfulness.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease [accept equivalents, or even Alzheimer disease]
This disease can be treated with the drug tacrine, which blocks the functions of cholinesterase ["kolin-esterase"]. This disease causes degeneration of the nucleus basalis of Meynert. Though originally hypothesized
to be caused by the tau proteins, the plaques caused by beta amyloid protein cause this diease. This disease,
named for a German neurologist, is characterized by decreased acetylcholine levels. For 10 points, name
common form of dementia, a disease of the elderly characterized by memory loss.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's Disease [accept Alzhimer's Dementia; prompt on "AD"]
This disease's pathogenesis is linked to a 42-amino acid cleavage product of a protein that can be
cleaved into 37 to 49 amino acid products. This disease is caused by buildup of beta-amyloid plaques and
by hyper-phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau. In its later stages, verbal skills and loss
of long-term memory occurs. For 10 points, name this neurological disease which causes dementia and
memory loss, named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
Risk factors of this disease include the presenilin 1 gene and the apoE4 gene. Symptoms of this disease can
be treated with Donepezil [don-EP-eh-zil], an acetyl-cholinesterase inhibitor. This disease was named by
Emil Kraepelin [KREP-eh-leen], and its namesake published a histology encyclopedia with Franz Nissl on
the cerebral cortex. This disease is marked by the presence of neurofibrillary tangles of tau proteins and
amyloid-beta plaques. For 10 points, name this form of dementia characterized by memory loss in the
elderly, and named for a German neurologist.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
In patients with this condition, loss of neurons leads to atrophy in the frontal cortex and cingulate
gyrus, and abnormalities in the APOE4 and SORL1 genes are factors that appear to cause it. One
theory proposes that oxidative stress is the primary cause of this condition, but the amyloid
hypothesis is more widely accepted. Increasing [*] acetylcholine production is one method of treatment
for this disease. A buildup of beta amyloid plaques and tau tangles are commonly found in patients with, for
10 points, what disease named after a German neuropathologist, the most common form of senile dementia?
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease [prompt on "dementia" or "senile dementia" before mentioned]
This disease's largest genetic risk factor is the E4 variant of Apolipoproten
(AY-poh-LIE-poh-pro-teen) E. It was first identified in a woman called "Auguste D" by its
namesake. This disease has been explained by a buildup of beta-amyloid deposits, which displaced an
older hypothesis that it was caused by reduced synthesis of (*) acetylcholine (uh-SEE-til-KOH-lean).
Cognitive reserve theory suggests likeliness of this disease can be lowered by reading and completing
crossword puzzles. For 10 points, name this most common form of dementia which is associated with
aging.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease [prompt on AD]
Many sufferers of this disease have alpha-synuclein-containing Lewy neurites in the CA2-3 region, and all
have APP that has been fragmented via proteolysis. It can only be definitively diagnosed via treatment of
tissue samples with Congo Red or Bielschowsky staining for a specific peptide derived from APP. Those
that have the E4 allele of apolipoprotein E are at an increased risk for this condition, which causes the
breakdown of microtubules in the brain due to tau protein aggregation. FTP, name the incurable
neurodegenerative disease that affects the hippocampus and results in dementia, a condition which is
characterized by the formation of beta-amyloid plaques and tangles.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
The inherited form of this disease has been linked to presenilin 1 and 2 genes, as well as the apoE4 gene on
chromosome 19. Hyperphosphorylation of tau proteins figures into the tau hypothesis concerning the
pathogenesis of this disease. A better-known hypothesis is the amyloid beta hypothesis, which suggests that
the buildup of amyloid beta plaques is responsible. Perhaps the oldest theory concerning this disease is that
it is caused by a shortage of acetylcholine in the brain. For 10 points, name this neurodegenerative disease
primarily affecting the elderly whose symptoms include memory loss.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's Disease
This condition is linked with the phosphorylation of a microtubule assembling protein called tau, which
ultimately leads to the development of neurofibrillary tangles. This disease is also linked with deficiencies
in the synthesis of acetylcholine. In general, this disease is characterized by complications in the
cytoskeletons of neurons in the cerebral cortex. For 10 points, identify this disease characterized by loss of
memory and dementia, named for a German.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
In 2012, researchers at Case Western Reserve University announced a potential to cure this condition using
the cancer drug Bexarotene. Sufferers of this condition experience a buildup of beta amyloid plaques, and
debate has long occurred over whether consumption of aluminum contributes to this disease. Most people
afflicted with Down syndrome develop the "early onset" form of this disease first identified by a namesake
German doctor. For 10 points, name this form of dementia most often characterized by memory loss in the
elderly.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
Late onset of this disease is correlated with having two mutant alleles of ApoE4. Galantamine and
rivastigmine are common treatments for this illness, in which overexcitement of glutamate receptors
can cause nerve cell death. Microtubule disintegration occurs in this disease due to
hyperphosphorylation of (*) tau protein. Sufferers of this disease exhibit degeneration of the cerebral
cortex, as well as aggregations of hyperphosphorylated tau protein, neurofibrillary tangles, and amyloid
plaques. For 10 points, name this most common form of dementia.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
Drugs used to treat this disease include memantine and rivastigmine. One cause of this disease is the
accumulation of proteins cleaved by beta-secretase rather than alpha-secretase. Those proteins are
pathologic A-beta-forty-two, which form amyloid plaques in the "early onset" form of this disease. For 10
points, name this disease that causes progressive dementia.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease [prompt on AD]
Neprilysin breaks down peptides that eventually lead to this disorder. In sufferers of this disease,
proteases in the ADAM-family are less active than beta and gamma secretases, which incompletely cleave
APP. All Down's Syndrome patients eventually develop this disease. Defects in tau protein may lead to the
formation of neurofibrillary tangles and thus this disorder. Destroying beta-amyloid plaques in the brain
slows the progression of it. For 10 points, name this common form of dementia in the elderly.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's Disease [or AD]
Factors that appear to cause this condition include the APOE e4 gene as well as the recently discovered
SORL 1 gene. The gene for one of its main causes is located on chromosome 21, explaining its prevalence
among sufferers of Down syndrome and moderate forms of it can be treated with Galantamine. Typically
diagnosed using the MMSE, a more common treatment for this disease is Donepezil, which helps increase
production of acetylcholine. First observed by the namesake scientist in describing the conditions of 51 year
old Auguste Deter, it is caused by a buildup in beta-amyloid and tau proteins in structures known as plaques
and tangles. FTP, identify this most common form of dementia that typically affects the elderly.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
A possible causative agent of this disease is herpes simplex virus type 1, and this disease causes 70%
cell loss in the locus ceruleus. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis may be able to predict this disease's onset,
and one genetic risk factor for this disease is the presence of the E4 variant of (*) Apolipoprotein E.
The cholinergic hypothesis is one theory of this disease's cause, but more widely accepted ones hold that it
is caused by neurofibrillary tangles of abnormal tau protein or amyloid-beta oligomers and plaques. Usually
diagnosed in people over 65, for 10 points, name this neurodegenerative disease that causes progressive
dementia.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease [prompt on "AD"]
This disease is theorized to be caused by abnormalities resulting from hyper-phosphorylation
(fos-FAWR-uh-ley-shun) of tau proteins. Another hypothesis concerning the cause of this disease suggests
that a buildup of beta-amyloid (AM-uh-loid) causes characteristic tangles and plaques in the brain. Other
evidence suggests it is caused by a deficiency of acetylcholine (uh-seet-l-KOH-leen). For 10 points, name
this disease that causes memory loss in its elderly sufferers.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
The ApoE4 mutation and malfunction of the gamma-secretase complex have been linked to this
disease. Treatments include cholinergics like donepezil and galanthamine. This disease is caused by a
buildup of microtubule-associated protein tau and the formation of plaques of beta-amyloid. It first
results in the loss of abstract thinking and (*) attention, followed by memory loss and dementia. For 10
points, name this neurological disorder that affects the elderly named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
One protein associated with this disease has been shown to selectively activate Death Receptor 6 in
the cells most heavily affected, and that protein is processed by PSEN1 and PSEN2. The ApoE4 allele
is strongly associated with this disease, and Pick's disease has a similar mechanism. Galantamine and
Donepezil are used to control this disease, which is partly associated with the hyperphosphorylation
of the tau protein, which creates microtubule tangles. People with down syndrome invariably develop this
disease by age 40, partly because they have an extra copy of the APP gene, which is thought to form betaamyloid plaques. Characterized by the gradual loss of longterm memory and eventual severe dementia, for
10 points, name this chronic neurological illness, named for a German.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's Disease
Recent results have shown that S100B levels in the serum can indicate progression of this disease, and
neuron-specific enolase levels can be used to measure its morphological status. Tacrine can provide
temporary relief to sufferers, and long-term effects of this disease are likely caused by the release of betasecretase. One hypothesis states that it is abnormalities in tau proteins that lead to this disease. Sufferers of
this disease experience plaques and tangles in the brain as a result of beta-amyloid accumulation.
Suffocation of neurons and defects in proper electrochemical signaling suggest this disease is linked with
deficiencies in acetylcholine synthesis. For 10 points, name this disease associated with memory loss in the
elderly.
ANSWER: Alzheimer's disease
Czyz developed a replacement for it to be used in marine environments. Developed by its namesake along
with Frank Lee and William Durston, it requires mutations in the excision repair system and
lipopolysaccharide synthesis, the latter of which makes the cell wall more permeable. A mammalian liver
extra is often used in this mutational reversion assay that employs several strains of Salmonella
typhimurium, each of which has a different mutation in the operon responsible for histidine. For 10 points,
name this test used to detect carcinogens.
ANSWER: Ames test
A reagent used in this assay can be activated using Aroclor-1254. An alternative to this assay uses the
Big Blue transgenic mouse strain. OECD 471 is the standard for this test, which can be extended into
a 384-well plate format in the fluctuation test. Before this test, a dose rangefinder using TA100 is
performed, and this test is often performed with rfa mutants that are unable to express
lipopolysaccharide. The S9 fraction, which is microsomal preparations of rat liver, must be added to
this assay because they have (*) cytochrome P450 activity, which may be required to activate some
analytes like benzopyrene. This assay works by using an auxotrophic strain which require histidine, with
revertants corresponding to a positive test. For 10 points, identify this biological test for determining
whether a substance is carcinogenic.
ANSWER: Ames test
Among the improvements made to this procedure are the introduction of an rfa mutation that makes a
lipopolysaccharide coat more permeable to a certain substance, and the introduction of the pkm10 plasmid,
which carries SOS repair genes and ampicillin resistance. An alternative to this procedure that uses a liquid
substrate and a 96-well microplate is called the fluctuation method. The man who developed this procedure
also improved it by inactivating the uvrB gene during it. In its original form, this procedure failed with
substances like benzopyrene, because cytochrome P450 is needed to activate it. To fix that and promote
growth during this assay, microsomes isolated from rat liver are mixed in. This procedure basically works
by incubating Salmonella typhimurium on agar that has been spread with a small amount of histidine. For
10 points, identify this eponymous biological test for a mutagenic agent.
ANSWER: Ames test
These molecules are linked together via DCC in the Merrifield technique. The psi and phi dihedral angles
between these molecules are visualized on a Ramachandran plot. The Strecker synthesis can form them. The
buildup of one of them at the blood-brain barrier causes the symptoms of phenylketonuria. The human body
synthesizes the nonessential type of these molecules, which all have a central carbon bonded to an R group.
They consist of carboxyl and NH2 units joined via peptide bonds. For 10 points, name these molecules, the
building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
These compounds react with reducing sugars in the Maillard reaction. These compounds can be
formed using a cyanide nucleophile in the Strecker synthesis. A carboxyl group and a namesake
nitrogen-containing group are found in these molecules, twenty of which are coded for in the human
body. For 10 points, name these compounds, exemplified by tryptophan and phenylalanine, which are
linked by peptide bonds to form proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
Combining one of these compounds with a reducing sugar can be used to produce different flavors in
the Maillard reaction, while reacting an aldehyde with potassium cyanide and ammonia is involved in
the Strecker synthesis of these molecules. The dihedrals of these compounds can be visualized using a
Ramachandran plot, and people with PKU cannot metabolize one of these compounds. Nine (*)
"essential" ones, including phenylalanine [fee - nol - AL - a - neen] and tryptophan [TRIP - toe - fan],
cannot be synthesized by the human body, and glycine is the simplest of these molecules. For ten points,
name these organic compounds which are joined by peptide bonds to form proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
Aldehydes can be treated with cyanide and ammonia, then with an acid, in one method of synthesizing these
molecules. One of these molecules cannot be processed in a genetic disorder, leading to musty-smelling
urine in a condition called PKU. Examples of these molecules are attached to tRNA before it enters the
ribosome. These zwitterions possess a variable side chain and a carboxylic acid functional group. These
substances are connected to each other via peptide bonds, and examples of these molecules include alanine,
tryptophan, and tyrosine. For 10 points, name this nitrogen-containing class of molecules that form the
building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
Nonstandard examples of these molecules have a sulfur atom replaced with selenium. They can be sorted
into glucogenic or ketogenic depending on how they are broken down, and the inability to break down
branched-chain ones causes maple syrup urine disease. There are 20 standard ones, several of which were
produced in the Urey-Miller experiment. They are polymerized by ribosomes and contain both a carboxy
and amine group. For 10 points, name these building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
Ninhydrin turns purple in the presence of these compounds. Naturally, these compounds are found only
in their L-enantiomeric forms. These compounds exist as zwitterions at neutral pHs because carboxyl
groups are more acidic than ammonium. These compounds were synthesized from sulfur dioxide, carbon
dioxide, nitrogen, and water, with the help of an electrical spark, in the Miller-Urey experiment. They form
a special type of amide bond called a peptide bond. Two of them contain sulfur: methionine and cysteine.
For 10 points, name these compounds, the constituents of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
These compounds are synthesized from aldehydes or ketones in the Strecker synthesis. These
compounds' various conformations can be visualized with a Ramachandran plot. Their base
structure consists of an NH3+ group, a COO- group, and an R group. The simplest one has an R
group consisting only of a hydrogen atom, [*] glycine, and other examples of these compounds include
arginine and tryptophan. These compounds are divided into essential and nonessential groups, and they
form peptide bonds with each other to form proteins. For 10 points, name these molecules that contain both
an amine and carboxylic acid group.
ANSWER: amino acids
These compounds are synthesized from aldehydes (AL-duh-hides) in the Strecker synthesis. Their side
chains, sometimes known as R groups, face outwards in beta sheets. They also form alpha helices
(HEEL-uh-seez). One of these compounds, encoded by the start codon AUG (A-U-G), is methionine
(muh-THIGH-oh-neen). Eight of the twenty common types of these are essential, because they cannot be
synthesized by the human body. For 10 points, name these building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
Ten of these substances cannot be synthesized by humans and must by supplied from the diet, making
them known as "essential." An inability to metabolize one of these compounds leads to phenylketonuria
(fee-noll-kee-toh-NEW-ree-ah). The only acidic ones are aspartic acid and glutamic acid. They were
created using a group of simple organic compounds in the Miller-Urey experiment. One of sixty-four
codons (CODE-onz) determines which one of these substances will be synthesized. For 10 points, name
these compounds, the building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
The addition of potassium cyanide to an aldehyde in the presence of ammonium chloride produces an alphaaminonitrile, which is hydrolyzed in the Strecker Synthesis to produce these substances. A gamma-form of
one of these is the chief inhibitory neurotransmitter in the mammalian nervous system, whereas the much
more common alpha-form exists as a zwitterion at its isoelectric point, which is near neutral pH levels. The
"R"-groups of these distinguish them from one another; examples are valine and glycine. For ten points,
name these biologically important compounds that comprise proteins, which contain amine and carboxylic
acid functional groups.
ANSWER: amino acids
Ramachandran plots describe certain bond angles within these molecules. Heat shock proteins assist in a
process in which hydrogen bonds are formed between these molecules. They are bound to tRNA in
preparation for translation, where a bond between these molecules' namesake functional groups is formed.
They are called "essential" when they cannot be synthesized in the body. Cysteine, alanine, and glycine are
examples of, for 10 points, what molecules that make up proteins?
ANSWER: amino acids
These molecules can be hydrolyzed from the condensation of an aldehyde and ammonium chloride with
potassium cyanide. Visualized on a Ramachandran Plot, these products of the Strecker Synthesis can
contain sulfur, such as the one produced by the start codon AUG that is considered essential. Consisting of
a carboxylic acid group and a namesake group, they form peptide bonds. Exemplified by methionine
(me-THAY-uh-neen) and glycine (GLAHY-seen), for 10 points, name these "building blocks" of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
A disease caused by the failed breakdown of one of these compounds is characterized by musty-smelling
urine and is known as PKU. The sequence of these compounds is known as the "primary structure" of a
certain kind of compound. In addition to phenylalanine and tryptophan, these compounds include glycine,
whose R group attached to its central carbon atom is simply a hydrogen. These compounds are joined by
peptide bonds. For 10 points, name these building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
A Ramachandran plot shows the bond angles psi and phi in these molecules. One of these molecules is
an excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system and opposes the actions of GABA. They exist
predominantly in the L stereoisomer. The sequence in which they bind determines primary structure, and
those that cannot be synthesized by the body are known as "essential." When these molecules are linked,
they form peptide bonds. For 10 points, name these building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids [or proteins until it is read; or peptides until it is read]
The JAR1 protein conjugates one of these compounds to the phytohormone jasmonic acid. The synthesis of
one of them is coupled with purine synthesis and begins with a PRPP precursor that is converted to ACAIR.
SECIS elements effect the synthesis of an unusual selenium containing example. The simplest one serves as
an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. Pyruvate, oxaloacetate, and alpha-ketoglutarate
are all converted into these substances which have an NH3+ and a COO- group. For 10 points, identify these
compounds which have twenty variants that make up the building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids [accept: jasmonates or jasmonic acid until mentioned, because that would be an amazing buzz]
Most types of proteases are named after specific examples of this type of molecule. The most common
examples of these molecules in nature have the L stereoisomer. One type of these molecules can form
disulfide bonds to stabilize tertiary structure. Threonine, lysine, and tryptophan are examples of "essential"
types of these molecules because the human body cannot synthesize them. For 10 points, name these
molecules, which are chained together in peptide bonds to form proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
These compounds can be formed in the Strecker Synthesis from ketones or aldehydes, and a Ramachandran
plot can visualize dihedral angles that are formed between these compounds. These compounds act as both
an acid and a base, since they are examples of zwitterions. The simplest one of these compounds is glycine,
and around twenty different forms of these compounds can be found in the human body, nine of which are
considered as essential. Examples of these compounds include cysteine and histidine. For 10 points, name
these compounds which are linked together by peptide bonds to form proteins.
ANSWER: Amino Acids
Maple syrup urine disease is caused by the inability to metabolized branched ones. They can be
classified into glucogenic or ketogenic based on metabolic properties. These chemicals, which include
carnitine and taurine, almost exclusively occur in the L configuration. They have both (*) three-letter
and one-letter designations, and are brought to the ribosome by tRNA able to bind to the right codon during
translation. For 10 points, name these building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acid
Chorismate is an intermediate in the synthesis of the aromatic type of these molecules, which can be formed
in a reaction that begins with aldehydes reacting with ammonia and hydrogen cyanide. That organic
chemistry reaction is the Strecker synthesis. Their phi and psi bond angles are displayed in a Ramachandran
plot. These compounds are zwitterions, meaning they can act as an acid or base. There are twenty standard
ones, each differing in their R group, and examples of them include tryptophan and glycine. For 10 points,
name these molecules that are joined by peptide bonds to form proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
They may be linked in a reaction that uses protecting groups like the acetal TBS and the carbamate Boc to
carry out a specific DCC coupling. They can be produced by a reaction that forms and then hydrolyzes a
nitrile using potassium cyanide and ammonia, which is named for Adolph Strecker. An uncommon one uses
selenium in the place of sulfur, while another is most often found in beta sheets, since its cyclic sidechain
allows for sharp turns. FTP, identify these products of the process of translation, which are the monomers of
proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
Two of these which contain aromatic groups are characterized by a strong UV absorption peak at 280
nanometers, while two other ones sometimes see their central sulfur atom replaced by selenium. The
dihedral angles between them can be shown on a Ramachandran Plot. The simplest one of the does
not show optical activity, and is called glycine. The bond between these objects' COOH group and NH2
group are known as peptide bonds. For 10 points, identify these molecules which are the basic building
blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids
PAME is a syndrome caused by one of these organisms, which is known as Naegleria fowleri. In
addition to a "brain eating" species, another species can cause keratitis and encephalitis, while the
species Histolytica causes a namesake dysentery. Its largest species, Pelomyxa palustris, inhabits
oxygen-poor mud at the bottom of ponds. These members of phylum Rhizopoda contain actin
extensions known as pseudopodia. For 10 points, name this protozoan known for its lack of definite
shape.
ANSWER: amoebae
Though this group is a genus, it is within a phylum named for it that includes lobosa and conosa. The lobosa
includes the tubulinea class and this genus, while the conosa includes many slime molds. The main species
of this genus is the proteus, which has exactly one contractile vacuole. Name these unicellular protists that
move using pseudopods, or false feet, and which often change their shape.
ANSWER: amoeba
This class of animals most likely evolved from the Rhipidistians, and other ancestors of this class
include Acanthostega and Tiktaalik, which was recently discovered in the Arctic. This class, which
possesses a unique three-chambered heart, includes the caecilians, who are worm-like, and they were
the first tetrapods to evolve. Since they lack an amniotic egg, they must lay their eggs in water and
undergo metamorphosis. For 10 points, name this animal class that can live on land and in water, which
includes frogs.
ANSWER: Amphibians
In 1993, the remains of a large extinct example of this class of animals was found on Madagascar and
named beelzebufo [bee-EHL-zeh-boo-foe]. One of its orders, many of whose examples have tentacles
between their nostrils and very small eyes, are gymnophonia [jim-noe-FONE-ee-uh]. These animals have
parotoid [PAIR-ah-toid] glands to produce neurotoxins to fight predators, and their skin is generally
permeable [PER-mee-ah-bul]. Its other living orders are caudata [caw-DAA-tuh] and anura. The caudate
order is composed mainly of salamanders and newts. Name these animals often able to live on land and in
water that includes frogs.
ANSWER: amphibians or amphibia
One species in this class known as tropicalis is increasingly used as a model organism because it is
diploid unlike a more commonly used tetraploid species in the same genus. Organisms in this class
are dying off from the disease chytridiomycosis (KYE-tridd-ee-oh-my-KO-sis). Order Gymnophonia
in this class contains caecilians (say-SILL-yinns), while (*) Anura contains the organism in which the
gray crescent was discovered. Organisms in this class undergo a metamorphosis that often includes the
development of kidneys and lungs. For 10 points, name this class that includes newts, salamanders, and
frogs.
ANSWER: Amphibia [or Lissamphibia; or amphibians]
The two subclasses of extinct organisms within this class are Labyrinthodontia and Lepospondyli. These
animals are the first to develop eardrums and use both buccal pumping and gas exchange on their skin for
respiration. Some of these animals, such as axolotls, retain gills in the adult, though most organisms in this
class eliminate gills in favor of lungs through the process of metamorphosis, which changes tadpoles to
frogs. For 10 points, identify this class of ectothermic organisms that include salamanders.
ANSWER: Amphibians
This class contain the most basal animals besides lungfish to have a double circulatory system. Because
their buccally-ventilated lungs are relatively inefficient, their skin must remain moist for respiration. They
including the snake-like caecilians (suh-SILL-yuns), and their young typically transform from a
water-breathing juvenile form to an air-breathing terrestrial form. 10 points, identify this class which
includes all non-amniotic four-legged vertebrates, such as salamanders and frogs.
ANSWER: amphibians [or Amphibia]
One major group of these organisms was Labyrinthodontia, and their peak as predators came in the
Carboniferous and Permian. The metoposaurs were a type of this organism important in the early Triassic.
The caecilians are one order within this group of organisms, and this group, which all developed from the
superorder Salientia, includes mudpuppies, newts, and frogs. For 10 points, name this class of organisms
that live both on water and land.
ANSWER: amphibians
This brain area is presumed to control sexual motivation, and men show more activation in this area
when viewing sexually-arousing scenes. People with certain types of disorders are theorized to have
an overactive this brain area, and stimulation of this brain area can induce (*) eating and drinking.
This brain area responds to many sensory modalities, and this brain area is important for flashbulb
memories. This brain area is shaped like an almond, and it is implicated in depression and anxiety. for 10
points, what is this brain structure in the limbic system that is primarily associated with emotional arousal,
especially fear?
ANSWER: amygdala
This enzyme breaks down the indicator compound Phadebas, which is used to measure the levels
of this enzyme in grain. Termamyl is a heat-stable version of this enzyme isolated from Bacillus
licheniformis, and phaseolamin is an inhibitor of it. The active site of this enzyme contains a chloride
ion for activation and cleaves the substrate using two aspartate and one glutamate residues. Malt is a
common source of this enzyme in (*) breadmaking. This enzyme is used to produce limit dextrins, and
along with lipase, a version of this enzyme is measured in studies of pancreatic function. This enzyme
breaks down alpha-one-four glycosidic bonds in a certain polymer. For 10 points, name this enzyme that
breaks down starch, a version of which is found in saliva.
ANSWER: amylase
In humans, expression of this enzyme in one tissue is carried out from a promoter that is an unusual
combination of a gamma actin pseudogene and a retrotransposon. Its activity can be tested using the
Bernfeld assay and quantified in somogyi units. The thermostable taka variant of this enzyme comes
from the koji fungus and the BamH1 restriction enzyme comes from a bacterium named for its
production of this enzyme. Examples of this enzyme that are "liquefying" act internally on the
substrate. Limit dextrins are a product of the (*) beta form of this enzyme. This enzyme cleaves its
substrate at 1,4 alpha linkages. This enzyme is produced in the pancreas and can also be found in saliva. For
10 points, name this enzyme that degrades starch.
ANSWER: amylase [or diastase]
One controversial suggestion of the Gaia hypothesis is that ancient organisms with this property sacrificed
themselves for the benefit of the planet. Denitrification occurs most quickly in soil with this property, while
hydrogenosomes take the place of mitochondria in protists of this type. Gas gangrene only develops under
this condition, and methane is a byproduct of this form of digestion. Also a method of respiration that
produces hydrogen sulfide, identify this term that describes environments or processes like fermentation,
which function in the absence of oxygen.
ANSWER: anaerobic [or anaerobes, etc.]
This phase begins when securin (seh-CURE-in) is destroyed, allowing separase (SEH-pah-rase) to
cleave cohesins (coh-HEE-sins). During this phase, kinetochore (kih-NEH-toh-kore) fibers shorten.
Unipolar kinesins (KIE-neh-sins), bipolar kinesins, and dyenins (DIE-eh-nins) push microtubules
apart during this phase, which occurs after the creation of the (*) spindle. This phase causes sister
chromatids to separate. For 10 points, identify this phase of mitosis in which chromosomes split apart and
move towards opposite poles, coming just before telophase and after metaphase.
ANSWER: anaphase
The action of Stu2 opposes that of Kip3 and carries out important stabilization during this phase, and
another kinesin called MCAK plays a similar role. It begins with the production of a ubiquitin ligase, and
the cleavage of securin, which ceases to inhibit separation. In this phase, depolymerization shortens the
kinetochore microtubules, and spindle fibers pull sister chromatids apart into individual chromosomes.
For 10 points, name this phase of mitosis that precedes telophase.
ANSWER: anaphase
During the transition to this phase, the protein geminin is degraded by its namesake promoting complex,
which also starts this phase by tagging securin for destruction by a proteasome. This phase begins with the
separation of the centromeres of sister chromatids, which then move to opposite ends of the cell. By the end
of this phase, a complete set of chromosomes has been formed at each end of the cell. For 10 points, name
this second-to-last phase of mitosis which precedes telophase.
ANSWER: anaphase
This phase of mitosis is triggered by cyclosome [SIGHkloh-some], which eliminates securin, leading to the
release of separin. The end of this phase is characterized by the disintegration of the kinetochore [ki-NEEtuh-kor] microtubules and the first stages of a cell membrane. This phase is characterized by movement
along the polar microtubules pulling the sister chromatids [KROH-muhtids] apart, leading to an elongation
of the cell. Name this phase of mitosis occurring between metaphase and telophase.
ANSWER: anaphase
This phase of mitosis sees the binding of Cdh1 and the subsequent cleavage of securin and
M-phase cyclin. The lengthening of polar microtubules and shortening of kinetochore microtubules
help separate (*) spindle poles during this phase. It is the shortest stage of mitosis, and it sees the migration
of sister chromatids to opposite ends of the cell in preparation for the formation of daughter nuclei. For 10
points, this is what phase of mitosis that follows metaphase and precedes telophase?
ANSWER: anaphase
The protein Cdc20 is not activated until the start of this stage. The cyclosome is also known as a
complex that promotes this stage by breaking down securin. This stage occurs due to the removal of tubulin
monomers from the "plus" end of a microtubule by the kinetochore (kin-ET-oh-core). Errors in this phase
of mitosis can lead to Down's Syndrome and other nondisjunctions. For 10 points, name this stage of
mitosis in which sister chromatids are segregated to opposite sides of the cell and which occurs between
metaphase and telophase.
ANSWER: anaphase [prompt on mitosis until it is read]
Late in this phase of the cell cycle, its namesake promoting complex directs degradation of cyclins. The
second part of this phase requires ATP for motors to move the spindle poles apart. It is initiated by the
unlinking of sister chromatids (CROW-muh-tidz). For 10 points, name this phase of mitosis, in which
chromosomes are pulled toward opposite ends of the cell, which precedes telophase and follows metaphase.
ANSWER: anaphase
This process sees the deactivation of the maturation promoting factor. During this process, CDC20
activates the APC complex, resulting in the end of securin proteins inhibiting separin proteins.
Separin protein then goes on to hydrolyze cohesion proteins. A lag that can occur during this process
causes monosomy, seen in patients with Turner's syndrome. This *stage sees the action of
kinetochores shorten the spindles, which in turn results in the separation of sister chromatids. Coming
between metaphase and telophase, for 10 points, name this third stage of mitosis that sees chromosomes
separate to opposite sides of the cell.
ANSWER: anaphase (prompt on "mitosis" until stage)
Benomyl delays this event from occurring, while the binding of Mad2 prevents it. Cdh1 binds to its
namesake promoting complex, which also polyubiquinates securin. Events in it are caused by the shortening
of kinetochore microtubules at their positive ends, along with the destruction of cohesin molecules. During
this shortest stage of mitosis, the spindle elongates, and sister chromatids disjoin and migrate to opposite
ends of the cell. For 10 points, name this phase of mitosis found in between metaphase and telophase.
ANSWER: anaphase
The onset of this event is regulated by levels of RCS1, and a complex key to this event is activated by
the Cdc20 cofactor. This event proceeds when a complex alternatively called the cyclosome degrades
securins, leading to the activation of separases which cleave residual cohesin; that complex is an E3
ubiquitin ligase, the APC/C. Spindle poles begin to move apart during the later part of this stage, and its
early portion sees the shortening of microtubules due to depolymerization at the plus ends. For 10 points,
identify this event in which sister chromatids begin to move towards opposite poles of the cell, a stage of
mitosis which precedes telophase.
ANSWER: anaphase
In vertebrates, one protein critical to this process has a KEN box instead of a D box, which is recognized by
a CDH1 complex. That protein, CDC20, complexes with a promoting cyclosome to start this process by
degrading S and M cyclins and cleaving a protein dephosphorylated by CDC14, securin. Separase is then
released, which removes cohesin from chromosomes. In this phase, polar microtubules are lengthened and
kinetochore microtubules contract, which drags sister chromatids to opposite poles of the cell. For 10
points, name this stage of mitosis that follows metaphase and precedes telophase.
ANSWER: anaphase [accept anaphase II before "mitosis"; accept anaphase I before "chromatids"; prompt on mitosis or meiosis before "start this process"]
Mice lacking Cks2 were sterile because the gametes were unable to progress beyond this stage. Before this
can begin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase must be activated which destroys the targets through the 26S proteasome.
The degradation of one of those targets, securin, allows separase to breakdown cohesin, which marks the
start of this. The cohesins hold together sister chromatids, and, once separated, daughter chromosomes are
formed and move towards the spindle poles. For 10 points, give the name of this stage of mitosis, which
results in two sets of chromosomes being formed at the poles of the cell and that starts after metaphase.
ANSWER: Anaphase (accept anaphase I or anaphase II before "E3 Ubiquitin ligase")
Drugs treating some forms of this condition include Mircera and Aranesp. This condition can be caused by
deficiencies of triosephosphate isomerase, pyruvate kinase, and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The
presence of Heinz bodies accompanies several potential causes of this condition. Although it's not gastritis,
autoimmune destruction of parietal cells causes one type of this condition, and another type of this
condition is characterized by the production of spherocytes. Some forms of this condition are treated with
ESAs, or erythropoiesis-stimulating agents. Some causes of this condition confer resistance to malaria, and
it is commonly caused by iron deficiency. For 10 points, name this condition affecting red blood cells that
comes in "pernicious" and "sickle-cell" varieties.
ANSWER: anemia [or more specific types like pernicious anemia, hemolytic anemia, iron-deficiency anemia, and sickle-cell anemia]
Along with an enlarged spleen, one type of this condition is a symptom of hereditary spherocytosis. Another
type of this disease is detected by Schilling's test and is characterized by a deficiency of a molecule
sometimes named after castle. Patients with that variety of this condition produce megaloblasts because of a
lack of intrinsic factor, in turn due to a vitamin B12 deficiency. Another type is characterized by the
replacement of Hemoglobin A with Hemoglobin S. For 10 points, give this blanket name for conditions that
cause deficiency or abnormality in red blood cells, which includes iron-deficient, pernicious, and sickle cell
types.
ANSWER: anemia
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency lead to the megaloblastic (MAY-guh-lo-BLAST-ic) type of this disease.
Some genetic diseases cause overactivity of the spleen and so lead to this disorder. Misshapen red blood
cells lead one variety of this disorder, and low iron intake leads to its most common definition. For 10
points, name this illness, generally defined as a decrease in levels of hemoglobin or of red blood cells.
ANSWER: anemia
Immune mediated forms of this disease can be diagnosed by the Coombs test. A form of this disease
named after Cooley arises from genetic abnormalities. The presence of (*) anti-intrinsic factor
antibodies leads todeficiencies in cobalamin, triggering its megaloblastic form. Lead poisoning can lead to
its microcytic form and it can arise due to thalassemia or iron deficiency. For 10 points, name this disease
that is characterized by deficiency in hemoglobin or decreased red blood cell volume and comes in a sickle
cell form.
ANSWER: anemia
One type of this disorder is caused by iron deposits in the mitochondria. That type of this disorder is
called sideroblastic, and a deficiency of B12 or folic acid can cause the megaloblastic type of this disorder.
This disorder may be diagnosed as a result of an abnormal reticulocyte count. A recessive genetic variety of
this disorder provides a heterozygote advantage against malaria and is thus common in people of African
descent. For 10 points, name this blood disease, one variant of which causes its namesake sickle cells.
ANSWER: anemia
One agent used in this field causes a form of hepatitis resulting from the production of triflouroacetic
acid, and one of the pioneers of this field impressed John Collins Warren with a demonstration, who stated
that "this is no humbug"; that was William Thomas Green Morton. Isoflorane, sevoflourane, and
desflourane has replaced several compounds in this field, whose name was coined by Oliver Wendell
Holmes Senior. Peter Murphy, a member of this profession, developed endotracheal intubation in the
1960s, and the first practitioners of this field used diethyl ether or nitrous oxide. For 10 points, name this
field of medicine, which is concerned with knocking people out for surgery.
ANSWER: anesthesia [or anesthesiology]
Genetic evidence from the basal types of these organisms suggest that the genus Amborella is sister to all
species within this division. They have small male and female gametophytes, allowing faster life cycles.
Double fertilization leads to the production of an endosperm, a tissue within the seed that provides the
embryo with nutrition. Self-fertilization is prevented by having ovaries enclosed in a carpel, which later
develops into fruit. They have a specialized reproductive structure consisting of pistils and stamens, unlike
the other extant division of seed plants. For 10 points, name this division containing flowering plants,
contrasted with gymnosperms.
ANSWER: angiosperms or anthophyta or magnoliophyta (prompt on "flowering plants" before mentioned)
This clade underwent significant radiation in the middle Cretaceous, displacing the more basal
Cycadophyta. When certain parts of their perianths are undifferentiated from one another, those structures
are termed tepals. Members of this clade develop a nutritive tissue around the embryo from one sperm
nucleus and two polar bodies after another cell forms a tube down the style; that process is called double
fertilization. Traditionally divided into monocots and dicots, these plants possesses reproductive organs
called pistils and stamens and often have colorful petals. For 10 points, identify this division of seedbearing flowering plants, a sister clade to Gymnospermae.
ANSWER: angiosperms [or Angiospermae; or Magnoliophyta; or magnoliophytes; or Anthophyta; or anthophytes; accept flowering plants until it is read; prompt on "flowers"]
Oleanane is the name given to chemicals produced by these organisms. Nymphaeales [nim-FAY-uhleez] is one basal member of these organisms, and recent genetic evidence suggests that Amborella is
another. In these organisms, one sperm cell fuses with the egg, and two polar nuclei from the embryo
sac fuse with another sperm cell, creating a triploid (*) endosperm, in a process called double
fertilization. These organisms are divided into monocots and eudicots by the number of cotyledons. Pollen
is carried from the stamen to the pistil in these organisms. For 10 points, identify this group of flowering
plants contrasted with gymnosperms.
ANSWER: angiosperms [or Magnoliophyta; prompt on flowering plants]
A majority of these organisms possess short cells called vassal elements and lose their fiber cells at
maturity. A primitive example of these organisms which is a key to their phylogenetic tree is
Amborella. A micropyle allows their cells to become triploid during (*) double fertilization. Two classes
of these organisms are the monocots and eudicots. Distinct characteristics of these organisms include a
terminal sac called an anther and sporophylls called carpals, the bases of which contain pollen receptors
called ovaries. For ten points, name these organisms which produce flowers and fruits, distinguishing them
from the gymnosperms.
ANSWER: Angiosperms (prompt on "flowering plants")
Hypotheses for the origin of this phylum include the woody magnoliid and paleoherb hypotheses.
Members of this phylum are monoecious (MON-oh-EESH-uss) if they contain both sexes and are divided
into monocots or dicots based on the number of cotyledons. Seeds are contained inside sporophylls in
members of this phylum, whose corolla surround the stamen and pistil. Sepals protect petals on members of
this fruit-producing phylum. For 10 points, name this phylum of flowering plants, contrasted with
gymnosperms.
ANSWER: angiospermae [or angiosperms or Anthophyta]
Recent gene sequencing suggests that the modern Amborella is a sister genus to the first of these, a
group which radiated during the early Cretaceous 130 million years ago. They create a triploid foodstoring body when a male gamete and two polar nuclei fuse during their process of double [*]
fertilization. This group is separated by number of cotyledons into monocots and dicots, and they use
animals and wind to carry pollen from stamens to an ovule enclosed within the pistil of their characteristic
part. For 10 points, name this group of plants that grow flowers.
ANSWER: angiosperms [accept Magnoliophyta, prompt "flowering plants"]
In these organisms, two nuclei from the embryo sac fuse with a sperm nucleus after another sperm nucleus
unites with the egg in a process called double fertilization. The phloem of these organisms includes
companion cells, and they can be divided based on number of seed leaves into monocots and dicots. These
organisms receive pollen with the stigma, which is connected by the style to the ovary. For 10 points, name
these flowering, fruit-producing plants contrasted with gymnosperms.
ANSWER: Angiosperms
Bennettitales, an extinct line of these organisms with recessed microsporangia, is theorized to be a sister
group to this monophyletic group. This group's most distant-living relative is endemic to New Caledonia
and is called Amborella. Their integuments have two layers, and the megasporangia of members of this
group become triploid after undergoing a process called double fertilization. They can be classified into
monocots and eudicots, but are most easily distinguished from another phylum of seed bearing plants by the
presence of stamens and carpels. For ten points, name these often fruit bearing plants that have owers and
which are contrasted with gymnosperms.
ANSWER: angiosperms
The oldest known specimen belonging to this plant clade is Archaefructus lianongenesis, and the male and
female gametophytes of this plant clade are greatly reduced, having only three and seven cells, respectively.
This group of organisms is characterized by the presence of a 3n (*) endosperm in the fertilized seed, and
following fertilization in these plants, a pericarp forms. These organisms have micropyles through which
double fertilization occurs. This clade includes monocots and dicots, and plants in this clade notably have
carpels and stamens. Fruits are formed from flowers in, for 10 points, what group of flowering plants
contrasted with gymnosperms?
ANSWER: angiosperms
The oldest known specimen belonging to this plant clade is Archaefructus lianongenesis, and the male and
female gametophytes of this plant clade are greatly reduced, having only three and seven cells, respectively.
This group of organisms is characterized by the presence of a 3n (*) endosperm in the fertilized seed, and
following fertilization in these plants, a pericarp forms. These organisms have micropyles through which
double fertilization occurs. This clade includes monocots and dicots, and plants in this clade notably have
carpels and stamens. Fruits are formed from flowers in, for 10 points, what group of flowering plants
contrasted with gymnosperms?
ANSWER: angiosperms
Amborella trichopoda is the oldest surviving example of the "basal" type of these organisms, which
are related to magnoliids. One of these organisms' gametes passes through the style before engaging
in double fertilization. These organisms produce a structure that contains endosperm and is
surrounded by a pericarp. These organisms are divided into (*) monocots and dicots depending on the
number of seed leaves they possess. Unlike a related class of organisms, their seeds are contained in a fruit,
and their most notable feature contains stamens and pistils. For ten points, name these flowering plants,
which are often contrasted with gymnosperms.
ANSWER: angiosperms (or Angiospermae; accept Anthophyta or anthophytes; prompt on "flowering plants" until mentioned)
Reproduction of this animal entails the male biting the female on her side, after which he releases an
enzyme to physically fuse his body to hers until he remains just a pair of testes. The most notable feature of
this animal is the result of bacteria-induced bioluminescence, and is a light dangling at the end of a
rod-shaped feature above this animal's head. For 10 points, name this frightening-looking fish so named
because the aforementioned feature makes it appear to be fishing.
ANSWER: anglerfish
One class in this phylum consists of tiny flat and round members that are exclusively parasites of crinoids,
the Myzostomida. Another class, the Hirudinea, has its coelom filled with spongy tissue reducing a
normally open space into a series of narrow canals. Another class of this phylum consists of marine
creatures that possess hundreds of chitin bristles and some can be found living in self-secreted tubes in
deep-sea vents. Terrestrial members of this phylum hold their eggs in a glandular sac called a clitellum and
though they are hermaphroditic, usually must make contact with another individual to reproduce. Named
after the many ring-like structures found on their bodies, for 10 points, identify this phylum of segmented
worms that includes leeches and earthworms.
ANSWER: Annelida or Annelids or segmented worms (before stated)
The Myxobolus parasite, which causes whirling disease, completes its life cycle in salmonid fish and an
organism from this biological group. One subclass in this phylum produces the chemical hirudin and uses a
clitellum in reproduction. Structures for locomotion called parapodia are used by one group in this phylum,
which is divided into polychaetes and a group which includes organisms that have nephrostomes in their
metanephridia. With a name meaning "little rings", for ten points, name this phylum of segmented worms
that includes leeches and earthworms.
ANSWER: annelids or annelida (accept oligochaetes before "subclass")
The anterior portion of organisms in this phylum is known as the prostomium. Except for organisms in
class Hirudinea (here-oo-din-EY-uh), organisms in this phylum possess chitinous (KITE-uh-nus) bristles
known as setae. Most organisms in this phylum are hermaphroditic and reproduce by cross-fertilization.
Their most notable feature is known as metamerism (meh-TAH-mer-izm), and describes a pattern of
repeated segmentation. For 10 points, name this phylum of segmented worms that includes leeches and
earthworms.
ANSWER: annelida [or annelids]
Creatures from this phylum used as model organisms include Capitella capitata and Platynereis dumerilii,
and chemoreceptors called nuchal organs are found at the prostonium towards their anterior ends. A.
pompejana is a member known for its tolerance for high temperature differentials near deep sea vents, and
they are subdivided into polychaetae and clitellata. This phylum was long thought to be the sister taxon to
arthropoda due to their characteristic body plans. For 10 points, identify this phylum of segmented worms,
which include earthworms and leeches.
ANSWER: annelida [or annelids]
The prostomium protects the mouth of one organism in this phylum. The reproductive epitoke breaks off
from syllids, a family in this phylum. Cocoons form from clitellum, a pale ring on members of this phylum.
This phylum includes nereids, oligochaeta, which includes the family lumbricus, and hirudinea that
includes hermaphroditic leeches. Chaetae are stiff bristles found on earthworms, who are members of this
phylum. For 10 points, name this phylum of segmented worms.
ANSWER: Annelida
Cordyceps unilateralis is an ascomycete that specifically infects types of these organisms, causing them to
go to the tops of plants. Antibiotic secretions by Pseudonocardia deter growth of Escovopsis weberi, which
is a pathogen of certain fungal cultivars maintained as a food source by the attine variety of these
organisms. Bull horn acacia provide a home and Beltian bodies as food for these organisms that protect the
plant from large mammals and other plants. These organisms use their antennae to milk their herd for
honeydew and will also fiercely defend their herd against predators such as lady beetles. For 10 points,
identify these social insects that farm aphids and live in large colonies whose portals to the outside world
often take the form of hills.
ANSWER: ants
One species of these creatures, Mycocepurus smithii (MY-coh-seh-"PURE"-us "SMITH"-"e"), is
cultivated by the Attini and is entirely female. The presence of a metapleural (MET-uh-PLOOR-uhl) gland,
which secretes phenylacetic acid (FEN-il-uh-SEE-tic), differentiates most species of these creatures from
other members of order Hymenoptera (hi-men-OP-ter-uh). These organisms of family Formicidae
(for-MISS-uh-dee) often herd aphids for food and include "driver," "carpenter," and "army" varieties. For
10 points, name these insects which form underground hives occupied by soldiers, workers, and the queen.
ANSWER: ants [or Formicidae until it is read]
The first discovered greenbeard allele, Gp-9, was found in one of these animals. One species of these
insects makes devil's gardens, and acacia trees host some in domatia. Another group of these animals uses
leaves as a substrate for fungus cultivation. These eusocial animals belong to the family Formicidae, and
with wasps and bees they form Hymenoptera. E. O. Wilson is an expert on these insects, some of which
"farm" aphids for honeydew. For 10 points, identify these insects that include leaf-cutter and army types.
ANSWER: ants [or Formicidae before mentioned]
Basidiomycetes fungi can infect them with Ustilago violacea, commonly called this "smut," and in daisies,
they are connate, while their support is fused to the carolla. They exhibit either longitudinal or poricidal
dehiscence, because they may be either basifixed or versatile, and AGP6 and AGP11 expression appears to
be essential to the stomium and septum disintegration which allows the theca to separate. The sporogenous
cells in the center of its lobes develop and move into the locules, where they mature until they are ready for
release. Site of the most common venereal disease to affect plants, For 10 points, this flower part which
releases pollen from its position on top of the filament of the stamen.
ANSWER: anther
The pathogen causing this disease has a polypeptide, rather than polysaccharide, capsule made of
glutamic acid. That pathogen secretes a cell-binding protein called the protective antigen, an
adenylate cyclase called the edema factor, and a matrix metalloproteinase called the lethal factor.
Jean Joseph Toussaint made a vaccine against this disease with potassium dichromate. The (*) Ames
strain causes this disease. It comes in pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and cutaneous types. The germ theory of
disease was proven when Louis Pasteur cultured this disease's causative agent, a member of Bacillus first
discovered by Robert Koch. It produces long-lasting endospores. For 10 points, name this disease, which
was spread through bioterrorist attacks in 2001.
ANSWER: anthrax
The organism that causes this disease has a toxicity related px01 plasmid. The British conducted
experiments on this disease on Gruinard Island. Historical names for this disease have included ragpickers's
and woolsorter's disease. This causative agent of this disease makes use of protective antigen, edema
factor, and lethal factor. The bacteria makes use of macrophages to spread and the common laboratory test
strain of it is the Ames strain. It comes in cutaneous, inhalation and gastrointestinal forms. Patients with
this infection are given Cipro and the bacteria that causes it can survive through endospores. The spores of
this disease are often found in the soil, but it is primarily known as a biological weapon. For 10 points,
name this disease that was used in a 2001 terror incident.
ANSWER: Anthrax [or Bacillus anthracis]
These compounds are transported by the AcrAB/TolC system. Genes such as neo whose products
interact with these compounds are often used to positively select gene knockout mice cells. Several classes
of these are degraded by Beta-lactamase and that class inhibits proper assembly of peptidoglycan. Another
common mechanism for these substances is the inhibition of translation. Notable examples include
tetracyclines and penicillin. For 10 points, name these compounds that are used to fight bacterial infections.
ANSWER: antibiotics
One class of these substances possesses an amide functionality connected to the last of four six-membered
rings. A specific compound of this type prevents the synthesis of tetrahydrofolic acid. The effectiveness of
these substances can be enhanced by drugs that block Pol II, Pol IV, and Pol V, thus limiting the SOS
response that is triggered when these substances cause DNA damage. Several of them bind to the 30S
ribosomal subunits to prevent translation, although the 50S subunit is bound to by the aminoglycoside
variety and peptidoglycan synthesis is inhibited by the beta-lactam kind. MRSA has developed resistance to
many of these substances. For 10 points, penicillin was the first effective kind of what agents used to treat
bacterial infections?
ANSWER: antibiotics [accept tetracyclines in the first sentence; accept antibacterials prior to mention of "bacteria"]
One class of these compounds has four-membered rings with a carbonyl bonded to nitrogen, which
can bind to DD-transpeptidase. That class of these compounds contains a beta-lactam ring and
breaks cross-links in peptidoglycan. Some common types of these compounds are ineffective against
MDR-TB and MRSA (MER-sah). Imipenem and (*) amoxicillin are examples of "broad-spectrum"
ones. Over-prescription of these compounds led to the evolution of superbugs like Staphylococcus aureus.
For 10 points, name these compounds that kill bacteria and include penicillin.
ANSWER: antibiotics [or antibacterials; prompt on "penicillin" before mention]
Thomas McPherson Brown advocated using this type of drug to treat rheumatoid arthritis, usually using the
class called tetracyclines (the-truh-SIGHkleens). Several of these drugs work by decreasing folate synthesis
and are known as sulfonamides, while others decrease the synthesis of peptidoglycan and are known as
cephalosporins. MRSA is becoming resistant to several of these drugs, and medical societies are trying to
decrease their usage overall. Identify these types of drugs that also include penicillins which work by
preventing certain microorganisms from dividing or living.
ANSWER: Antibiotic(s) (accept Antibacterial(s), accept Tetracycline before it is mentioned)
A technique for producing these structures developed by Milstein and Kohler use hybridomas, fused
from myeloma and B cells, to make strains that are specific to a single epitope - that process creates
the monoclonal variety of these molecules. In the ELISA analytical technique, special types of these
molecules are bound to a (*) fluorescence enzyme to assist in detection. These molecules have a fragment
crystallizable region that contain the ends of two heavy chains, while its binding section also has light
chains that interact with specific epitopes, making an overall Y shape for the molecule. Also known as
immunoglobulins, for 10 points, name these proteins used in the immune response that bind to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [accept monoclonal antibody or immunoglobulin before mentioned]
These things are secreted by HPGRT-positive hybrid myelomatous cells that are grown in a HAT
medium; those cells constitute hybridomas. In one assay that can be made more sensitive by adding
haptens to the analytes, these structures can be visualized with streptavidin after being biotinylated
or alternatively visualized with HRP. In another technique, proteins are labeled with a primary one
and then a conjugate (*) monoclonal one of these things after being blotted on a polyvinylidene fluoride
or nitrocellulose membrane. Those techniques are ELISA and the western blot. They undergo somatic
hypermutation, in which their epitopes are modified, after B cells begin to proliferate during an immune
response. For 10 points, name these Y-shaped proteins that bind to foreign antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins; accept Ig]
A beta-sheet sandwich structure is common to all types of these whose Fab and Fc regions can be separated
by papain based on their crystallizability. Their effector functions are increased through CSR, while somatic
hypermutation occurs in their variable regions and renders a higher affinity for binding sites. They are used
in the ELISA process, and Kohler and Milstein got the Nobel in Medicine for producing the monoclonal
varieties of these. They can easily change isotypes, of which humans have five, and they attach to epitope of
their targets by induced fit. For 10 points, name these y- shaped proteins produced by B Cells, that target
and attack foreign antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins]
The exons of these proteins attach via non-homologous end joining to perform class-switching.
The "12/23" rule achieves efficient V(D)J recombination of these proteins. The two heavy and two
light (*) chains that comprise them vary among the five isotypes of them that exist for mammals. Their
epitopes are uniquely recognized by the molecules they form an induced fit with. These are secreted by B
cells. For 10 points, identify these proteins used by the immune system against foreign antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or antibody; or immunoglobulins; or Ig]
In follicular lymphoma, the enhancer controlling the gene encoding one part of these molecules
junctions to bcl-2. One side of these proteins contains three CDRs interspersed between framework
regions. Activation-induced cytidine deaminase is required for the synthesis of two parts of these
molecules, one part of which undergoes somatic hypermutation after joining (*) V, D, and J genes
together. These proteins come in E, A, M, G, and D isotypes, which all differ in their Fc regions. These
proteins, which opsonize their targets to enhance phagocytosis, consist of two heavy and two light chains
joined together in a Y-shape by disulfide bonds. These proteins are expressed and secreted by B cells. For
10 points, name these proteins that bind to foreign antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins]
Components of these proteins include Fc regions and Fab fragments, and the E variety causes the release
of histamine during an allergic reaction. The M and A isotypes of these proteins are pentamers and dimers,
respectively. The structural units of these proteins include pairs of light and heavy chains, and the G type is
the most abundant and crosses the placenta. For 10 points, name these proteins which bind to antigens as
part of the immune response.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins]
The Bence-Jones protein is a version of these proteins secreted by cancerous cells. One part of them is
coded for by either a kappa or lamba segment, and the genes coding for them undergo the VDJ
recombination. One of them is unique in having a J-chain connecting two segments of a dimer. They occur
in 5 different isotypes and contain both constant and variable regions. They are secreted by B cells. For 10
points, name these Y-shaped proteins that recognize pathogens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins]
William Jencks proposed the use of these molecules as catalysts. Gerald Edelman and Rodney Porter
discovered the structure of these molecules, which can be cleaved into Fc and Fab portions using papain.
Milstein and Kohler developed techniques for producing the monoclonal type of these proteins, which are
composed of two heavy and two light chains. For 10 points, name these Y-shaped proteins that are
produced by the B cells of the immune system in response to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or antibody; or immunoglobulins; or monoclonal antibodies]
In flow cytometry, these molecules bind to fluorophores to differentiate test cells, and HRP is bound to
them for use in another process. Kohler and Milstein discovered that myeloma cells can produce the
monoclonal variety of these molecules. Three layers of these are used in the "sandwich" variety of the
ELISA technique, and these proteins exhibit disulfide bonds between their two heavy and light chains to
form a Y-shaped structure. The type of these molecules which attack A and B blood groups is known as
Immunoglobulin M. Released by plasma B cells, for 10 points, name these proteins produced by the
immune system which each tag a unique antigen.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins before mention]
The Bence-Jones protein is a derivative of these proteins that is hypersecreted in multiple myeloma
patients. IP assays use these molecules to pull targets out of solution by taking advantage of their
binding to protein A and protein G. Fab fragments are generated when Papain cleaves these
molecules at their hinge region, and one subtype of them contains a J chain connecting two elements of
a dimer. One of these is applied to a PVDF membranes with proteins affixed to it in a Western blot. The
monomers of these molecules contain two heavy and two light chains connected by a disulfide bond. For 10
points, identify these Y-shaped proteins secreted by the immune system to target pathogens.
ANSWER: Antibodies or immunoglobulins
The removal of these proteins by apharesis is the treatment for Guillain-Barre (GHEE-yahn BAR-ay)
syndrome. These proteins are the subject of the Kabat numbering scheme, and their function mostly
depends on their CDR3 regions. These proteins are separated into isotypes by their constant regions, consist
of two heavy and two light chains, and get their variable regions from VDJ recombination. These proteins
are secreted by plasma cells. For 10 points, name these Y-shaped proteins that are secreted by B-cells and
which bind to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins]
The protease papain cleaves their Fc portion from their Fab portion. The antinuclear type of these molecules
is present in sufferers of lupus. They can participate in opsonization, and ELISA can be used to determine
their concentration. These Y-shaped molecules consist of two heavy chains and two light chains.
Hybridomas are needed to produce the monoclonal type, which are specific for the same epitope. Part of the
humoral response, they are secreted by B cells. For 10 points, name these proteins that bind to a specific
antigen in an immune response.
ANSWER: antibodies [or antibody; or immunoglobulins]
Mutations in Bruton's tyrosine kinase result in a condition in which these proteins cannot be
produced. Domains named for their resemblance to these proteins are found on either side of the
PEVK region of titin and in Intercellcular Adhesion Molecules, and that superfamily contains a
sandwich of two beta-sheets. Plasmapharesis is used to remove these proteins from blood, and papain
cleaves them into Fc regions and Fab fragments. They are produced by rearranging a light and heavy
chain locus together in the VDJ recombination in B-cells, and they occur in five different isotypes, the most
common being IgG. For 10 points, name this highly variable class of proteins important in immune
function, which bind to foreign particles.
ANSWER: Immunogobulins or Antibodies
Organic molecules can be conjugated to haptens to elicit a response by these molecules. RAG-1 and RAG-2
proteins place random V domains into random J domains of these proteins. Specific ones are isolated via a
process that involves "priming" and "booster" phase. Pregnant women often produce one type of these
proteins that attack the Rh Factor, and the ELISA assay uses these molecules to detect and quantify ligands.
These proteins are composed of a Heavy Chain and a variable Light Chain, the end regions of which are
called epitopes. These molecules are produced by B cells upon the detection of cytokines. For 10 points,
name these 'Y' shaped proteins in the immune system that bind to antigens
ANSWER: antibodies [word forms okay]
A process called ChIP (CHIP) employs these compounds to find DNA binding sites for a given protein.
One region of these proteins undergoes isotype switching to produce the A, E, and G classes of these
proteins. Their structure consists of a pair of heavy chains and a pair of light chains. They can be divided
into polyclonal and monoclonal depending on how many objects they can bind to. For 10 points, name these
gamma globulin proteins, also called immunoglobulins (im-MUNE-oh-GLOB-you-lins), that are produced
by plasma B cells in the immune response.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins before mentioned; or Ig before "immunoglobulins"]
One important structure in these objects is a "sandwich" held together by cysteine bonds between
two beta sheets. They are diversified through VDJ recombination and contain three key amino acid
sequences called CDRs. These structures have Fv and Fc regions, and interconversion among the
types of these produced by a cell is called (*) class switching. Only one type of these proteins can cross
the placenta from mother to fetus, the G type, and the E type triggers mast cells' release of histamines. They
are composed of two heavy and two light chains, and their variable regions participate in antigen binding.
For 10 points, name these proteins also known as immunoglobulins.
ANSWER: antibodies [accept immunoglobulins or Ig before mentioned]
RAG1 and RAG2 reorganize the genes that code for these proteins. AID and AP-endonucleases allow them
to undergo isotype switching, while the competitive form of a certain assay uses both primary and
secondary ones. One component of these proteins has V, D, and J segments, while the other parts comes in
kappa and lambda types and are linked to the heavy chains by disulfide bridges. In addition to the
competitive ELISA assay, they are commonly used for a certain kind of fluorescence imaging and to
perform Western blots. For 10 points, name these Y shaped proteins of the immune system made by B cells
that bind to foreign antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [accept also immunoglobulins]
Somatic hypermutation occurs in their variable domains, and serves to increase their binding
strength through affinity maturation. The nicking and breaking of DNA by AID and uracil DNA
glycosylase at two S regions followed by non-homologous end joining results in their isotype
switching, and their variable regions are encoded in V, D, and J segments. Their monomer consists of
four polypeptide chains, two heavy and two light, and, of their five classes, one is a pentamer and one
a dimer. IgM and IgA are examples of these proteins produced in the humoral (*) immune system by
B cells, which, FTP, bind to antigens.
ANSWER: Antibodies or immunoglobulins
One process which acts on these proteins only occurs at segments flanked by two RSS sites with
spacers 12 and 23 nucleotides long. One type of these proteins is a pentamer containing a central J
chain surrounded by 10 F-sub-a-b regions. These proteins are used to precipitate a protein-DNA
complex in ChIP, and they can be used to detect specific proteins in a (*) Western blot. Examples of
these proteins made from identical cells which all bind to the same epitope are known as "monoclonal."
Consisting of two heavy chains and two light chains, these proteins come in 5 different isotypes labeled A,
D, E, G, and M. Produced by plasma B cells, for 10 points, name these Y-shaped proteins which mediate
the immune response by binding to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins]
Activation-induced cytidine de-aminase regulates these entities' diversification in somatic hypermutation
and class switch recombination. RAG-1 and RAG-2 are involved in V(D)J recombination of genes coding
for them. These proteins contain Fc and Fab fragments composed of two heavy and two light chains. One of
their five isotypes triggers histamine release in allergic responses. They identify foreign objects and cause
agglutination. Produced by plasma B cells, they are essential to the humoral immune system. For 10 points,
name these Y-shaped proteins that bind to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies or immunoglobulins
Artificial examples of these like Erbitux and Herceptin can be used to treat cancer. The protein RAG-I is
used to generate diversity in these structures via a process called VDJ recombination, and cells can change
which type they produce via a process called class switching. These proteins, which share a "beta sheet
sandwich" structure, activate complement via their Fc regions. The E type of these binds mast cells and
mediates allergic responses, while the G type is the only one that can cross the placenta. They consist of
heavy chains and light chains, and it is their variable regions that recognize and bind epitopes. For 10
points, name these proteins produced by B cells that bind antigens.
ANSWER: immunoglobulins [or antibodies; or Igs]
These are often conjugated to the surfaces of nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery. Complementary
Determining Regions are central to their binding power, which can be consolidated through production of
scFv's, and they consist of a tetramer of light and heavy chains. They can use their Fc region to activate
opsonization or the Membrane Attack Center through the complement system, and they rely upon VDJ
recombination to produce a virtually unlimited variety of binding sites. This specificity makes them useful
in tests like the Western blot. FTP, name these proteins of the immune system, the product of B cells.
ANSWER: Antibodies or Immunoglobulins
These proteins are cleaved by papain to release one Fc fragment and two Fab fragments. The many possible
paratopes of these proteins are produced by near-random assembly of variable, diverse, and joining
segments during somatic recombination. One isotype of these proteins can pass through placenta and is
symbolized IgG. These proteins are all comprised of two light and two heavy chains. For 10 points, name
these y-shaped proteins, which are produced in the specific immune response in the presence of antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [accept word forms; or Ab; or immunoglobulins; or Ig]
These proteins can be sorted into different classes by spectrotyping, and cells that secrete these
proteins have characteristic clockface chromatin. A version of these proteins conjugated to
horseradish peroxidase are used to stain a membrane in Western blots. They are created through a
process of somatic hypermutation and (*) VDJ recombination, and they have two light chains bonded
two heavy chains. They are produced by B cells. For 10 points, name these Y-shaped immune proteins that
bind to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobulins]
As part of the process of affinity maturation, the genes that code for these proteins undergo somatic
hypermutation. One molecule of this type, called Rho(D), is injected before childbirth to desensitize an Rhnegative mother to her Rh-positive fetus. In a Western blot, "secondary" varieties of these molecules are
linked to a horseradish peroxidase and bind to the Fc or F(ab) region of another protein of this type. By
fusing myelomatous cells with spleen cells, monoclonal varieties of these epitope-binding proteins can be
formed. For 10 points, name these Y-shaped glycoproteins produced by B cells that bind to foreign antigens
and trigger an immune response.
ANSWER: antibodies [or antibody; or immunoglobulins; or Ig; prompt on "Ab"]
Two different types of these proteins are used in sandwich assays. These proteins can be further divided
into classes such as opsonins and agglutinins (uh-GLUE-tin-ins). These proteins can be classified as
polyclonal or monoclonal depending on the B lymphocytes they are produced by. These proteins consist of
two heavy and two light chains, arranged in a Y shape, and their variable regions interact with epitopes. For
10 points, name these proteins found in the immune system, whose primary purpose is to bind to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or antibody; or immunoglobulins]
Different types of these proteins are distinguished by unique sequences in their hinge region, and some
subtypes of them can fix complement. One isotype of these molecules is a dimer held together by a J chain.
They consist of at least two heavy and two light chains connected by disulfide bonds, and they have both a
constant and variable regions. These molecules are produced by B cells and attach to antigens, coating
them for disposal. For 10 points, name these y-shaped immune proteins
ANSWER: antibody or immunoglobulin
These structures can act as opsonins by binding to other molecules, making them easier to
phagocytose. The A form is found in colostrums and breast milk, and transfusion reactions are mediated
by the M form. Monoclonal ones may be used to treat cancers. These structures consist of two heavy
chains and two light chains. For 10 points, name these structures that are produced by B cells,
sometimes called immunoglobulins, and bind to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or antibody; accept gamma globulins; accept early immunoglobulins]
These molecules have intrinsic hydrogen peroxide that generates enzymatic activity capable of
killing bacteria, and when they have catalytic activity, they are known as abzymes. They possess four
variable-region domains, and disulfide bonds link their heavy and light chains. They can be (*)
polyclonal or monoclonal depending on their epitope recognition, and they are secreted by plasma cells,
which are differentiated B cells. For 10 points, immunoglobulin G constitutes the major class of what
type of molecules that bind to antigens?
ANSWER: antibody
These molecules' variable regions use induced fit to bind to epitopes. Human types of them include E,
involved in allergic reactions, and M, a pentamer produced in response to mismatched blood transfusions.
Autoimmune diseases occur when they mistakenly attack self, rather than foreign, molecules. They are
produced by B cells and are also known as immunoglobins. For 10 points, name these proteins in the
immune system that defend against antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [accept immunoglobins until mentioned]
Unlike TCRs, which are formed in a closely related process, they undergo somatic hypermutation. Epitopes
bind to these molecules' variable regions by induced fit, and recombinase forms their light chains by
deleting sections of DNA to randomly join V, D, and J gene segments. These light chains are joined to
heavy ones by disulfide bridges. Their M type can be produced in response to transfusions of a different
blood type, while the E type is responsible for allergic reactions. They can cause autoimmune diseases such
as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. For 10 points, name these immune system proteins that are produced by B
cells in response to antigens.
ANSWER: antibodies [or immunoglobins]
Although they can be naturally produced from a common germ cell, their isolation is difficult due to
variations in possible epitope binding sites and epitope binding activities. Hybrids of human-mice versions
can be constructed using recombinant DNA techniques and the mouse anti-human choriongonadotropin
variety can be conjugated with a dye and employed in pregnancy tests. They can be produced artificially on
a HAT medium through the fusion of an activated lymphocyte and cancerous bone marrow cell to form a
hybridoma. For 10 points, what are these immunoglobulin molecules produced by plasma cells cloned from
a single B cell that was activated by an antigen?
ANSWER: monoclonal antibody [prompt on antibody]
One method of creating these molecules involves culturing in an IL-6 rich medium or injecting
into the peritoneal cavity of a mouse and collecting the ascites. The classical method of creating
these molecules was developed by Cesar Milstein, and involves growing cells deficient in
HGPRT in a medium containing hypoxanthine, thymidine, and aminopterin. Examples of these
molecules used therapeutically include adalimumab, which inhibits TNF-alpha, and
Trastuzumab, or Herceptin, used to treat breast cancer. These proteins are created by fusing a
single plasma cell with a mouse myeloma cell, creating a hybridoma that secretes only one
heavy-light chain pair. For 10 points, name these pharmaceuticals that consist of an antibody
targeting a single epitope.
ANSWER: monoclonal antibodies
The use of these compounds can lead to the HAMA or HACA response, and one method of growing
these compounds involves collecting ascites fluid from mice. Medarex developed the UltiMab platform for
creating fully humanized ones. Using the substem -zu- indicates that these compounds are humanized.
These compounds are created using cells that can't express HGPRT, making them susceptible to the
aminopterin present in HAT medium; those cells are immortalized myeloma cells fused to candidate
B-cells to create a hybridoma. These drugs include Rituximab, which targets B-cells, and Herceptin, which
targets the HER2/neu receptor responsible for some breast cancers. For 10 points, name these
artificially-created antibodies that target a single epitope.
ANSWER: monoclonal antibodies [prompt on "antibodies"]
One class of these medications acts by inhibiting the demethylation of lanosterol. Ergosterol is the main
target of both the azole and polyene types of these drugs. A classical example of these named for its mutual
acid/base reactivity is amphotericin B. These drugs are indicated in cases of cryptococcosis, aspergillus
infection, and candidiasis, while examples include Tolnaftate, Lamisil, and Lotramin. Some like
nikkomycins targets chitin synthesis. For 10 points, name this class of drugs that treat yeast infections,
athlete's foot, and other diseases caused by members of a certain taxonomic kingdom that includes mold and
mushrooms.
ANSWER: Antifungals [accept equivalents conveying the treatment of Fungi]
This structure's namesake valve contains the nodules of Arantius, while the sinus of Morgagni and
sinus of Valsalva in this structure are weakened in Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Coarctation of this
structure often occurs in Turner's syndrome patients, and it is said to be (*) "overriding" in patients
exhibiting the tetralogy of Fallott. Marfan syndrome may result in an aneurysm of this structure, which
divides into the common iliac arteries after descending through an opening behind the diaphragm. This
vessel, whose first branches are the coronary arteries, sends blood from the left ventricle to the systemic
circulation. For 10 points, name this largest artery in the human body.
ANSWER: aorta
This site of the Sinus of Valsalva can become more and more attached to a nearby structure in a process
called overriding. Overriding of this structure occurs in a fourfold affliction called the Tetralogy of Fallot.
Many sufferers of Turner Syndrome see a narrowing of this structure, which may develop an aneurysm as a
result of Marfan Syndrome. Near the navel, the iliac arteries split from it. Also the origin of the coronary
arties, it carries blood away from the left ventricle. For 10 points, name this largest blood vessel of the
body.
ANSWER: aorta [prompt on "heart" until "nearby structure" is read]
An ongoing clinical study compares the effectiveness of Iosartan and atenolol on elastin fibers in this
structure. A septal defect lies directly under this structure, which is "overriding," in the tetralogy of Fallot,
and in Takayasu disease this structure's namesake arch is inflamed. This structure's namesake valve
contains the nodules of Arantius, and its branches include the subclavian and the brachiocephalic. It arises
in the left ventricle, and it carries oxygenated blood to the entire body. For 10 points, name this largest
artery in the human body.
ANSWER: the aorta
Glomus cells serve as chemoreceptors in this structure's namesake bodies, and sufferers of Turner's
syndrome usually have malformations of a valve leading to it. The right auricle helps support and
cover it at its origin. Coarctation, or congenital narrowing, of this structure causes high pressure in
the limbs, and sufferers of (*) Marfan syndrome often have dissection or aneurysm of this structure. Its
descending portion connects the point at which it divides into the iliac arteries to its namesake arch, and it
originates at the exit of the left ventricle. For 10 points, name this largest artery of the body.
ANSWER: aorta
This structure is positioned over a defect in an "overriding" condition that is part of the
Tetralogy of Fallot (fuh-LOW). The tunica (TOO-nih-kah) adventitia (ad-ven-TEE-she-uh), tunica
media, and tunica intima are the three layers of its wall. It narrows where the ductus arteriosus
(ar-tee-ree-OH-sus) inserts in coarctation (koh-ahr-TAY-shun). The brachiocephalic
(brah-kee-oh-seh-FAH-lick), two subclavian, and two (*) carotid arteries extend from this structure. This
structure splits off into two arteries in the abdomen and rises from the left ventricle. For 10 points, name
this largest artery in the body.
ANSWER: aorta
In the abdominal area, this structure bifurcates to two common iliac structures. This structure is
termed "overriding" in the tetralogy of Fallot, and women suffering from Turner's syndrome have
coarctation of it. This structure may develop an aneurysm as a result of Marfan syndrome. This (*)
blood vessel, whose first branches are the coronary arteries, carries oxygenated blood away from the left
ventricle. For 10 points, name this artery, which is the largest blood vessel in the human body.
ANSWER: aorta
This entity dilates to form the sinus of Valsalva, and it is "overriding" in the tetralogy of Fallot. The root of
this structure may be dilated, and its coarctation is common in Turner's syndrome patients and occurs when
it narrows near the ductus arteriosus. Its abdominal portion terminates upon branching to the common iliacs,
while the brachioencephalic, carotid, and subclavian arise from its namesake arch. With ascending and
descending portions, for 10 points, identify this vessel which arises from the left ventricle and is the largest
artery in the human body.
ANSWER: aorta
It's not the brain, but medin forms amyloids in this structure in one disease, and one pathology of
this organ is classified into Stanford A or B types depending on extent. During embryologic
development this structure arises from the fourth left pharyngeal arch. A pathological narrowing of
this structure occurs in Turner's syndrome and causes rib notching. This structure contains a large
amount of elastin in its (*) tunica media. People with Marfan's syndrome have a high risk of dissection of
this structure, which breaks off into the brachiocephalic, left common carotid, and left subclavian on its
arch. This organ is the outlet of the left ventricle through its namesake semilunar valve. For 10 points, name
this organ, the largest artery in the human body.
ANSWER: aorta
This structure can be repaired by grafting in the Bentall procedure. An overriding one is present in the
Tetralogy of Fallot, and a valve named for it contains the nodules of Arantius. Dilation of the root of this
structure is a common symptom of Marfan's syndrome, while coarctation, or narrowing, of it is fairly
common in patients with Turner's syndrome. Structures such as the subclavian, innominate, and common
carotid branch off from its namesake arch, located between its ascending and descending segments. FTP,
name this vessel which arises from the left ventricle, the largest artery in the human body.
ANSWER: Aorta
This structure splits at the L4 vertebral level and passes through the diaphragm at the T12 vertebral level.
This structure's wall contains a high concentration of elastin. This structure's wall is weakened in
Marfan's syndrome, and its ascending and descending portions are connected by an arch. A set of
semilunar valves separate it from the left ventricle, which pumps blood into it. For 10 points, name this
largest artery in the body that originates in the heart.
ANSWER: aorta
This structure is overriding in patients with tetralogy of Fallot, while Marfan syndrome causes its
myxomatous degeneration and Turner syndrome causes its coarctation. This elastic structure bifurcates at
the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. Existing as six arches in the developing embryo, in adults it contains
a single arch, which branches into the brachiocephalic, subclavian, and common carotid arteries. The
coronary arteries branch off from the ascending portion of this structure immediately after it emerges from
the left ventricle. For 10 points, name this largest artery in the body that carries oxygenated blood from the
heart.
ANSWER: aorta
This structure contains the sinus of Valsalva. When it is situated over a ventricular septal defect, it is
described as "overriding." That condition occurs in the tetralogy of Fallot. Individuals with Turner
syndrome often exhibit coarctation of this structure. A disorder caused by mutation in the fibrillin
gene can lead to (*) dilation or aneurysm of it. That disease is Marfan syndrome, and this structure divides
into the common iliac arteries after its descending portion through the torso. Its ascending section branches
into the coronary arteries. For 10 points, name this blood vessel which receives oxygenated blood from the
heart's left ventricle, the largest human artery.
ANSWER: aorta
Crocodiles have two of these structures separated by a hole called the foramen of Panizza (puh-NEEZ-zuh),
and fish have one in front of and one behind the lamellar lacunae (laa-KOO-nay). Women with Turner's
syndrome often have coarctation (co-ark-TAY-shun) of this structure, whose wall can rupture in a usually
fatal condition called dissecting aneurysm. The descending section of this structure separates into thoracic
(thoh-RAA-sihk) and abdominal segments while the sinuses of Valsalva lead to is first branches, the
coronary arteries. Originating from the left ventricle of the heart, name this blood vessel with a
characteristic arch, the largest artery in the body.
ANSWER: aorta [do not accept or prompt on "artery"]
One species in this genus was named after Andrew Carnegie's wife Louise. Its type species, ajax, was
named by Othniel Marsh, who mistakenly added a Camarasaurus-like skull to its skeleton and declared it a
new genus. For 10 points, what genus of dinosaur is no longer scientifically referred to by the term
Brontosaurus?
ANSWER: Apatosaurus [prompt on Brontosaurus before read]
Landau-Kleffner syndrome is one of these commonly misdiagnosed as autism. Another form of this
condition results from damage to a region of the superior temporal gyrus called Brodmann area twenty-two;
that type, named for Wernicke, is characterized by word salad, in contrast to a type named for Broca. Strong
evidence for brain modularity is represented by the existence of multiple types, as some are marked by
dysprosody, telegraphic speech, and agrammatism, while others reflect problems with comprehension. FTP,
name this term referring to a diminished ability to comprehend or produce language.
ANSWER: aphasia (or aphemia)
The gene dcp-1 is necessary for this process to occur in Drosophila, and it can be triggered by the release of
endonuclease G from the mitochondria. This process can be inhibited by a family of proteins with multiple
BIRs at the amino terminus, or by a pathway involving Pl-3 kinase and Akt kinase, which phosphorylates
the protein Bad. This process can be induced by hypoxia or heat shock, unless it is suppressed by Bcl-2.
This process results from a release of cytochrome c into the cytosol, which triggers a cascade of caspases.
Eventually resulting in the fragmentation of the cell, for 10 points, identify this process of programmed cell
death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
This process is inhibited by the PI3K pathway, and it can be initiated upon the binding of Apo-1 to
Fas receptors, which leads to the formation of DISC complexes. Proteins in the Bcl2 family inhibit
this process, while proteins like Bax and (*) Bad promote it. This process, which occurs 191 times during
C. elegans development, can be initiated upon an increase in p53 concentration due to DNA damage. It
occurs upon the release of cytochrome c from the inner membrane of the mitochondria, which activates a
caspase cascade. The action of those proteases leads to blebbing and the eventual fragmentation of the cell.
For 10 points, name this process of controlled cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
BH3-only proteins such as Bim and Bid promote this process once they are activated by Fas
ligand binding its receptor. Trophic factors prevent this process from occurring. Mutant CED
protein in C. elegans causes defects in this pathway. In eukaryotes, it is caused when Bcl-2 no longer
prevents the release of (*) cytochrome C from the mitochondria. This process results in a cascade of
caspases. Damage to p53 causes this process to occur in healthy cells, though defects in it are indicative of
cancer. For 10 points, name this process of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis [prompt on cell death until it is read]
In birds, BMPs cause the onset of this, and it is often associated with increased ethylene production in
plants. The growth of B and T lymphocytes necessitates this process, and it can be triggered by cytotoxic T
cells. Papillomaviruses interferes with the p53 protein in the cell, which is essential to the pathway of this
process, and it can lead to the formation of asymmetrical bulges in the cell membrane and DNA
fragmentation. In adult humans, up to seventy billion cells are involved in this process daily, and fingers and
toes differentiate in an embryo due to this which, unlike necrosis, is often advantageous. For 10 points,
name this process of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis [accept programmed cell death or reasonable variants before it is read]
In the Epstein-Barr virus, the protein BHRF1 acts as an inhibitor for this process, and MDM2 induces
polyubiquitination of a protein that promotes this process. The compound ABT-737 is antagonistic to Bcl2
and promotes oligomerization of BAX and BAK proteins, thereby inducing this process, which is
accompanied by permeabilization of the inner mitochondrial membrane. During it, chromatin becomes
tightly condensed at the nuclear membrane, a characteristic known as pyknosis. Blebs appear on the cellular
membrane, and endonucleases begin to rapidly chop up DNA. For 10 points, identify this cellular process
that occurs as a form of tumor suppression and is known as programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
One method of detecting this process is Annexin-A5 binding. This process is inhibited by bcl-2,
and the binding of the Fas receptor to its ligand is one trigger for it. Another pathway for activating
it relies on Apaf-1 binding to cytochrome c released from mitochondria. During it, a chain reaction of
caspase activation occurs. During this process, DNA is cleaved into a ladder pattern and the cell
membrane forms (*) blebs. Cancer cells are able to evade signals that trigger this this process. C. Elegans
undergoes 131 instances of it during development, and it also occurs on the webs between toes during
human development. Unlike necrosis, this process is orderly, neat, and a normal cellular function. For 10
points, name this type of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis [or programmed cell death before mention, prompt on "cell death" or "death"]
A class of proteins that contain a baculovirus internal repeat, including XIAP and hIAP1 and 2, are
responsible for inhibiting this process, and that protein is inhibited by Smac and Omi. Protein 14-33controls this process, and is elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid in patients with CJD. Another series of
proteins responsible for regulating this process contain some combination of domains BH1 through 4; the
prototype of that family is Bcl-2. Methods of assaying for this process include watching for the exclusion of
the dye tryphan blue or nick-end labelling via the TUNEL assay. This process occurs interdigitally during
limb development, during selection of T-cells, and exactly 191 times during the development of C. elegans.
For 10 points, name this process, known as programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis [accept programmed cell death before said]
This process is governed by Ced ("c-e-d") genes that were first discovered in nematodes. C. elegans
undergoes this process exactly 191 times in its development. An important factor in this process is (*)
cytochrome c, released by mitochondria, and it can sometimes result in "blebbing" when the cell membrane
bulges out. When DNA damage is too high, the protein p53 can initiate it.This process is carried out by a
caspase cascade, and unlike necrosis, it can be beneficial, such as when it causes finger and toe
differentiation. For 10 points, name this process often referred to as "programmed cell death".
ANSWER: apoptosis [or programmed cell death before mentioned; prompt on "cell death" before mentioned]
A baculoviral family of proteins that inhibits this process contains BIR domains. During this
process, scramblases move phosphatidylserine to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane. One
method of activating this process relies on signal transduction through a FADD domain. In
follicular lymphoma, an 8 to 14 translocation upregulates a protein that inhibits this process,
called Bcl-2. This process can be triggered by the binding of the Fas ligand or by release of
cytochrome C from the mitochondria. This process is carried out by cysteine proteases called
caspases, and it results in blebbing of the plasma membrane and laddering of DNA. For 10
points, name this process of neat, ordered cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
FasL and several molecules that bind to TNF receptors promote this cellular process. Dronc RNAi
prevents this process in Drosophilia embryos. One early step in the internal pathway is the
production of caspase-9, which cascades to produce caspace-3 and caspase-7. This process is induced
by production of (*) p53, and in later steps the release of cytochrome c causes mitochondria to break down
and released ATP attracts phagocytic cells like macrophages. Common causes of cancer are mutations that
makes cells resistant to this process. For 10 points, name this process likened to programmed cell death.
ANSWER: Apoptosis [accept programmed cell death until mentioned, prompt on PCD until then]
One pathway in this process sees DISC formation after binding of the Fas ligand, and early on in this
process MAC channels and the proteins Bak and Bcl-2 become activated. In nematodes, this process can
occur by activating Ced-4 and Ced-3, and it can also be triggered by an increase in p53 molecules. A
common indicator of this process is the presence of cytochrome c outside the mitochondria. Caspases play
an integral role in this process which results in non-webbed digits in some animals and in most cases
features a distinct lobing process known as blebbing. For ten points, name this biological process of
programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
A feature of cells that are going through this process is the presence of such molecules as annexin A1,
calreticulin, and phosphatidyserine. TNF is the major extrinsic mediator of this, with TNF receptors are
involved in both major theories of the initiation of this in mammals. In some cases of vitiligo, two varieties
of a type of protease that plays an important role in this process are overexpressed. Carl Vogt was the first
to describe the mechanism of this, which he did in 1842. Caspases play essential roles in this process.
Identify this process which causes blebbing, cell shrinking, and nuclear fragmentation, the process of
programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
The human papillomavirus protein E6 and an HIV gene called Nef inhibit it. It may be induced by the
binding of proteins like FasL to receptors like CD95 or TNF, and it is often detected using the addition of
marked uracil to nicks in DNA in the TUNEL assay. In one pathway leading to it, caspase-9 cleaves and
thus activates caspase-3 and 7, and the degradation of the cell membrane leads to blebbing. Noxa and BAX
are two of the few proteins in the Bcl-2 family to promote it, and it can be triggered by the release of
cytochrome c. For 10 points, identify this process, promoted in cancer cells by p53, the most common form
of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
Akt mediated release of NF-kappa-B leads to its inhibition, which begins with SHC adaptor activation of
PI-3 kinase. It can lead to formation of the Apaf-1 complex and activation of SMAC proteins, and is
mediated by Bim and JNKs (junks). It is effected by the release of inhibition on Bcl-2, which allows Bax to
move to the mitochondria, releasing cytochrome C, which induces caspase activity. P75 and p53 are
initiators of this process, which is useful for getting rid of diseased cells so that the affliction does not
spread to nearby cells. An alternative to necrosis, FTP identify this process of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
This process can be triggered by a TNF-family protein known as the Fas ligand. This process occurs exactly
131 times in the normal development of C. elegans, in which it is most commonly triggered by the ced-3 or
ced-4 proteins. In humans, this process is mediated by the "tumor suppressor gene." When irreparable DNA
damage occurs, the p53 protein can initiate this process to prevent the mutations from being passed on. For
10 points, name this process of programmed cell suicide.
ANSWER: apoptosis [or programmed cell death/suicide before mentioned]
During this process, phosphatidyl-serine becomes expressed on the cell surface, and can be detected by an
annexin A5 affinity assay. Also detected by the TUNEL assay, it is triggered by the binding of a Fas ligand
and induced by the Bax protein, although it is inhibited by Bcl-2. Characterized by DNA laddering, in C.
elegans exactly 131 cells undergo this process, which is initiated by p53 and regulated by caspases. Marked
by blebbing of the cell membrane and fragmentation of the nucleus, its failure can lead to incompletely
separated fingers and toes. For 10 points, name this process of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis [prompt on programmed cell death until mentioned]
This process can be detected using nick-end labeling in the TUNEL assay. During this process,
phosphatidyl-serine becomes exposed to the cell surface and "laddering" is observed. It is triggered by
BAK and BAX, and opposed by Bcl-2. Initiated by the binding of a Fas ligand, which activates caspases, it
is triggered by p53 if DNA is damaged beyond repair. During this process, the cell membrane blebs, DNA
breaks down, and the nucleus becomes fragmented. In the human body, its failure results in conjoined
fingers or toes. For 10 points, name this biological process of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis ("a-puh-to-sis") [prompt on "programmed cell death" before it is mentioned]
Fragments created due to this process can be detected using the TUNEL assay and DNA laddering. The
CED9 gene codes for a protein in C. elegans that inhibits this process, which is regulated by the Bax and
BAD proteins in the Bcl-2 family in humans. In the TNF path, a DISC forms when Fas ligand binds to Fas
receptors, causing this process to occur. When DNA is damaged, the tumor suppressor p53 can initiate this
process, which is contrasted with necrosis. For 10 points, name this process of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
This process is caused by "ced" genes, first discovered in C. elegans. Nitrous oxide is thought to induce this
event, by activating SMACs and allowing cytochrome c to exit the mitochondria. Some viruses, like
Epstein-Barr, contain IAPs which directly inhibit it, while others can inhibit the p53 transcription factor
which regulates it. Theories for its deliberate initiation by the human body include the TNF-induced model,
which may play a role in autoimmune diseases. Triggered by caspase proteins, name this process of
programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis
At one stage in this process, a condensation of chromatin called pyknosis occurs. Syndactyly is caused by
the failure of cells between digits to undergo this process. Pyknosis is followed by karyorrhexis, the
fragmentation of the nucleus. After this, protrusions called blebs form on the cell membrane. During viral
infection, protein kinase R induces this to stop the spread of the virus. In its final stage, the entire cell
breaks into vesicles which are phagocytosed. FTP, name this process found in multi-cellular organisms by
which a cell effectively commits suicide.
ANSWER: Apoptosis
This organ is converted into a surrogate urinary bladder in the Mitrofanoff procedure. A "meso" form of
this organ functions primarily as a lymphatic structure. Darwin related this organ's function to the cecum's
in animals, and defects in this organ have been shown to increase C. difficile infection rates. The Alvarado
score can indicate defects in this organ, and pain at McBurney's point is often used to indicate that this
organ is inflamed. For 10 points, identify this worm-shaped, possibly vestigial, organ that is connected to
the colon and is surgically removed when swollen.
ANSWER: vermiform appendix [or cecal appendix; or vermix]
McBurney's point becomes tender when this organ is inflamed. Creationists use the "absence" of
this organ in various non-mammals to argue for a flaw in evolution. It has been theorized to act as a
holding cell for new digestive bacteria, as inflammation of this organ is far more common in countries
with good health care. For 10 points, name this worm-shaped organ, long thought to be vestigial, whose
inflammation affects over half a million Americans each year.
ANSWER: (vermiform or cecal) appendix
Antibodies produced against structures in neurons result in a disorder often mistaken for multiple
sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica. Hereditary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is caused by a mutation in a gene
for another of these proteins. They usually form tetramers and are characterized by the NPA motif. In
plants, the rate of symplastic movement increases due to these proteins. In the kidneys, they are transcribed
in response to binding of antidiuretic hormone. These proteins are essential to maintaining turgor and for
keeping cells isotonic. They may transport glycerol or other small polar solutes by facilitated diffusion. For
10 points, name these membrane proteins which transport water.
ANSWER: aquaporins
Defenses against infection in this organism were shown to depend on ATP binding cassette transporter
PEN3/PDR8. The KNOLLE syntaxin protein in this organism controls cytokinesis. One gene in this
organism that encodes for an oxidoreductase mediating the fusion of epidermal cells was found to correct
itself in the case of an offspring with two parents possessing defective copies. The HOTHEAD gene is an
example of the non-Mendelian inheritance exhibited by this organism, whose genome consists of 135 or
157 mega base pairs in five chromosomes. Enrico Coen and Elliot Meyerowitz drew from research on this
organism to conclude that the ABC model explained how clusters of genes in angiosperms regulate flower
development. For 10 points, identify this plant model organism.
ANSWER: Arabidopsis thaliana [or thale cress; or mouse-ear cress; prompt on Arabidopsis since that is the genus name; prompt on cress]
OXI1 is a stress-response gene that was discovered in this organism, and the FT gene and its interactions
with the FD protein were first investigated in it. The biological clock gene toc was discovered in this
organism as well as the HOTHEAD gene, which might indicate a new method of DNA repair. Another one
of its proteins, psbS, is essential to the quenching process through its interactions with zeaxanthin and
chlorophyll. Unlike other members of its genus, it has mutations in the SRK and SCR genes, which allow it
to self-pollinate. Agrobacterium tumefaciens is often used as a vector to introduce foreign genes into this
organism, and it was the first plant to have its genome sequenced. For 10 points, name this model organism
widely used in plant biology.
ANSWER: Arabidopsis thaliana (prompt on "Arabidopsis")
This is a small flowering plant found in Asia, Europe and parts of Africa. It is an annual, and usually grows
up to 20-25cm. Its flowers are arranged in a corymb and it has a primary root that grows downwards and
produces smaller lateral roots. Recent research regarding its HOTHEAD gene has shown that this
angiosperm can store its ancestors' genes for up to 4 generations, which demonstrates a parallel path of
inheritance. FTP, name this model organism that completes its life cycle in 6 weeks and was the first plant
genome to be sequenced (2000) by its namesake genome initiative.
ANSWER: Arabidopsis thaliana (accept thale cress or mouse-ear cress)
In this organism, FLS2 perceives bacterial flagella and initiates immune signaling. Systematic
acquired resistance in this organism requires salicylic acid. The correct spatial development of this
organism's reproductive organs requires the Superman gene. In one experiment, if one of these
organisms was homozygous recessive for a certain gene and had a parent that was heterozygous for a
certain gene, its offspring could be heterozygous up to 15% of the time. That gene can cause organ
fusion and it is inherited in a (*) non-Mendelian fashion. Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which causes crown
gall, is used to transform this organism's DNA. Research on this organism, which contains the HOTHEAD
gene, led to the ABC model of how angiosperms develop flowers. For 10 points, name this model plant
organism.
ANSWER: Arabidopsis thaliana
Homolog interaction during prophase I is mediated by the SOLO DANCERS gene in this organism,
while the discovery of the HOTHEAD mutation indicated non-Mendelian inheritance, though this
was debunked due to the idea of SNPs. In a 2003 study by Link et al, the Advanced Astroculture
facility on the ISS used these organisms to show that growth can occur in (*) microgravity. Dipping
these organisms in detergent and Agrobacterium tumefaciens is the most common way of transforming TDNA into them, and studies of this organism's Superman gene have helped form the basis for the ABC
model of flower development. For 10 points, name this flowering plant, a thale cress whose small genome
makes it a model organism for plant biology studies.
ANSWER: Arabidopsis thaliana [prompt on thale cress before mentioned]
Animals in this class have bodies that consist of a prosoma and opisthosoma (oh-PISS-thoh-soh-muh), and
the largest of them that ever lived were aquatic species called eurypterids (yoo-RIHP-tuh-ridz). Orders
within this class are distinguished by the shape and function of the pedipalps, and some members of this
class take in oxygen through soft overlapping flaps inside the abdominal cavity known as book lungs.
Apulmonate members of this class include the Acari, which consists of mites and ticks. The species
Androctonus in this class can kill humans with a neurotoxin; that species is better known as the fat-tailed
scorpion. More famous for the ability of some of its members to spin silk, name this class that includes
harvestmen and spiders.
ANSWER: Arachnida [or Arachnids]
This class of animals includes the orders of opiliones and schizomida, and one organism within this
class is a common vector for an infectious disease caused by a bacteria from the Borrelia genus; that
disease is Lyme disease. The Acari subclass within this class includes ticks and mites, and other members
within this class possess book lungs. Scorpions and turantulas belong to this class. For 10 points, identify
this class which includes many spiders.
ANSWER: Arachnids [or Arachnida]
Nearly half of these are capable of methanogenesis, and all have their membrane lipids ether-linked.
Insensitive to chloramphenicol, streptomycin and kanamycin, their encasings do not contain muramic
acid and they use methionine as their initiator tRNA, which together with the fact that their
ribosomes are sensitive to diphtheria toxin, indicates close relationship with plants, animals, and
fungi. They were first discovered by Carl Woese and George Fox in 1977, and by 2000 there were
209 catalogued species which are commonly placed in 3 broad categories of halophiles, (*)
thermophiles, and acidophiles. This is because many are found in extreme environments. Though they
sound old, they are in fact, FTP what domain of prokaryotic organisms closer related to Eukaryotes than
bacteria are?
ANSWER: Archaea (accept Archaebacteria)
N equitans is the only organism in one phylum of this taxon. Carl Woese first identified and classified
this group of organisms. Organisms in this taxon have ether, rather than ester bonds, to fatty acids, and their
fatty acids are branched. They have pseudomurein, rather than peptidoglycan, in their cell walls. Halophiles
and methanogens are categorized into this taxon, which also contains a group of organisms which can live
in hot springs. This prokaryotic domain was separated from Bacteria in 1977. For 10 points, name this
group of unicellular extremophile organisms.
ANSWER: Archaea
Some of these organisms contain methano-chondroitin bound to the S-layer. The cell membranes in these
organisms have fatty acids bonded to L-glycerol by ether linkages, rather than by esters. The flagella of
these organisms resemble Type IV pili instead of Type III secretory systems. Some of these organisms use
Coenzyme M in a pathway that ultimately uses methane to drive chemiosmosis. Although the ribosomes of
these organisms are separated into 30-S and 50-S subunits like those of bacteria, their rRNA sequences
resemble those of eukaryotes. For 10 points, name this prokaryotic domain whose name suggests that they
are older than bacteria.
ANSWER: Archaea [or Archaebacteria]
16S ribosomal RNA was pioneered to study this taxon. Because cells in this taxon have psuedomurein
rather than muramic acid, the monosaccharides form 1,3-glycosidic linkages. Phospholipids in these
organisms consist of ether linkages between isoprene-based fatty acids and have the L-stereoisomer of
glycerol. Carl Woese pioneered the study of this domain, which has four or five known phyla. Some
organisms in this domain can metabolize carbon dioxide to methane and live in the digestive tract of cows.
Members of this domain lack peptidoglycan in their cell walls. For 10 points, name this domain of
extremophiles, distinct from Eukarya and Bacteria.
ANSWER: Archaea [or archaebacteria]
The cell walls of some of these organisms cannot be degraded by lysozymes because they are
composed of pseudomurein. Their cell membranes contain branched hydrocarbons and are primarily
composed of ether-linked lipids instead of ester-linked lipids. Those that use carbon dioxide to oxidize
methane are called methanogens, and, like many of these organisms, are poisoned by (*) oxygen since
they are obligate anaerobes. Many halophiles, thermophiles and other extremophiles belong to this class of
organisms. For 10 points, name these prokaryotes named after the fact that they are much older than other
forms of life.
ANSWER: archaeans (accept archaebacteria; do not accept or prompt on "bacteria")
Amorpha-4,11-diene can be run through a three-step oxidation process to produce a precursor to this
compound. Its dihydro form is the active metabolite. Fluorescent studies show that it co-localizes with lipid
rafts in its target cell. It and Atovaquone treats the same disease, and may both attack mitochondrial
electron transport. Other studies suggest it is targeted by reacting with iron, but it may kill parasites even
before they have accumulated a hemazoin crystal. Its currently unknown mechanism probably depends on
its characteristic peroxide bridge. For 10 points, reports of resistance in Cambodia and Thailand are
stoking fears of the approaching failure of this antimalarial.
ANSWER: artemisinin
In the brain, a collection of these is known as the circle of Willis. The popliteal one is found near the
knee, while a larger one of these anatomic objects is divided into the celiac trunk, superior mesenteric,
and inferior mesenteric. The carotid and subclavian ones are found in the neck, and the pulmonary one
is the only one to contain deoxygenated blood. For 10 points, name these blood vessels that carry
blood away from the heart.
ANSWER: arteries [prompt on blood vessels before "popliteal"; do not accept "veins"]
The catopril challenge test checks for conditions such as fibromuscular displasia, which concerns the renal
variety of these entities. One type of these is closely related to the median nerve and splits into ulnar and
radial varieties at the cubital fossa. Another type of these undergoes coarctation in Turner's Syndrome and
sinuses of Valsalva are the origin of the coronary variety. The largest example of these objects has a
namesake arch and pulmonary ones uniquely carry deoxygenated blood. For 10 points, name this type of
blood vessel exemplified by one that exits the left ventricle, the aorta, which carries oxygenated blood away
from the heart in contrast to veins.
ANSWER: arteries
Massaging a bulb named for these structures distinguishes types of tachycardia. Visceral fibers
originating from bodies named for these structures go to the glossopharyngeal (GLAH-soh-fuh-RIN-jee-ul)
nerve, and those bodies are chemoreceptors that monitor pO2 changes. Along with the subclavian arteries,
they are the first structures to come off the arch of the aorta before dividing into external and internal
branches in the neck. For 10 points, name these arteries that carry blood to the head.
ANSWER: carotid arteries
One form of this disorder is known as Still's disease, and chronic persistent Lyme disease is sometimes
known as the Lyme form of this disorder. Often a side disorder of lupus, this disorder is typically caused by
the breakdown of cartilage, though one form is caused by a buildup of uric acid and is known as gout.
Though the "osteo" type is the most common, if stiffness lasts for more than an hour, it is classified as the
rheumatoid type. For 10 points, name this inflammation of joints.
ANSWER: arthritis
This type of disorder, along with a rash and fever, can be caused by Still's disease. This often develops in
people who have the skin disease psoriasis [suh-RIE-uh-sis]. One type of this problem is caused by an
autoimmune response against the synovial [sih-NOE-vee-ul] membrane, which is the rheumatoid [ROOmah-toid] type. The most common type of this disorder is caused by the stiffening of cartilage over time,
leading to pain in tendons. Name this joint pain that becomes more common with age.
ANSWER: osteoarthritis
A form of this condition affecting kids is known as Still's disease. Another type is treated with
DMARDs. One type of this disease causes small bony spurs called osteophytes (AH-stee-oh-fites) to
appear. Elevated levels of uric acid causes this disease in gout. There are (*) "osteo" and
"rheumatoid" forms of this disease, which can both be treated with painkillers. For 10 points, name this set
of diseases which cause joint pain.
ANSWER: arthritis [or arthropathy or arthritides until "bony spurs"]
Tests to diagnose this disease include the anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide test and the anti-mutated
vimentin assay. DMARDs are a class of drugs used primarily to treat this disease, also treated by the
TNF inhibitor infliximab. This disease's namesake factor is an IgM antibody against the constant
region of human IgG, which is also present in Sjogren's syndrome and (*) lupus. High cytokine activity
contributes to the progression of this disease, which can induce the swan's neck and Z-thumb deformities.
Caused by autoimmune destruction of collagen II-containing membranes, it results in disruption of the
synovium of small joints and associated swelling. For 10 points, name this inflammatory disorder that
causes joint pain.
ANSWER: rheumatoid arthritis
One modern group in this phylum possessing single-branched appendages is called Uniramia.
Different body plan arrangements in members of this phylum are called tagmata, and members of
this phylum possess an excretory system consisting of hemolymph-bathed channels called (*)
Malphigian tubules. Members of this phylum may possess ocelli or ommatidia for visual perception. A
waxy outer layer helps protect these creatures' inner "procuticle," the chitin-containing layers of their
exoskeletons. Members of this phylum also possess jointed appendages and a three-segment body plan. For
10 points, name this phylum that includes crabs, spiders, and insects.
ANSWER: Arthropoda
Some members of this phylum use the caridoid escape reaction. Major segment of this phylum's body
plan are known as tagma. A major subphylum of this phylum is distinguished by the presence of
appendages located before the mouth called chelicerae. The telson and uropods form the tail fan of
some members of this phylum. Like Mollusca, members of this phylum have an open circulatory
system. Many members of this phylum have an (*) exoskeleton made of chitin. For 10 points, name this
largest extant phylum that includes insects and crustaceans.
ANSWER: Arthropoda [or arthropods]
One of these organisms, Tesnusocaris goldichi, possessed uniramous instead of biramous appendages. One
structure that characterizes this phylum undergoes apolysis and ecdysis and is composed of proteins like
resilin or sclerotin interwoven with fibrous alpha-chitin. That structure, often mineralized with calcium
carbonate, is a cuticle. Animals in this phylum uptake waste from their hemolymph using Malpighian
tubules and also possess open circulatory systems and jointed legs. For 10 points, name this phylum of
segmented invertebrates protected by exoskeletons, which includes crustaceans, arachnids and insects.
ANSWER: Arthropoda [accept crustaceans before "this phylum"]
Eurypterids were early aquatic members of this phylum that lived in the Ordovician and Silurian
periods. Some members of this phylum have book lungs, and are usually grouped into the subphylum
Chelicerata. The largest members of this phylum were the Meganisoptera, and families in this
phylum include (*) Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera. Like molluscs, members of this phylum use hemolymph
instead of a closed circulatory system, and s silverfish are part of this phylum. Members of this phylum have
chitin exoskeletons, and were also the first to develop complex eyes and flight. Trilobites were ancient
members of, for ten points, what phylum of animals that includes insects and arachnids?
ANSWER: Arthropoda
Some members of this phylum breathe using their plated book lungs while other organs are housed
in the hemocoel. This phylum is characterized by, and named for, their jointed legs, and organisms in
this phylum have a (*) segmented body protected by an exoskeleton. The classes Trilobita and Arachnida
fall under, for 10 points, what phylum that includes invertebrates like crustaceans, spiders and insects?
ANSWER: Arthropoda (accept Arthropods)
One organ in members of this phylum contains many ommatidium. Some members of this phylum have an
excretory system consisting of Malphigian tubules, while others have book lungs in their respiratory system.
Extinct members of this phylum include trilobites, and many members of this phylum have their body
divided among the head, thorax, and abdomen. Members of this phylum shed their exoskeleton and have
jointed legs. For 10 points, name this animal phylum which contains crustaceans, arachnids, and insects.
ANSWER: arthropoda [or arthropods]
One class within this phylum, the Pycogonids, possess such a small size that their muscles consist of a
single cell covered in connective tissue, while another class is characterized by a long caudal spine or
telson projecting from the posterior, the Xiphosura. The diversity of feeding mechanisms among
these creatures has resulted in a namesake (*) "Head Problem" in determining their evolutionary history,
although most scientists now classify them in the superphylum Ecdysozoa along with the Nematodes.
Terrestrial members of this phylum have their size limited due to the inability of book lungs or tracheal
respiratory systems to effectively circulate oxygen. The bodies of these creatures are coated in a protein
matrix of alpha-chitin through marine species are usually found with an exoskeleton of calcium carbonate.
FTP, identify this phylum whose named means 'joint-legged' and includes barnacles, scorpions and beetles.
ANSWER: Arthropoda
Some members of this phylum use book lungs for respiration, while others have circulatory systems that
pump hemolymph. Some members of this phylum have telsons at the end of their bodies, which typically
are behind the uropods on those animals. All members of this phylum undergo ecdysis, which is the
shedding of their exoskeletons which are made out of chitin. For 10 points, name this phylum of animals
which includes crustaceans and insects.
ANSWER: arthropods [or Arthropoda]
Along with mollusks, this grouping is defined by the existence of a cavity for blood circulation known as
the hemocoel (HEE-moh-"SEAL"). This phylum takes in oxygen through stacks of plates filled with blood
known as book lungs. One extinct member of this phylum was the most common animal of the Cambrian
Explosion. That animal was a three lobed marine creature known as the trilobite (TRY-lo-bite). Members of
this phylum have exoskeletons made of chitin (KYE-tin). For 10 points, name this phylum that includes
crustaceans (crus-TAY-"shins") and insects.
ANSWER: Arthropoda [or arthropods]
The development of members of this phylum is divided into stages called instars, which become longer
in duration with age and define the time between occurrences of ecdysis. A notable feature of members of
this phylum consists of a procuticle and an epicuticle. Over eighty percent of all known animal species
belong to this phylum. Members of this phylum have an exoskeleton made of chitin. For 10 points, name
this phylum including arachnids, crustaceans, and insects.
ANSWER: Arthropoda [or arthropods]
Wilhelm Johannsen's pure line theory of this concept is often applied to self-pollinating plants, and
a common goal of this process is hybrid vigor. Dmitri Belyaev successfully used this method to
domesticate the silver fox. Darwin devoted the first chapter of On the Origin of Species to this
concept, focusing on varieties of fancy pigeons. Broccoli, cabbage, and kale all descended from the
wild mustard plant because of this process that in dogs resulted in radically different types like the
Great Dane and Chihuahua. Identify this process in which humans produce plants and animals with
desirable traits by choosing which individuals get to reproduce.
ANSWER: artificial selection [accept selective breeding; prompt on "breeding"]
Many organisms in this phylum have perithecium as a reproductive structure. Amorphotheca resinae
is an organism in this phylum that can feed on aircraft fuel. They are the most common symbiots
with Trebouxia in an organism that is often used as indicator of air quality. (*) Aflatoxins are created
by organisms in this phylum. During sexual reproduction, an important organism in this phylum becomes
elongated and pear-shaped, giving them the name "shmoos." Penicillin was isolated from a species in it.
They often are in a symbiotic relationship with green algae in lichen and they are named because they form
small spores during sexual reproduction. That aforementioned organism is used to make alcohol. For 10
points, name this phylum of fungi that includes baker's yeast.
ANSWER: ascomycota [accept ascomycotes]
The causative agent of Dutch elm disease belongs in this phylum, as does the causative agents of
sporotrichosis, blastomycosis, and histoplasmosis. One organism in this phylum infects ants' brains and
grows out of their heads; that species is named Chordyceps. Candida albicans, a member of this phylum,
causes yeast infections, and these organisms reproduceby plasmogamy followed by delayed fusion of the
paired nuclei, though some reproduce asexually. This phylum gets its name from the fruiting bodies
containing its spores. Like others in their kingdom, their bodies contain hyphae which form a mycelium,
and familiar members include brewer's yeast and baker's yeast. For 10 points, name this phylum of fungi,
sometimes called sac fungi.
ANSWER: Ascomycota [or Sac Fungi before mentioned]
Polychaete marine worms can form epitokes through a process of this type. This process can
occur through the aggregation of archaeocytes and subsequent gemmulation in Porifera, and
many phyla are capable of it via parthenogenesis. Other examples of this type of process
include fragmentation, budding, and binary fission. For 10 points, name this type of process
that does not involve meiosis or the fusion of gametes following fertilization.
ANSWER: asexual reproduction [prompt on budding before "aggregation"; do not accept "sexual reproduction"]
The Meselson effect was discovered in bdelloid rotifers undergoing this process. The relative rarity of
this process can partially be explained by the results of Muller's ratchet. Members of the kalanchoe
genus create plantlets in one step of this process, and the strawberry plant uses rhizomes or stolons in
it. Conidial fungi use mitospores for this process. (*) Apomixis is one variety of this process, and
liverworts use gemmae in the fragmentation variety. Parthenogenesis is one form of this process, and in
bacteria this process is exemplified by binary fission. Budding is a form of, for 10 points, what process by
which offspring arise from a single parent?
ANSWER: asexual reproduction [prompt on reproduction; parthenogenesis is not acceptable at any point]
During this process, the creation of a protective coat via the migration of cells results in the
formation of specialized cells called gemmules. A relatively recent discovery revealed that some
organisms undergo this process via (*) apomixis. The breaking of a body into multiple pieces can
facilitate this process during fragmentation. Several species of fish accomplish it with parthenogenesis and
another form of this process is budding. Many invertebrates accomplish this process via binary fission. For
ten points, name this process by which the genes of one parent create a new individual without the fusion of
egg and sperm.
ANSWER: Asexual Reproduction (prompt on "reproduction"; do not accept "sexual reproduction")
This molecule, which is the primary source of Reye's syndrome and can act as an uncoupler in
cartilage and liver mitochondria, is derived from a similarly named monohydroxybenzoic acid and is
commonly synthesized by combining said substance with ethanoic anhydride and a small amount of
sulfuric acid as a catalyst in a Fischer esterification reaction. This drug is sometimes used instead of
nitroglycerin to treat heart conditions like angina, but most commonly used in the treatment of aches and
pains or as an antipyretic or an anti-inflammatory drug. First synthesized in 1897 by Felix Hoffmann at
Bayer in Germany, for ten points, name this salicylate drug, commonly known as Aspirin.
ANSWER: Acetylsalicylic acid or ASA or Aspirin before the end
A severe, recurring form of this disease is called "brittle." It's not parasitic infection, but people
with this disease show aggregations of Major Basic Protein called Charcot-Leyden crystals. One
drug used to treat this disease inhibits 5-lipooxygenase and is called Zileuton. One method of
diagnosing this disease involves giving a short-acting muscarinic receptor agonist called
methacholine. This disease occurs alongside an eosinophilic vasculitis in a condition named for Churg
and Strauss. People with the (*) atopic form of this disease also often have eczema, and this disease is
diagnosed using a peak flow meter. This disease is controlled using albuterol inhalers. For 10 points, name
this respiratory disorder which is characterized by wheezing attacks.
ANSWER: asthma
This disease is traditionally diagnosed using a methacholine challenge. Its intensity varies from
intermittent to severe persistent and is controlled using beta-2 agonists like albuterol. Patients with this
disease have a low peak flow rate and athletes experience the exercise induced-form. This disease is
characterized by reversible obstruction and hyperreactivity. It manifests itself in namesake "attacks" which
include wheezing and shortness of breath. For 10 points, name this chronic respiratory disease.
ANSWER: asthma
Form II of this drug was recently discovered in co-crystallization experiments with an epilepsy drug, and its
active component can interfere with chloride levels to induce hearing loss and tinnitus. A newly discovered
mechanism of its action involves stimulation of lipoxins to then form nitric oxide, while a more established
mechanism involves its irreversible binding to a serine residue on the cyclo-oxygenases; this binding
prevents the formation of thromboxane A2, which is needed for platelet aggregation, as well as
prostaglandins. For 10 points, name this drug that can cause Reye's syndrome in children, a pain-reliever
also known as acetylsalicylic acid.
ANSWER: Aspirin [accept acetylsalicylic acid before it's read]
It's not anacardic acid, but this compound enhances the chemopreventive properties of lunasin. Intravenous
immunoglobulin and high doses of this drug is the standard course of treatment for Kawasaki disease. This
drug irreversibly blocks COX-1 and modifies COX-2, inhibiting the synthesis of prostaglandins and
thromboxanes, which bind platelets together. As a result, this salicylic acid derivative is often prescribed
long-term in daily 81 milligram doses as a blood thinner. The use of this NSAID by children with viral
infections may cause Reye's syndrome. For 10 points, name this drug first synthesized at Bayer and used to
counter inflammation, fever, or pain.
ANSWER: aspirin [or acetylsalicylic acid before "salicylic acid"]
This disease is often caused by the transformation of TH0 cells into TH2 cells, which triggers the humeral
immune system to produce antibodies. Beta2-adrenergic agonists interrupt the response to this, and can be
used to treat this, although recently two such drugs have been removed as treatments because without
steroids, they can exacerbate the condition. Leukotriene antagonists relieve symptoms of this by inhibiting
the fatty molecules that accompany histamine production. It can be diagnosed by spirometry, which is more
accurate than measuring peak flow rates. The characteristic symptom that accompanies it is caused by the
production of mucous and a constriction of the bronchi. For 10 points, name this common ailment that
inflames the lungs and makes it hard to breathe.
ANSWER: asthma
This non-parasitic disease is often associated with desquamation in Curschmann's spirals and CharcotLeyden crystals from eosinophil breakdown. It is dependent on IL-4, a promoter of Th2 cell differentiation
and IgE synthesis, which prompts mast cells to release pro-inflammatory substances. Spirometry is used to
diagnose this disease treated with beclomethasone. While not allergies, the hygiene hypothesis addresses its
modern prevalence. It can be triggered by mold, animal dander, or dust, and is temporarily relieved by
beta2 agonists administered by nebulizer or inhaler. For 10 points, name this respiratory inflammatory
disease that results in recurrent airway constriction, wheezing, and difficulty breathing.
ANSWER: asthma
Research groups studying the increasing incidence of this disease among children in urban areas
have noted its markedly lower incidence in the indigenous tribes of the Amazon and among other
hunter-gatherer groups in Africa. Physicians are beginning to rethink the basis of this disease after it
was discovered that the Th2 pathway and immunoglobulins involved in this disease frequently target
(*) Ascaris and other helminths. Evolutionary biologists and anthropologists now posit that rather than
being an autoimmune disorder, this disease of "hyper-immunity" may have historically protected early
people from deadly parasitic worm infections. For 10 points, name this chronic inflammatory disorder of the
bronchial mucosa know for causing its namesake "attacks."
ANSWER: asthma
Tissue from patients with this disease show Creola bodies, Curschmann's spirals, and Charcot-Leyden
crystals, and it is diagnosed with a methacholine challenge test. Salmeterol and albuterol are beta-2
adrenergic agonists which relieve smooth muscle spasm in this disease. Peak-flow meters are used to
follow this disease, which becomes life-threatening during attacks. For 10 points, name this obstructive
lung disease controlled with inhalers.
ANSWER: asthma
Resealed ghost erythrocytes are more susceptible to malarial infection in the presence of a magnesium
complex of this compound, and the activity of this compound decreases with increasing sarcomere length. It
acts as a signal for purigenic receptors, and it is converted into an important second messenger molecule via
the adenylate cyclase enzyme. Oligomycin inhibits the FO unit of its namesake synthase which is powered
by a proton gradient, and it is produced via substrate-level phosphorylation in glycolysis. For 10 points,
identify this compound produced mainly in the electron transport system, which is known as the currency of
energy.
ANSWER: Adenosine triphosphate or ATP
The enzyme which produces this molecule includes a gamma subunit connecting its F0 and F1
complexes. This molecule is produced by a namesake synthase and is used up in processes such as active
transport. Glycolysis results in the production of two of these molecules, whose energy is released by the
breaking of a phosphate bond. For 10 points, identify this molecule which is known as the "energy
currency" of cells.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
As a signaling molecule, this molecule can activate P2 membrane receptors. Paul Boyer showed that
the purpose of a certain proton gradient is to remove it from its namesake synthase. During muscle
contraction, the heads of the myosin molecule hydrolyze this molecule. In plants, this molecule is
synthesized in the (*) thylakoid membrane of the chloroplasts. Two molecules of it are synthesized as the
end product of glycolysis. For 10 points, name this compound that is sometimes referred to as the "energy
currency" of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine-5-triphosphate]
The enzyme that produces this compound has segments called F0 and F1 connected by a rotating axle.
This compound is converted into a cyclic signal transduction second messenger called cAMP ("camp"). The
Embden-Meyerhof pathway produces two molecules of NADH and two molecules of this compound.
Hydrogen ions are pumped across a gradient to produce this compound in oxidative phosphorylation
(OX-ih-DAY-tive FOSS-FOR-ill-AY-shun). For 10 points, name this "energy transfer currency" of the cell,
a compound that contains three phosphate groups and goes by a three-letter acronym.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate; or adenosine 5' (five-prime) triphosphate]
This compound reacts with a free amino acid to aminoacylate tRNA. It is broken down by dynein in
flagella. This molecule's namesake synthase contains a rotor subunit that spins when protons flow through
it, found in the cristae of an organelle. This compound is converted by adenylyl cyclase into the secondary
messenger cyclic AMP. Two net molecules of it are produced through glycolysis. For 10 points, name this
mitochondria-produced "energy currency of life" that is composed of a certain nucleoside bonded to three
phosphate ions.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
The synthesis of this molecule is described by the Boyer model, and takes place by beta units switching
between "tight" and "loose" configurations in its namesake enzyme, which consists of a knob, rod, and
rotor. It is produced especially quickly in cells with myoglobin. Its most important function can be
catalyzed by polynucleotide kinase, and involves the breaking of one phosphate bond to release energy.
Name this molecule produced in the Krebs cycle, the "energy currency" of cells.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine 5' triphosphate]
Transporters named for this compound have transmembrane and nucleotide-binding domains. As a
neurotransmitter, this compound is recognized by P2X receptors. This compound is produced by its
namesake synthase, which consists of F-sub-O [oh] and F-sub-1 [one] portions. A net total of two of these
molecules are produced in glycolysis, and 34 more are made in aerobic respiration. Produced in the
mitochondria, this compound is required for primary active transport. For 10 points, name this energy
source composed of adenine, ribose, and three phosphate groups.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
Proteins that bind to this molecule were the first shown to have Walker motifs. It acts as a
neurotransmitter at P2Y and P2X receptors. A complex that synthesizes this molecule was imaged by
affixing it to a glass slide and attaching fluorescent actin. It is a minus-4 anion in solution, and its
terminal charges are coordinated to a magnesium ion. By negative feedback, it inhibits
phosphofructokinase, and in many cells, the majority of this compound is used by the (*)
sodium-potassium pump. This compound is created by a rotor-shaped protein with an F-sub-0 base piece
and an F-sub-1 active subunit. That synthase rotates by the action of the electron transport chain in
mitochondria. For 10 points, name this molecule, the basic energy currency of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or Adenosine Triphosphate; prompt on "adenosine" or "adenine", but do NOT accept "adenine triphosphate"]
This molecule is usually found bonded to a divalent cation such as magnesium, as it has a minus-four
charge in neutral solutions. This compound is converted to 3,5 cAMP by the enzyme adenylyl cyclase. The
synthesis of this molecule is coupled to the facilitated diffusion of protons into the inner membrane. This
molecule binds to sodium-potassium pumps to allow active transport of ions, and around thirty-six
molecules of it are produced in oxidative phosphorylation in the electron transport chain. For 10 points,
name this end product of cellular respiration, the "energy currency" of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
This molecule is the most common source of the donor group in kinase-mediated transfer
reactions. Fatty acid oxidation that does not take place in the peroxisome is coupled to the production
of this molecule. The enzyme that produces this molecule has F sub zero and F sub one regions and is
a synthase embedded in the (*) mitochondrial membrane. Glycolysis produces two molecules of NADH
(N A D H) and two molecules of this compound. For 10 points, name this molecule that is the energy
currency of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
The enzyme adenylate cyclase (aa-DEN-uh-late SIK-laze) produces a "cyclic" secondary messenger from
this molecule. This molecule is produced by an enzyme with a characteristic "gun barrel" structure, in which
an axle-like structure turns and adds a phosphate group to another molecule. Glycolysis (gli-CAHL-uh-sis)
results in the net creation of two of these molecules, which are also produced in the oxidative
phosphorylation (FOS-for-uh-LAY-shun) step of the electron transport chain. For 10 points, name this
molecule referred to as the "energy currency of the cell."
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine 5-prime triphosphate]
The binding site of this molecule on the bcr-abl protein is blocked by imatinib, and it is
synthesized by a protein containing an F0 base piece and an F1 rotor. This compound is transformed
into a signaling molecule by adenylate cyclase, and (*) kinases break ions off this molecule to attach to
proteins. Two molecules of it are produced during glycolysis, though around 34 are created by oxidative
phosphorylation of glucose. For 10 points, name this compound, the energy currency of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
The torsin protein, a member of the AAA protein family, is crucial for carrying out the role of this
molecule, which tightly binds to the N-terminal domains of DnaK and Hsp70. In order for tRNA to be
aminoacylated, this molecule must first react with free amino acid, and seven of these molecules can bind to
the GroEL/GroES chaperone complex. It is the product of an enzyme containing F0 and F1 subunits that
harness a proton gradient produced by the electron transport chain. Produced by a namesake synthase, about
36 of these molecules are generated per glucose entering cellular respiration. For 10 points, identify this
energy-storing molecule, which consists of three phosphates bonded to an adenosine sugar.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
Glutamic [gloo-TA-mik] acid reacts with this molecule to turn into a molecule that combines with ammonia
to form glutamine [GLOO-tah-meen]. When this molecule is used and not replenished, the pH [p h] level in
the body is lowered, and that condition, often caused by a lack of oxygen in cells, is lactic acidosis [LAKtik as-i-DOE-sis]. This molecule and NADPH are created by the light-dependent reactions in the
chloroplasts of plants. In animals, these molecules are typically created in the mitochondria [mie-toe-KONdree-uh]. Name this molecule produced by oxidative phosphorylation [oks-uh-DATE-iv fos-for-uh-LAYshun] to supply energy to living cells.
ANSWER: ATP (accept Adenosine Triphosphate)
Seven of these molecules bind to GroEL, and it can activate purinergic receptors. Oligomycins inhibit its
synthesis, and it can be replenished by NDKs. The enzyme that synthesizes this molecule is known as the
F0-F1 complex, and has a rotating gamma subunit. Pyruvate kinase is inhibited by this molecule in a
negative feedback loop, and it can be produced at the substrate-level or through oxidative phosphorylation.
It has two high-energy phosphate bonds, and a net gain of two of these molecules is produced in glycolysis.
For 10 points, name this molecule produced in mitochondria, known as the "energy currency of the cell."
ANSWER: ATP or adenosine-5'-triphosphate
This molecule functions as the substrate to adenylate cyclase enzymes, and this molecule is made up of a
purine base attached to a pentose sugar. This molecule notably contains two high energy bonds, and
glycolysis yields two of these molecules. Most active transporters derive their energy from these molecules.
The bulk of the production of this molecule occurs when protons pass through its namesake "synthase"
enzyme after the electron transport chain. For 10 points, name this molecule often called the "molecular
currency of the cell."
ANSWER: ATP [accept Adenosine Triphosphate]
The enzyme that produces this compound has segments called F0 and F1 connected by a rotating axle.
This compound is converted into a cyclic signal transduction second messenger called cAMP ("camp"). The
Embden-Meyerhof pathway produces two molecules of NADH and two molecules of this compound.
Hydrogen ions are pumped across a gradient to produce this compound in oxidative phosphorylation
(OX-ih-DAY-tive FOSS-FOR-ill-AY-shun). For 10 points, name this "energy transfer currency" of the cell,
a compound that contains three phosphate groups and goes by a three-letter acronym.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate; or adenosine 5' (five-prime) triphosphate]
These compounds can be "replenished" through reactions catalyzed by nucleoside diphosphate
kinases, and proteins that bind this molecule have a characteristic fold known as the Rossman fold.
One derivative of this molecule is a second messenger that regulates the passage of the calcium ion
through ion channels and is called cyclic (*) AMP, and this molecule itself plays a crucial part in many
cellular processes due to its ability to readily give up a phosphate ion by hydrolysis. Glycolysis produces
two molecules of, for ten points , what energy-carrying compound, consisting of a nucleotide and three
phosphate groups?
ANSWER: Adenosine triphosphate (accept ATP)
This molecule is the most common source of the group that kinases transfer. The synthase that
creates this molecule has F-sub-zero and F-sub-one subunits. A cyclase transforms this molecule into
cAMP. The consumption or production of this molecule determines the investment and pay-off
phases of (*) glycolysis. The hydrolysis of this molecule yields -30.5 kilojoules per mole and ADP. For 10
points, identify this energy currency of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine-5 prime-triphosphate]
This molecule was discovered in 1929 by Karl Lohmann. Its use was first proposed by Fritz Albert
Lipmann in 1941. The tricarboxylic acid cycle usually produces two of this molecule, and they are also
produced by moving protons down a concentration gradient through their namesake synthase. Glycolysis
produces four and expends two of these. Produced in the chloroplasts during photosynthesis and the
mitochondria during respiration, these are, FTP, what main energy transfer molecules of cells?
ANSWER: Adenosine Triphosphate Accept ATP
This compound allosterically inhibits phosphofructokinase, thus creating a negative feedback loop in a
process whose end product is two molecules of pyruvate. A cyclase can act on this molecule to create a
second messenger that activates protein kinase A, which in turn dephosphorylates this compound. An
enzyme that synthesizes this molecule uses the chemiosmotic flow of protons through it to drive a rotorshaped subunit in the cristae of the inner mitochondrial membrane. Two molecules of NADH and this
energetic molecule are produced by glycolysis. For 10 points, name this molecule, which functions as the
energy currency of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
As a signaling molecule, this molecule can activate P2 membrane receptors. Paul Boyer showed that
the purpose of a certain proton gradient is to remove it from its namesake synthase. During muscle
contraction, the heads of the myosin molecule hydrolyze this molecule. In plants, this molecule is
synthesized in the (*) thylakoid membrane of the chloroplasts. Two molecules of it are synthesized as the
end product of glycolysis. For 10 points, name this compound that is sometimes referred to as the "energy
currency" of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine-5-triphosphate]
The enzyme that synthesizes this compound is inhibited by oligomycin, an antibiotic which gives its
name to that enzyme's Fo subunit. That enzyme works via the proton motive force and is found in the
inner membrane of a certain organelle. A cyclic derivative of this molecule is a classic second
messenger created by (*) adenylate cyclase, and kinases regulate signal transduction by using this
molecule as a phosphate donor. Its namesake synthase is found in the mitochondria, and roughly 36 of these
molecules can be produced from glucose in cellular respiration. For 10 points, name this energy-carrying
molecule consisting of a ribose, a purine, and three phosphate groups.
ANSWER: ATP [accept adenosine triphosphate]
When combined with luciferin, this molecule is responsible for the light of fireflies, and as a signaling
molecule, it can activate P2 membrane receptors. Proton gradients power the synthesis of this molecule,
which is produced by an enzyme containing the F0 and F1 complexes. This molecule can be converted into
a second messenger used in signal transduction, known as cyclic AMP. Along with pyruvate and NADH,
two of these molecules are produced in glycolysis, and cellular respiration ideally produces 38 of these
molecules. For 10 points, name this molecule that carries energy in cells.
ANSWER: ATP [accept Adenosine Triphosphate]
The enzyme that synthesizes this molecule can be inhibited by the antibiotic oligomycin. Fritz Lipmann first
proposed the important role function this molecule has while one reaction producing this molecule occurs in
the thylakoid. Along with NADPH, this molecule is produced in the light-dependent reaction of
photosynthesis in a process known as photophosphorylation while this molecule is also produced alongside
NADH in glycolysis. Adenylate cyclase uses this molecule to produce cyclic AMP. For 10 points, name the
primary biological energy currency that is found in the mitochondria.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine triphosphate]
Earthworms uniquely use the molecule lombricine to react with this molecule. This molecule activates
P2X3 and P2X2/3, two receptors that control pain responses, and in conjunction with luciferin this
molecule is responsible for the light of fireflies. In the muscular tissue of chordates, this compound donates
a group to creatine. In proteins, this molecule, first synthesized by Alexander Todd, is almost always bound
by a magnesium cofactor, and large quantities of this molecule are produced via oxidative phosphorylation
in the electron transport chain. For 10 points, name this molecule discovered by Karl Lohmann,, the energy
currency of the cell.
ANSWER: ATP [or adenosine-5'-triphosphate]
In the sliding filament theory of muscle contraction, the binding of this molecule allows myosin to
detach from actin. The second messenger cyclic AMP is synthesized from this molecule by adenylyl
cyclase. Pyruvate kinase is involved in the transfer of a phosphate group from PEP to ADP, which yields
one molecule of this as well as one molecule of pyruvate in glycolysis. For 10 points, name this molecule
which is a primary energy source for cells.
ANSWER: ATP [or Adenosine-5'-triphosphate]
This protein fails to function if an aspartate residue at position 61 is modified by dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
or mutated to alanine. Three beta subunits in an alpha-beta hexamer likely cycle between three
conformational states, open, low, and tight. Its c ring causes its gamma subunit to rotate in discrete
multiples of 120 degrees. While fourteen c subunits are present in chloroplasts, ten are present in yeast
mitochondria and twelve in those of animals. Composed of F0 and F1 complexes, for 10 points, name this
protein that uses energy from proton movement to add a phosphate to ADP.
ANSWER: ATP synthase (accept F0/F1 complex before F0 and F1 mentioned)
The beta subunit of this enzyme features the highly conserved DELSEED motif. Neutralization of
aspartate residues in this enzyme allows the movement of its c-ring. Inhibitors of it include DCCD
and oligomycin. One subunit of this enzyme transitions between loose, tight and open conformations,
according to the binding change mechanism of Paul Boyer. The two components of this enzyme are
connected by a stator. Those two components are F-sub-zero and F-sub-one, rotary motors whose direction
is controlled by the flow of protons across a membrane. For 10 points, name this enzyme that produces the
major energy storing molecule in cells.
ANSWER: phosphorylation factor-ATP synthase [or F-type ATPase]
This protein's C-subunits consists of a GXGXGXG motif important for helix packing. One section of
this protein is named for its sensitivity to oligomycin. One domain of this protein is a hexamer
containing 3 sets of alternating alpha and beta subunits. The mechanism of this protein was solved by
affixing it to a glass plate and attaching a fluorescent actin molecule; that experiment revealed that
its (*) F1 domain rotates by 120
degrees while its F-oh base piece is transmembrane. This protein is central to Mitchell's chemiosmotic
hypothesis, and is found in the inner mitochondrial membrane. For 10 points, name this rotor-shaped
protein that converts proton gradients created by the electron transport chain into ATP.
ANSWER: ATP synthase [accept Complex V]
One theory about how these structures evolved posits that they originally were used by the cell to
break down the compound they now synthesize. Its action was observed in an experiment in which a
fluorescent filament of actin was attached to its gamma subunit and turned counterclockwise in the
presence of a certain molecule. The F0 complex of this protein forms a channel through the
membrane, whereas the F1 complex stretches into the matrix. The binding of a proton to one of the csubunits in the (*) F0 produces a 1/10 turn in the gamma subunit of this protein, in turn driving a
conformational change in the alpha-beta subunit which allows for the binding of the namesake molecule.
FTP, name this enzyme present in the mitochondrion, which creates a highly energetic molecule via
phosphorylation.
ANSWER: ATP synthase (also accept ATP synthetase, Adenosine Tri-Phosphate synthase, etc.)
One experiment to investigate this enzyme used nickel-binding histidine residues to affix one end of it
to a glass surface and allow researchers to observe a rotating actin filament bonded to its other end. Its
beta subunits can assume three different configurations with different binding affinities for its substrate, and
this enzyme is inhibited by compounds like oligomycin and vancomycin. This enzyme's alpha/beta hexamer
and gamma "stalk" comprise its F1 complex, and a, b, and c subunits comprise its F0 complex. This
enzyme's action is driven by proton flow across the mitochondrial membrane. For 10 points, name this
enzyme that adds an inorganic phosphate group to ADP.
ANSWER: ATP synthase
Oligomycin and vancomycin interfere with this protein in bacteria, and Paul Boyer explained its function by
the binding change mechanism. The knob of this protein is thought to be a modified DNA helicase and its
stator serves to anchor the F0 subunit in the cristae. This is the only eukaryotic protein known to form a
rotary motor and it relies on the electron transport chain to establish a proton gradient. Powered by
chemiosmosis in the mitochondria, name this enzyme that produces most of the energy of cell respiration by
attaching a phosphate group to an ADP.
ANSWER: ATP synthase [do not prompt on "ATP"]
In an important experiment, its beta subunits were bonded to nickel on a glass surface, and an actin filament
attached to its gamma subunit was observed. Its mechanism was elucidated in an experiment when sunlight
was shone towards artifical vesicles containing bacteriorhodopsin, and it is inhibited by DCCD and
oligomycin. The gamma subunit of the F0 rotates as protons pass through, and the proton motive force
releases the product of this enzyme. For 10 points, identify this enzyme present in the mitochondrion, which
uses chemiosmosis to catalyze the production of a high energy molecule by phophorylating ADP.
ANSWER: ATP synthase [or adenosine tri-phosphate synthase]
In this country, Watarrka National Park lies near the range of the world's largest camel herd. In the early
1900s, a series of fences were erected to keep rabbits out of this country west, one ending near Broome. In
the 30s, veterans in this country's Campion district used machine guns to mow down flightless birds. The
now extinct Paradise Parrot may have ranged as far north as this country's Gulf of Carpentaria. The
majority of monotremes have habitats in this country, where the alleged murder of Azaria Chamberlain
turned out to be the result of a dingo attack. For 10 points, name this home country of the duck-billed
platypus and the koala.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
A three-year old female member of this genus was nicknamed Selam and is also referred to as the
child or baby of the most famous member while another three-year old genus member was likely
killed by a large predatory bird. Although boisei and robustus were originally placed in this group,
they're now considered to be in the genus Paranthropus. A member of this genus left footprints at Laetoli,
demonstrating bipedalism predated the development of large brains. Including the species anamensis,
africanus, and afarensis. For 10 points, identify this genus of extinct hominids which also includes Lucy,
with a name meaning "southern ape."
ANSWER: Australopithecus
The earliest known example of this taxonomic group was discovered in and named for Tuang, South Africa.
It used to be split into gracile and robust varieties, but the latter are now considered another group that
includes the boisei species, known as Paranthropus. A set of footprints from some of its members,
discovered by Mary Leakey in Laetoli, showed arched feet and non-opposable big toes, and members of this
genus have been excavated in Olduvai Gorge. The most famous specimen of this genus, discovered in
Ethiopia, was 3.5 feet tall and named Lucy. Studied by Raymond Dart, for 10 points, name this extinct
genus of hominids with species afarensis and africanus.
ANSWER: Australopithecus [or australopithecines; or australopiths; accept Australopithecus africanus before "split"]
One member of this genus was used to disprove the single-species hypothesis, while another member is the
earliest for which fossil evidence indicates bipedalism. One early fossil from this genus, discovered by
Raymond Dart, is the Taung child. In 2010, researchers announced a new species in this genus named
sediba. The most famous individual of this species, discovered in Ethiopia in 1974, is of the species (*)
afarensis and is named Lucy. Including species like anamensis and africanus, for ten points, identify this
extinct genus of hominid whose name means "southern ape".
ANSWER: Australopithecus (accept word forms like Australopith or Australopithecine)
In polio-infected cells, this process is mimicked by vesicles that are tagged with cephalin-modified
LC3. It's not differentiation, but it is upregulated by beclin 1, which suppresses a competing process.
It is also downregulated by Tor, via UNC-51-like kinases. In Alzheimer's, multilamellar bodies may
generate amyloid-beta as a byproduct of this process. This process occurs in structures that are
synthesized at omegasomes on the ER, where Atg is localized. The organelle in which this process
occurs is enclosed by the isolation membrane, or (*) phagophore. Acid hydrolases carry out this process
in an organelle that is produced by the fusion of a namesake vesicle with a lysosome. Mostly occurring
under starvation conditions, for 10 points, name this process in which a cell degrades its own components.
ANSWER: autophagy [or autophagocytosis; accept macroautophagy; accept autolysis; accept type 2 programmed cell death; prompt on "programmed cell death" or "cell death"]
Neurofibromatosis (nur-ohf-eye-broh-mah-TOE-sis) and Marfan syndrome have this inheritance
pattern. Another disease with this inheritance pattern is caused by a CAG repeat. Since negative selection is
most effective if a disease causes a drop in fitness before the end of reproductive maturity, some disorders
with this pattern don't manifest until later in life, such as Huntington's. For 10 points, name this genetic
disease inheritance scheme where the disease is caused by one bad allele on a non X nor Y chromosome.
ANSWER: autosomal dominant [prompt on partial answer; or non sex linked dominant]
The synthesis of this substance often takes place in young leaves and cotyledons, and bulk flow causes the
movement of these in plants to be rapid. One receptor of these is the F-box protein TIR-1. The most
common form of this substance, indole-3-acetic acid, is chemically similar to and is derived from the amino
acid tryptophan. Plant growth in abnormal directions is caused by the shade avoidance effect, which in turn
is caused by these substances. For ten points, identify these plant hormones that control cell elongation and
development of the roots and seeds, and are not cytokinins.
ANSWER: auxins
One of the main actions of this hormone is described by the acid growth hypothesis. By activating
proton pumps in the cell membrane, this hormone causes the pH of the cell wall to decrease,
ultimately making it more elastic. They also can induce ethylene synthesis in high concentrations and
inhibit senescene and abscission. Indole-3-acetic acid is the prominent example of this group of hormones,
which help ensure that the main stem of the plant grows the most by inhibiting development of the lateral
buds. For 10 points, name this class of plant hormones which promote cell division and maintain apical
dominance.
ANSWER: auxins (accept indole-3-acetic acid before mentioned)
Synthetic versions of this hormone can be used as herbicides in eudicots. It is carried through parenchyma
tissue by polar transport, which is named for the higher concentration of its transport protein at the basal
ends of cells. It stimulates both cell division in the vascular cambium and root formation, but in one of its
better-known functions changes in pH and membrane potential cause increased turgor and cell wall
plasticity. This leads to cell elongation according to the acid growth hypothesis. The natural form of it in
plants is called indoleacetic acid. FTP, name this first plant hormone to be discovered, which promotes
coleoptile expansion and fruit growth.
ANSWER: auxin
The synthesis of this hormone relies on a nitrilase, and its actions are mediated by the actions of
the SCF-TIR1 ubiquitination complex. It moves through the organism via PIN proteins in a process
called polar transport, and its action was discovered by Fritz Went using agar blocks. This hormone
triggers the activity of expansins, which loosen the cross-linking between cellulose fibrils, a
mechanism known as (*) acid growth. Indole-3-acetic acid is the principle type of this hormone, which is
synthesized in shoot tips and controls apical dominance. Among its actions are regulating gravitropism and
phototropism, and it stimulates the production of ethylene in order to suppress lateral growth. For 10 points,
name this class of plant hormones.
ANSWER: auxin
One example of this chemical substance is 2-phenylacetic acid. These substances are involved in a
myriad of genetic processes, including the binding of picloram to genomic sites which promotes
thigmotropism whenever the plant is touched. The most important example, indole-acetic acid, is
known to significantly increase the concentration of ethylene in the plant, resulting in the speedy
ripening of plants and fruit. For 10 points, identify this family of plant hormones which are involved in plant
growth.
ANSWER: auxins
The flavinoid Quercetin inhibits transport of these compounds, which can inhibit gene expression by
binding to TIR1 in the nucleus. Their major effect stems from causing cells to actively transport
hydrogen ions out of the cell, acidifying the local extracellular medium, activating (*) expansins in the
cell wall. Their movement is regulated by PIN proteins in a process called polar transport. Other effects
mediated by these compounds include phototropism and apical dominance. Synthetic versions like 2,4-D
acetic acid are used as selective herbicides,such as the defoliating Agent Orange, and one natural example is
indole-3-acetic acid. For 10 point, name this plant hormone that promotes growth.
ANSWER: Auxins [accept Indole-3-acetic acid or IAA until mentioned]
ABP1 and PIN proteins mediate the transport of these compounds which bind to TIR1-SCF
receptors, in a process known as polar transport. When present in low concentrations, these
compounds can inhibit the production of ethylene and can delay senescence of leaves by preventing
abscission. Although these compounds are naturally synthesized in the apical [*] meristem, synthetic
example include 2,4,5-T and Agent Orange, which are used as selective herbicides. Indole-3-acetic acid is a
natural example of these compounds, which induce apical dominance, phototropisms, and cell elongation.
For ten points, name these plant hormones, the first to be discovered.
ANSWER: auxins
The breakdown of hydrogen bonds by enzymes called expansins occurs when these substances
increase voltage across a membrane. That action is caused when these substances stimulate proton
pumps according to the acid growth hypothesis. Their synthesis occurs in the (*) apical meristem, and
a natural one of them is IAA. These hormones play a large role in the formation of adventitious roots and in
behaviors like phototropism. For ten points, name these plant hormones that, like gibberellins, play a role in
stem elongation.
ANSWER: auxins (prompt on "plant hormones")
The overexpression of AXI 4 or other cation-chloride co-transporters triggers growth of protoplasts
independent of these molecules. This class of molecule binds to ABP-1 to regulate clathrin-mediated
endocytosis. The polarity of PIN proteins determine the intercellular flow of these types of molecules. This
hormone is linked to the action of expansin, which causes cell enlargement, because it turns on proton
ATPase. In large quantities, this hormone will stimulate the production of ethylene, which causes leaf
abscission. The asymmetric distribution of this molecule regulates both gravitropism and phototropism.
Indole-3-acetic acid is, for 10 points, a member of what class of plant hormones that promotes elongation of
coleoptiles and enhance apical dominance.
ANSWER: auxin [accept indole-3-acetic acid before mention]
These compounds are commonly synthesized via the tryptamine pathway or the IPA pathway, and one mode
of their action involves the formation of ARF homodimers. These compounds also lead to the activation of
by H+-ATPase pumps in the acid growth model. First fully characterized by Fritz Went using agar blocks
and coleoptiles, this hormone is commonly synthesized in apical meristems and distributed throughout the
plant via polar transport. Also responsible for phototropism, the formation of lateral roots, and apical
dominance, FTP, name this class of plant hormones which includes indoleacetic acid and the herbicide
Agent Orange.
ANSWER: Auxin
It was recently discovered that the F-box protein from the complex SCFTIR1 is a receptor for them.
PIN proteins regulate their efflux, and they cause miscarriages and leukemia, as evinced by 2,4-D and
2,4,5-T, two of them in Agent Orange. Also responsible for parthenocarpy, they activate expansins in
one of their main functions. In low concentrations, they can delay flower senescence. Featuring
prominently in the acid growth hypothesis, and competing with cytokinins in apical dominance, for 10
points, name this class of plant growth hormones.
ANSWER: auxins
These substances are transported by PIN proteins and bind to TIR1. They stimulate proton pumps to lower
the pH and activate expansins, according to the acid growth hypothesis. In high concentrations, they
stimulate excess ethylene production, which induces abscission, hence the use of these compounds in
herbicides like Agent Orange. Indole-3-acetic acid is one example of these compounds which contribute to
apical dominance, phototropisms, and cell elongation. For 10 points, name these plant hormones whose
effect is strengthened in the presence of cytokinins and gibberellins.
ANSWER: auxins [prompt on plant hormones before mention]
The TIR1 protein binds to the SCF complex and is then headed for degradation after binding to these
entities. PGP and PIN are proteins involved in the transport of these molecules. Their transport also
involves a decrease in the pH of the cell, which induces the activation of expansins. Excess concentration of
these molecules can induce Ethylene synthesis, which causes leaf abscission. Indole-3-acetic acid is an
important member of this class of molecules, which play a significant role in apical dominance. For 10
points, identify these plant hormones which are best known for their influence in phototropism and
geotropism.
ANSWER: auxins
These chemicals affect gene expression by binding to TIR1, and they leave the cell via PIN proteins.
Examples such as 2,4 -D and 2,4,5 -T are used as selected herbicides and were used in agent orange.
Boyson-Jensen's experiments identified the mechanism of these chemicals, but it was F W Went who
first extracted them from avena sativa in agar. The acid (*) growth model explains their primary
function, which is to promote stem elongation. For 10 points, name this class of plant hormones produced
in the apical meristem and that causes apical dominance.
ANSWER: Auxins
One model for the long distance transport of these substances sees uptake by passive diffusion in a
protonated form and export actively in a dissociated anion form by PIN proteins, in the polar transport
model. These substances is generally thought be derived through some combination of transamination and
oxidative decarboxylation from tryptophan. Experiments with coleoptiles showed that these substances
decreased the pH of the growth substrate, which along with the uptake of water is thought to cause one of
their major functions. High concentrations of these substances can cause bent tissue, as well as the
formation of adventitious roots. They also inhibit growth in lateral buds to reduce competition with the
apical meristem and are involved in gravitropism and phototropism. These hormones are most famous for
causing cell elongation. For 10 points, name these plant hormones that include IAA.
ANSWER: auxins
One step in a synthesis of this class of compounds involves the creation of indolepyruvic acid from
tryptophan, and this class of compounds is transported in the parenchyma tissue. They play a key
role in the acid growth hypothesis by activating [*] proton pumps. This class of compounds, discovered
by Fritz Went, is often synthesized in the apical meristem, and they are responsible for differentiation of
xylem and phloem and delays in the ripening of fruit. For 10 points, identify this class of plant hormones,
responsible for stimulating stem elongation.
ANSWER: auxins [prompt "plant hormones" before read]
Binding of these to the TIR1 protein causes the degradation of their namesake proteins, which are otherwise
bound to ARF proteins. They are pumped out of cells by PIN proteins, and they can activate the pumping of
protons into the cytoplasm, which results in a decrease of pH. They are found in higher concentrations in
apical buds than lateral buds, thus playing an important role in apical dominance, and common examples of
these include indole-3-acetic acid. For 10 points, identify this class of plant hormones which influence
phototropism and geotropism.
ANSWER: auxins
Overexpression of YUCCA genes increase the synthesis of these compounds by increasing
hydroxylation of tryptamine, and another step of their synthesis is catalyzed by nitrilase. The toxin
fusicoccin mimics some of the effects of these compounds, which binds to the TIR1-SCF complex. They
trigger increased efflux of protons across the cell wall, causing the activation of expansins; that mechanism
is known as the acid-growth hypothesis. This hormone moves from shoots downward in a process known
as polar transport, and it helps establish apical dominance. Experiments with blocks of agar also showed
that its responsible for phototropism. For 10 points, name this plant hormone, examples of which include
indole-3-acetic acid.
ANSWER: auxin
These substances were named by a man who, in a 1926 experiment, cut the tips of oat coleoptiles and
placed them on agar. One of these substances, MCPA, is used to kill weeds, and the most abundant one is
phenylacetic acid. They are structurally similar to tryptophan, and can be used to form seedless fruit. 2,4-D
is a synthetic type of this substance, whose principal natural type is indoleacetic acid. Responsible for many
forms of tropism, these substances delay fruit ripening. FTP name these plant hormones that promote stem
growth, root formation, and cell enlargement.
ANSWER: auxins
Trans-cinnamic acid is a noted inhibitor of this molecule's transport, which is also
controlled by quercetin and genistein. Its response factors are targeted for
degradation by ubiquitination, and this molecule's stimulation of hydrogen ion
transport activates expansins in theory. They include phenylacetic acid and 2,4,5-T,
which was the active agent in Agent Orange. Delaying fruit senescence, they inhibit
ethylene growth and work with cytokinin in root and shoot apical dominance. For 10
points, name this class of plant hormones.
ANSWER: auxin
Produced from tryptophan, parenchyma cells are responsible for this compound's polar transport through
coleoptile tissue. It activates expansins which loosen cellulose microfibrils, in turn causing the target cell to
take in water, according to the acid growth hypothesis. At high concentrations, it stimulates ethylene
production, and as dicots are more sensitive to synthetic ones, it is often used as an herbicide. Responsible
for vascular cambium growth and many tropisms, it is produced in meristem tissue. Name this class of
chemicals explained by Frits Went, responsible for cell elongation in plants-the first plant hormone to be
discovered.
ANSWER: auxins
In the ubiquitin ligase complex SCF, the F-box protein TIP acts as a receptor to these compounds,
and PIN is a protein used in a type of "polar transport" named after these compounds. They activate
expansins that break down the cell wall and allow the cell to expand, according to the acid growth
hypothesis. These hormones regulate gravitropism and (*) phototropism in addition to delaying fruit
ripening. Most plants use one called indole-acetic acid, and they were the first plant hormones discovered.
For ten points, name these plant hormones, which, like gibberellins, promote stem elongation and root
growth.
ANSWER: auxins
In Drosophila, the growth of these structures is controlled by the interaction of Stilt and Robo receptors,
while in vertebrates they are guided by a gradient of Ephrins and the interaction between Semaphorins and
Plexins. One type of them tend to gather in Remak bundles, and upon destruction, they are digested by
macrophages in a process called the Wallerian degeneration. These structures begin at the hillock, and are
often surrounded by oligodendrocytes or Schwann cells. They operate by saltatory conduction, in which an
impulse leaps between spaces in their myelin sheaths known as the nodes of Ranvier. FTP, name these long
projections between the cell body and synapse of a neuron.
ANSWER: Axons (prompt on "neurons" or "nerve fibers" throughout)
Based on the lengths of these structures, some cells are classified as Golgi One or Golgi Two. The
A delta and polymodal C types of these structures transmit signals from nociceptors. A lack of
protection for these structures can cause Guillain-Barre syndrome. This part of some cells has branches
called telodendria. Much of this structure is surrounded by cells that produce an insulating material,
and the gaps where this structure is not surrounded are called the nodes of Ranvier [ran-vee-ay]. The
other parts are protected by Schwann cells that produce myelin. Name these extensions from nerve
cells that send signals to dendrites.
ANSWER: axons [prompt on nerve fibers; do not prompt on "nerve cells" or "neurons"]
In chandelier cells, these structures are arranged into cartridges. During growth, these structures
are repelled by the interaction between Slit and Robo receptors, and the growth cone is found on the
tips of these structures during development. Upon damage, these structures die in an anterograde
manner in a process called Wallerian degeneration. Dyenin is responsible for (*) retrograde transport
down these structures. The ends of these structures contain vesicles docked at SNARE complexes, which
are released upon influx of calcium. These structures, which are capable of saltatory conduction because
they are covered in myelin sheaths, conduct action potentials from cell bodies to synapses. For 10 points,
name these long projections of neurons.
ANSWER: axon [prompt on neuron]
Santiago Ramon y Cajal [ruh-MOAN ee kuh-HALL] showed that these structures are independent of one
another, and the Hodgkin-Huxley model was derived from experiments on a "giant" one of these structures
taken from a squid. These structures are often surrounded by a myelin sheath, and ion channels along these
structures are clustered at nodes of Ranvier [RON-vee-ay]. For 10 points, name these parts of a neuron that
conduct electrical impulses from a namesake hillock to the synapse.
ANSWER: axons [prompt on neuron before "giant"]
These deteriorate in Wallerian Degeneration. These cellular structures are guided by netrins and
they grow by growth cones. One notable MAP located here is the tau protein. These are connected to
their namesake hillock. These contain microtubules and motor proteins allowing anterograde
transport of materials to their termini to take place. They are covered a (*) myelin sheath. For 10
points, name these long projections of neurons that transmit electrical and chemical signals at synapses to
dendrites.
ANSWER: axon [prompt on neuron before mentioned]
Studies on one of these structures from a giant squid led Hodgkins and Huxley to a Nobel Prize for their
experiments. Their extension is guided by growth cones found at their ends, and they begin tapering near a
namesake hillock. In some cases, these branch out to form collaterals, which end in telodendria, and ones
with a smaller diameter can aggregate to form a Remak bundle. Nodes of Ranvier appear along these
structures that are insulated by myelin containing Schwann cells, which allows for the speedy conduction of
action potentials. For 10 points, identify the long, slender projection of a neuron, often contrasted with
dendrites.
ANSWER: axon [prompt on nerve fiber or equivalent; accept neuron until "growth cone"]
One type of aggregate of these structures is called a Remak bundle. They extend and elongate via actinsupported protrusions with filopodia and lamellopodia called growth cones. Their namesake hillocks do not
contain granules of rough endoplasmic reticulum called Nissl bodies that can be found in other regions of
the cell. Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes insulate these structures with a myelin sheath, gaps in which
are called nodes of Ranvier and allow for saltatory conduction. For 10 points, name these long processes of
nerve cells that, unlike dendrites, conduct signals away from the cell body.
ANSWER: axons
The individual cells in these structures are separated by nodes of Ranvier, and these structures
participate in a process triggered by the successive opening of voltage gated sodium channels. The
initial segment of these structures is thought to be the site of the action potential. Schwann cells are
the individual cells in these structures, and those cells are usually coated with an electrically insulating
material called myelin. For 10 points, name these projections from the soma of neurons which convey
electrical information from the neuron to dendrites or cells bodies.
ANSWER: axons [prompt on neuron before it is read]
These fibers often are attracted to netrin [NET-trin]. These are packed tightly but not able to touch each
other because of cytoplasm inside a Remak [ray-MAHK] bundle. This part of a cell extends from its
namesake hillock, and these are often surrounded by a type of cell that produces electrically insulating
material. Those surrounding cells are Schwann cells, and the insulator is myelin [MIE-uh-lin]. Name these
nerve fibers that conduct electricity away from a neuron.
ANSWER: axon
The group C type of these structures can form Remak bundles. Lesions in these structures cause Wallerian
degeneration, and their tips feature growth cones. A large one of these structures belonging to the squid was
used to develop the Hodgkin-Huxley model. Saltatory conduction is the propagation of information along
these structures. The nodes of Ranvier are gaps in the myelin that insulates these structures, and they
originate at their namesake hillock. FTP name these nerve fibers that send information in the form of action
potentials to other neurons.
ANSWER: axons
These cells are encouraged to proliferate by a protein that is inhibited by Blisibimod and Belimumab.
During their development they express Bruton's tyrosine kinase and rely on the Pax5 transcription factor.
The only cells of this type to depend on Notch-2 signaling are those formed in the marginal zone of the
spleen. Since naive mature ones only produce IgM and IgD, they must undergo class switching in order to
produce other immunoglobulins. One class of these cells has abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum and
are formed in the bone marrow before becoming the "plasma" type. Following primary infection, the
memory type is formed as well. For 10 points, name these lymphocytes involved in the humoral response,
in contrast with T cells.
ANSWER: B cells [or B lymphocytes; prompt on lymphocytes; prompt on white blood cells]
This cell type's namesake activating factor is targeted by the monoclonal antibody Benlysta. These
cells express both CD19 and CD20 on their surfaces, and immortalized ones are fused with normal
ones to form hybridomas. They proliferate in response to IL-4 and IL-5, and these cells get their
names from the unique organ in which they mature in birds. One protein expressed by them is
encoded for by genes that undergo somatic hypermutation. Those genes undergo the (*) VDJ
recombination to create diversity. They can be divided into memory and plasma types, the latter of which
secrete large amounts of antibodies in response to an infection. For 10 points, name this type of immune
cell, which, unlike T-cells, mature in the bone marrow.
ANSWER: B cell
Bruton's tyrosine kinase is essential for the creation of these cells. Follicular dendritic cells are so
named because they were first discovered in follicles of these cells. These cells express CD19 and CD20.
These cells present antigens bound to a class II MHC. Somatic hypermutation and V(D)J recombination of
heavy and kappa or lambda chains occurs in them. The humoral branch of adaptive immunity is mediated
by them. These cells produce antibodies. For 10 points, identify this lymphocyte that is produced and
matures in the bone marrow, unlike the lymphocytes which mature in the thymus, T cells.
ANSWER: B cells [or B lymphocytes]
The PAX5 gene plays a role in these cells' differentiation by encoding their specific activator protein, and
the MS4A1 gene encodes a marker located on the surface of them. Their primary receptor and Toll-like
receptors on their surface work together to stimulate the production of CD80 and CD86, which interact with
CD28 on another class of immune cells. Rituximab is used when lymphoma has been determined to be
caused by these cells, often identified by the expression of CD20 on their surfaces. They are made and
mature in the blood marrow and part of the function of helper T cells is facilitating their maturation into
plasma cells. For 10 points, name this type of lymphocytes which aid in immune response by producing
antibodies.
ANSWER: B cells
Bence-Jones proteins are synthesized by these cells. Lambda 5 protein is critical for the
development of these cells. They express activation-induced deaminase, which greatly increases the
rate of cytosine-to-uracil mutations. Hybridomas are hybrids of cancerous and normal types of these
cells. Clonal selection theory explains their proliferation. These cells can spontaneously (*) switch
from making mu to making delta heavy chains. In birds, these cells are made in the bursa of Fabricius.
Memory ones are extremely long-lived. For 10 points, name these cells whose plasma type secretes
antibodies in response to infection, a type of lymphocyte that matures in the bone marrow.
ANSWER: B cells [or B lymphocytes; prompt on plasma cells; prompt on memory cells; prompt on myeloma cells]
CD19 is an important co-receptor in these cells. They can undergo isotype switching and somatic
hypermutation. These cells proliferate in germinal centers, while some of these are relegated to the
marginal zone of the spleen. Their activation can be dependently or interdependently of a fellow
lymphocyte. They can be divided into memory and (*) plasma cells. They develop in the bone marrow
and produce the central component of humoral immunity. For 10 points, name these cells that produce
antibodies unlike T cells.
ANSWER: B cells [prompt on lymphocyte; prompt on white blood cell; prompt on leukocyte]
These cells are infected in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia. Belimumab is used to inhibit the growth of
these cells, which express TNF receptor superfamily 17 genes when mature and requires Pax5 expression
for differentiation. These cells express CD20 throughout their lifetimes, and use somatic hypermutation in
one important process, which also sees a recombination between V, D and J exons of a certain gene
cluster. They are partitioned into plasma and memory types, and are usually activated by helper-T cells in
response to an infection. Usually produced in the bone marrow, FTP, name these antibody-producing
lymphocytes, the basis for humoral immunity.
ANSWER: B cells
In order for some of these cells to develop, stromal cells must secrete stem cell factor, Kit, and IL-7. In
the process of clonal deletion, these cells undergo negative selection but not positive selection. The AID
enzyme helps these cells modify the isotype of their products via recombination, in a process called class
switching. Rituximab attacks CD20 on the surface of these cells before they fully mature, which is
exploited to treat lymphoma. After these cells develop into plasma cells, they produce Y-shaped
proteins that recognize antigens. For 10 points, name this these antibody-producing lymphocytes, which
are often contrasted with T cells.
ANSWER: B cells [or B lymphocytes]
Repertoire cloning can be accomplished by PCR on individual ones of these cells. These cells express
CD19 and C20 on their membranes. These cells proliferate in the germinal center of a lymph node. These
cells rearrange their variable, diversity, and joining genes in order to create their namesake receptor. They
differentiate in the bone marrow, and after activation can further differentiate into plasma and memory
types. For 10 points, name these lymphocytes that secrete antibodies.
ANSWER: B lymphocytes
One member of this group of compounds, which regulates the reaction of 5-hydroxytrytophan to
serotonin, is pyridoxine. Another member of this group is present alongside pyruvate dehydrogenase
in the reaction of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA in the buildup to the Krebs cycle. A deficiency of that
compound was observed in chickens fed a diet of polished rice. Deficiencies of different members of
this group can cause diseases like(*) pellagra and beriberi. For 10 points, name this group of compounds
that includes riboflavin and thiamin, which were discovered after vitamin A.
ANSWER: B vitamins or B complex (prompt on "vitamins" before mentioned)
One of these compounds is formed by a reaction between pimeloyl-CoA and alanine.
Takaki Kanehiro identified a deficiency of one of these compounds, and further work
on it was performed by the winner of the 1929 Nobel Prize in Medicine, Christian
Eijkman. This group includes the precursor molecule to coenzyme-A synthesis, while
another is the main component of FMN and FAD. Examples include pantothenic
acid and biotin, and (*) beriberi can be caused by the deficiency of "number one", thymine.
For ten points, name this class of water-soluble essential vitamins numbered up to 12.
ANSWER: B vitamins (accept B-complex)
One disease caused by the lack of one of these compounds comes in wet and dry forms. The autoimmune
deficiency of one of these compounds is called pernicious anemia. Pregnant women take supplements
containing the ninth of these compounds, which is called folic acid. For 10 points, name this class of
compounds that includes niacin and thiamine, a class of vitamins.
ANSWER: B vitamins [prompt on vitamins; or B complex vitamins]
Confabulation and amnesia in Korsakoff's syndrome is one potential result of deficiency in this group of
compounds, and a related deficiency results in the three Ds of dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia. Pregnant
women take a form of these groups as supplements to avoid birth defects and their consumption is also key
to preventing pellegra and beri-beri. Yellow-green urine results from excess intake of these chemicals and
5-hour Energy unscientifically includes four of its members because they promote energy production and
cell growth. For 10 points, name this group of vitamins including thiamine, riboflavin, and niacin and a 12
variety, which had been
previously considered a single vitamin.
ANSWER: B vitamins [Accept thiamine or B1 before "group of compounds"]
Sallie Chisholm discovered one species in this clade that is responsible for 20% of all atmospheric
oxygen. Species of these that are acid fast can contain mycolic acid. The firmicutes phylum of these make
endospores. They can be classified as gram-positive or negative depending on their type of cell wall. Their
shape can be coccus or bacillus. They are infected by phages. They do not have nuclei and often contain
plasmids. For 10 points, name this domain of life that contains species like E. coli.
ANSWER: bacteria
One compound present in these organisms is composed of an alternating chain of N-acetylglucosamine and
N-acetyl muramic acid. A virus transports DNA from one of these organisms to another in the process of
transduction, though they can also transfer DNA via conjugation. The Gram stain is used to divide these
organisms based on the presence of peptidoglycan in their cell walls. Contrasted with Archaea, For 10
points, name this group of single-celled prokaryotes, examples of which include Clostridium and
Salmonella.
ANSWER: Bacteria [accept Eubacteria]
Along with mice, one type of these organisms was used by Oswald Avery and Colin MacLeod to
suggest that DNA was the main vehicle of heredity. They can exchange genetic material through a
pilus in a process called conjugation, and can also incorporate exogenous DNA through
transformation. Roots of legumes often have (*) nitrogen-fixing types of these organisms. Ones with
peptidoglycan in their cell wall appear violet after Gram staining, and their cyano- type was misidentified as
blue-green algae. They do not have a nucleus, and contain circular chromosomes called plasmids. For ten
points, name these prokaryotic micro-organisms, such as E. coli, which can also cause diseases like cholera.
ANSWER: bacteria or bacterium (prompt on streptococcus before "nitrogen")
Transposons unique to these organisms include Tn elements. Their reproduction is mediated by FtsZ.
Drugs aimed at these organisms usually exploit selective toxicity to target their ribosomes or cell
walls. Some of them produce temporary dormant, extremely resistant structures called endospores,
and the (*) F-plasmid allows them to exchange genetic material. They can take up DNA via transformation,
and they reproduce asexually via binary fission. They are divided into two basic types by the Gram stain,
which tests their cell walls for peptidoglycan. The causative agents of cholera and strep throat, for 10
points, name this domain of prokaryotic organisms contrasted with Eukarya and Archaea.
ANSWER: bacteria [accept Eubacteria]
One division of this clade includes organisms that are known as PGPR's, which engage in endophytic
relationships that inhibit the growth of DRB's. If members of this taxon have the F factor, they can
transfer genes in a process involving a sex pilus. Another classification of these organisms retains
substances like safranin and carbol fuchsin after a certain type of (*) staining. Some of these organisms
cause diseases such as tetanus and strep throat and come in shapes like coccus and bacillus. For ten points,
name this domain of prokaryotic organisms such as E coli.
ANSWER: bacteria (accept pseudomonas until "Another")
A repressor found in one example of these entities binds to OR1, OR2, and OR3 and is a dimer
named c1; that example expresses genes gam, red, xis, and int when its genome is transcribed
leftward. One of these entities concatenates several copies of its genome, then cuts that structure into
segments of the original length, forming circular permutations of the original sequence. That example
cannot (*) integrate its genome into the host and instead must employ ribosomes until the host organism
bursts. The T4 variety of this kind of virus employs the lytic cycle in infecting E. coli, as does the "lambda"
variant. For 10 points, name this group of viruses that infect bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophage
The genome of one of these contains the cro and cI (see one) repressor genes. That entity was
discovered by Esther Lederberg. Their adhesive abilities often come from a baseplate. Temperate
ones can induce a lysogenic conversion. In the Hershey-Chase experiment, one of these had its DNA
and proteins radioactively labeled. Notable examples include lambda and (*) T4. Some have used
these in place of antibiotics because they target the same organisms. For 10 points, name these viruses that
infect bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophage [prompt on virus]
Some cells respond to the activity of these organisms by detecting PAM sites using Cas proteins in a
pathway based on CRISPR ["crisper"] loci. These organisms bind proteins such as pN to RNA
polymerase in the process of Q antitermination. An experiment involving these organisms labeled them with
radioactive phosphorus and sulfur probes, which showed that DNA and not protein was the carrier of
genetic information. The aforementioned Hershey-Chase experiment used the T2 type of these organisms,
while other oft-studied types include T4 and lambda. For 10 points, name these viruses that attack bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophages [prompt on "virus" until mentioned]
In one of these organisms, BoxB forms a hairpin at the Nut site. In that organism, cI [c-1] and cro
repress transcription and the N and Q factors induce antitermination. In one experiment, these
organisms were found to NOT influence the mutation rate, leading to the absence of a Poisson
distribution. These organisms were labeled with phosphorus and sulfur in another experiment which
confirmed that (*) DNA is the carrier of genetic information. Those experiments are the fluctuation test of
Luria and Delbruck and the Hershey-Chase experiment. The T-series of these organisms always undergo the
lytic cycle and are often used with E. coli in experimentation. For 10 points, the T4 and lambda are
examples of what type of virus which infects bacteria?
ANSWER: bacteriophages [prompt on "virus," accept more specific phages]
The M13 type of these organisms is used to display peptides in a type of screen. Esther Lederberg
discovered a type of them used for specialized transduction. In one experiment, they were either
labeled with radioactive phosphorus or sulfur to determine that DNA is the heritable material; that
experiment used a blender and was performed by Hershey and Chase. Common types include the (*)
T4 and Lambda variants, both of which infect E. Coli. For 10 points, name these viruses that infect
bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophage [prompt on "virus"]
Hydroxymethyl uracil replaces thymine in the genome of the SPO1 type of these, which also has a baseplate
that is rearranged during tail contraction into a hexameric pinwheel. Production of the most common protein
in the MS2 variety is inhibited by dimers of its coat protein. Lederberg and Zinder demonstrated the transfer
of genetic material via these by labeling parts of them with sulfur-35 and phosphorus-32 to help confirm
that DNA was the genetic material of the Hershey-Chase experiment. The T4 variety only reproduces via
the lytic cycle, while the lambda type may also use the lysogenic cycle. For 10 points, name these viruses
that infect bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophages [prompt on viruses]
Peptides on the surfaces of these entities can be used as a mirror image display to determine the D-peptides
that will bind in the body to an L-protein. Streisinger developed his model of mutation using the lysozyme
gene from one of these. One type of these entities has an experimentally useful rII (r two) mutant. Their
morphology includes base plates and tail fibers. The Luria-Delbruck experiment showed these do not
induce mutations that are harmful to their niche. The Hershey-Chase experiment also used one class of
these raised on radioactive material to determine that DNA contained genetic information. Common
examples of these entities include the lambda and T4 variants. For 10 points, name this type of virus that
infects bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophage [prompt on "virus"]
One of these organisms was the basis of the rII system used by Benzer for single nucleotide mapping,
and the cosmid uses elements derived from one of these organisms. The first stretch of DNA ever
sequenced by Frederick Sanger was from one type of this organism, dubbed phi X, and the Luria-Delbruck
experiment used them to show that mutations are spontaneous. Another experiment using them labeled
their DNA with phosphorus-32 and their proteins with sulfur-35 in order to show that nucleic acids are the
material of heredity; that experiment was performed by Hershey and Chase using the T4 type. For 10
points, name these viruses which infect bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophage [prompt on viruses]
An RNA polymerase from one of these organisms is commonly used in in vitro transcription
experiments, and one well-studied example of these organisms uses the Q antiterminator to
transcribe its structural components. Benzer's rII system uses these organisms for single-nucleotide
mutation mapping, and the Phi-X-174 example of these organisms was the first to have its genome (*)
sequenced. These organisms carry genetic information between cells in transduction. These organisms were
labeled with 32P and 35S in the experiment that showed that DNA is the substance that stores genetic
information, performed by Hersey and Chase. These organisms use their tail proteins as an injection
mechanism. For 10 points, name these viruses that infect bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophage
These organisms were used to develop a model for frameshift mutations named after Streisinger. One
example of these organisms has Qut and Nut sites, which bind to Q and N proteins during
antitermination. An experiment that showed that these organisms do not induce mutations that are
harmful to their niche was used to show that mutations do not occur in response to selection. That
experiment was run by Luria and Delbruck. Radioactive phosphorous and (*) sulfur were used to tag
the DNA and protein shells of these viruses respectively in another experiment. That experiment showed
that DNA transmits genetic information and was run by Hershey and Chase. These viruses come in lambda
and T4 variants. For 10 points, name these viruses that target bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophage
Seymour Benzer extensively studied the genetics of these entities, whose P1, Mu, and M13 varieties
are often used as cloning vectors. Radioactive P-labeled DNA was inserted into the genomes of these
entities, proving that DNA was the genetic material, in the Hershey Chase experiment. The lambda
variety engages in the lysogenic cycle, but most infect a cell via attachment, penetration, multiplication,
and eventual bursting of the host cell in the lytic cycle. For 10 points, name these viruses that attack a
certain type of single-celled organism.
ANSWER: bacteriophages [prompt on "virus" or "phage"]
The gix-L and gix-R sites are found in one of these things called mu. The cos (CAHS) sequence from
one of these things is used to create cosmids. The DNA ligase from the T4 variety of these things is
commonly used in cloning. The DNA or protein from one of them was radioactively labelled in the
Hershey-Chase experiment, which showed that they inject DNA into their hosts. For 10 points, name these
viruses that infect bacteria.
ANSWER: bacteriophages [prompt on virus]
The most studied form of these creatures use was studied by rightward and leftward transcription
and use Q Antitermination. That creature of this sort was denoted with the letter lambda.. They can
reproduce by adding there DNA into a vector and forcing that vector to reproduce, or the alternate
to the lysogenic cycle, the lytic cycle. For ten points, name these viruses that infect bacteria, named for
their appearance of eating them up.
ANSWER: bacteriophages
Alaska is home to the largest concentration of this bird in the United States, and a 1940 law protected
both it and its golden counterpart. This animal captivated public attention after Rachel Carson
pointed out its DDT related plight in Silent Spring, which landed it on the endangered list until (*)
1995. Seen on our national seal holding a thirteen-leaf olive branch is, for ten points, what animal, the
adjective in whose name means white, not hairless, the national bird and symbol of the United States?
ANSWER: Bald Eagle (also accept Haliaeetus leucocephalus, prompt on just eagle)
Quinine and apirin are isolated from this part of the cinchona plant and the willow, respectively. One tissue
found in this substance is produced by the phellogen and is also called its namesake cambium; that tissue is
called cork. Another tissue, which comprises the innermost layer of this substance, contains parenchymal
cells, companion cells, and sieve tubes and conducts nutrients, called phloem. For 10 points, give this term
that refers to the hard layer surrounding the stems of woody plants, notably found on the trunks of trees.
ANSWER: Bark
The Eed-Enx1 complex is required to stabilize these structures, which show characteristic
ubiquitination of histone H2A. These objects characteristically exclude the RNA of the Cot-1 gene,
and its existence was first theorized because carriers of the gene for G6PD deficiency would
sometimes show symptoms. The histone variant macroH2A localizes to this structure, which can
usually be seen in the periphery near the nuclear envelope. This object is created by the expression of
the non-coding mRNA XIST (EX-ist), and is formed by a process called Lyonization. The fact that the
creation of this entity is random leads to the tortoiseshell fur color of Calico cats. For 10 points, identify this
genetic feature found only in women, an inactive X chromosome.
ANSWER: Barr Body [accept inactive X chromosome until mention, prompt on X chromosome]
This group of structures in the brain appears especially dense after a tyrosine hydroxylase stain, due to high
levels of a certain neurotransmitter and one of its subdivisions is responsible for the organization of posture.
Damage to certain parts of it contribute to Huntington's disease, and a loss of pigmented neurons of the
substantia nigra, an accessory to this structure, is characteristic of Parkinson's disease. Its subdivisions
include the subthalamic nucleus, caudate nucleus, putamen, and globus pallidus. For 10 points, identify this
system of neural nuclei crucial for fine motor control, one of the major sites of dopamine production.
ANSWER: basal ganglia [also accept basal nuclei]
Some of these creatures have modified TRPV1 receptors on their noses to detect body heat, and a fungal
growth on these creatures called "white nose syndrome" has killed millions of them. These animals of
order Chiroptera have a cartilage flap called the tragus in front of their large ears, which helps them
determine the source of high-frequency ultrasound calls. For 10 points, name these mammals which roost
upside down, fly, and use echolocation, and include the blood-regurgitating "vampire" type.
ANSWER: bats [or Chiroptera before read]
These organisms collect gametes with scopa and use propolis as a building material. These organisms use
the round dance and waggle dance to convey information about food sources. These eusocial organisms
mate only once in their life. These insects can be raised in apiaries and swarm when their nests are
destroyed which can happen through colony collapse. These pollinators include workers and drones to feed
the pupae and mate with the queen. For 10 points, name these busy insects that collect pollen and make
honey.
ANSWER: bees
One method of communication employed by these animals involves the secretion of tricosane and
pentacosane and an ambulatory pattern in which they run forward and half-circle back, repeating in
alternating directions. One mysterious condition that affects these arthropods might be caused by the
Nosema fungus, or Varroa mites, or neonicotinoid pesticides. Some of these organisms are "Africanized",
making them very aggressive. These hymenopterans, which are raised in apiaries, communicate using the
waggle dance, and suffer from colony collapse disorder. For 10 points, name these honey-producing insects
that are much less nasty than wasps.
ANSWER: bees [or Anthophila; accept honeybees; do not accept "wasps" or "hornets" at any point]
Cells designated by this letter secrete amylin. Carbohydrates designated by this have the anomeric hydroxyl
group on the same side as the CH2OH group. Propanolol and metoprolol affect adrenergic receptors
designated by this letter, blocking the action of epinephrine. Brain waves described by this letter
characterize full consciousness, and cellulose forms this type of glycosidic linkage. Parallel amino acid
strands form hydrogen bonds in a secondary structure named for this letter, the pleated sheet. The Islets of
Langerhans mostly consist of insulin-secreting cells named for this Greek letter. For 10 points, name this
letter designating animals a step below the "alpha male."
ANSWER: beta
The nine types of these are classified according to the phi and psi angles of their L1 and L2 components.
According to the Chou-Fasman parameters, asparagine and glycine are the most common residues found in
these, likely due to their natural left-handedness and glycine's small side chain, which allows it to freely
rotate. For a group of four residues, this exists if the distance between the C-alpha atom of the first residue
and of the fourth is less than seven angstroms and if the second and third residues are not helical. For 10
points, what is this biochemical structure that commonly forms a hairpin with two antiparallel beta sheets
and gives proteins their globularity?
ANSWER: beta turn
The most effective of these compounds have a low Cohen's parameter and high Woodward's
parameter. These compounds are synthesized in vivo in a pathway beginning with ACV synthetase,
which makes a tripeptide that isomerizes. Enzymes like NDM-1 and TEM-1 break down these
compounds; those enzymes are inhibited by tazobactam and clavulanic acid. These compounds
operate by acylating serine-403 of DD-transpeptidases that crosslink D-(*) alanine residues. These
compounds include the carbapenems, monobactams, and cephalosporins, and work by inhibiting the
synthesis of peptidoglycan. The first of these compounds was originally discovered accidentally in a
fungally-contaminated bacterial culture by Alexander Fleming. For 10 points, name this class of antibiotics
that includes penicillin, named for a certain four-membered ring.
ANSWER: beta-lactams [prompt on "penicillins" or "monobactams" or "carbapenems" or "cephalosporins" or "antibiotics"]
A cascade of nuclear receptors including FXR, SHP-1, and LRH-1 represses its synthesis, and a Vitamin D
receptor is thought to sense its presence in the intestines. In phagocytes such as Kuppfer cells, this
substance secreted by the cannalculi is responsible for carrying a certain breakdown product. The hormone
cholecystokinin causes delivery of this liquid. Cholesterol derivatives like chenodeoxycholic acid combine
with glycine or taurine to form the acids in this fluid. FTP, name this mixture stored and concentrated in the
gallbladder, which aids in the digestion of fats.
ANSWER: Bile (prompt on early gall)
This substance is transported by a heterodimer of OST-alpha and OST-beta, and by NTCP and
MRP2. One component of this substance is synthesized by 7-alpha hydroxylase and is conjugated to
glycine or taurine. Cholestyramine is used to sequester one component of this substance, which is
required to absorb vitamins A, D, E, and K. The vessels that carry this substance produce by
gamma-glutamyl transferase and alkaline phosphatase; those vessels are called canaliculli. This
substance contains degraded porphyrin, and it is secreted into the (*) intestines in order to emulsify fat
droplets. This substance is produced in the liver and stored in the gallbladder. For 10 points, name this
yellow substance which contains bilirubin, important in digestion.
ANSWER: bile
Testing this substance for vascular endothelial growth factor can be used to detect cancer. Along
with many enzymes, the sphincter of Oddi allows this substance to travel through the ampulla of
Vater. This substance is used to remove another substance often responsible for jaundice in infants.
Taurocholic and glycocholic [GLY-koh-KAH-lik] acids are major components of the acids, or salts,
in this substance and are used to remove cholesterol from the body. This substance is secreted by
hepatocytes in the liver and released into the duodenum of the small intestine from the gallbladder.
Name this substance that digests fats and can be dark yellow or green.
ANSWER: bile
CCK and VIP mediate the release of this substance through the ampulla of Vater. Along with cholic acid,
taurocholic acid, and deoxycholic acid, this substance also contains a byproduct of hemoglobin breakdown.
Lack of this substance in the body can lead to deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins. Released via a namesake
duct into the duodenum, it is responsible for the brown color of feces. It is a bitter, green fluid whose main
function is to emulsify fats for digestion. For 10 points, name this substance produced by the liver and
stored in the gallbladder.
ANSWER: bile [prompt on "gall" until "gallbladder" is read]
Sulfonamides given to neonates compete with it for binding to albumin, which itself keeps this
compound from passing through the blood-brain barrier and causing kernicterus. The Van den
Bergh reaction has been used to quantify this compound, which is conjugated by UGT1A1 to become
water-soluble. (*) Newborns naturally have more of this because in utero red blood cells have a shorter
lifetime than in adults. The product of heme catabolism, it is commonly implicated in the discoloration
associated with jaundice. For 10 points, name this yellow pigment found in the liver, a major product of
bile.
ANSWER: bilirubin
One disorder that causes increased levels of this compound results from a mutation in the cMOAT gene,
while another is caused by mutations leading to decreased UGT1. Besides Dubin-Johnson, Gilbert, and
Rotor's syndrome, inactivating mutations in UDP glucoronosyltransferase lead to accumulation of the
unconjugated form of this substance in Crigler-Najjar syndrome. Lab tests usually measure both the direct
and indirect versions of this open-chain polypyrrole. Exposing this substance to light transforms it from the
ZZ to EE isomer, which is why ultraviolet light is a treatment for the accumulation of this substance in
newborns. For 10 points, name this product of heme metabolism, which when elevated causes jaundice.
ANSWER: bilirubin [or conjugated, unconjugated, direct or indirect bilirubin]
A gradient in MinCD complex concentration ensures that this process begins correctly, while a fifty-five
carbon alcohol is required to prevent autolysis near the end of this process. This process begins as ZipA
anchors a polymerized form of FtsZ to form the Z ring. Cephalosporins and beta-lactams work by inhibiting
PBPs, proteins that facilitate peptidoglycan cross-linking to form cell walls at the end of this process.
Unlike a similar process in eukaryotes, it does not require a spindle, and steps prior to this process include
cell elongation and replication of circular DNA. For 10 points, name this common mode of bacterial
replication, in which a cell simply splits in half.
ANSWER: binary fission [or prokaryotic cell division; or bacterial cell division; prompt on cell division by itself; do not accept "mitosis"]
During this process, the protein FtsZ ("F T S Z") forms a ring like structure in the center of the cell. FtsZ
is the foundation of the septal ring which mediates cell division in this process and assembles the septum.
The last step of this process sees the completion of the cross-wall. Before this process occurs, the cell must
copy its genetic material and segregate it at opposite ends of the cell. For 10 points, name this form of
asexual reproduction by which prokaryotes split to create two identical copies of themselves.
ANSWER: binary fission
This property is the subject of a set of three metrics proposed by R.H. Whittaker, the second of
which expresses the difference in composition of two distinct sites within the area being studied. The
generation of this phenomenon is the subject of the Janzen-Connell hypothesis, which explains it in
terms of negative density dependence due to pathogen specificity. For a forest, this property is
predicted to be highest when (*) disturbances are neither too rare nor too common. This property is
measured by an index named for Shannon and Wiener, and the IUCN's Red List indicates threats to this
property. For 10 points, identify this property that is generally described by the number of genera or species
growing in a given area, which decreases with the extinctions of species.
ANSWER: biodiversity [accept answers like "the number of species" before the giveaway]
In one species, this phenomenon is controlled by an operon [AH-pur-ahn] that relies on quorum
sensing, and thus only activates when population density is high. One organ that displays this
phenomenon, the esca, is found at the end of another organ that resembles a fishing rod and is
called the illicium [ih-LIH-see-um]. In bacteria such as Vibrio fischeri [vih-BREE-oh fih-"SHARE"-ee],
this process tends to be controlled by the Lux operon, and occurs via the reaction of a flavin
mononucleotide. This process occurs when luciferins are excited by luciferases, and is seen in angler
fish and fireflies. Name this phenomenon in which an organism emits light.
ANSWER: bioluminescence [accept word forms; prompt on answers describing the emission of light]
This phenomenon occurs in an organ called the esca, which protrudes dorsally from the spine via the
illicium in species like O. acanthias, and is believed to contain bacteria of family Vibrionaceae.
Coelenterazine is a substrate in one reaction that causes this phenomenon; that reaction, occurring in
Renilla, is often leveraged in an imaging technique called (*) BRET. In another organism, this
phenomenon is the product of an operon whose Y subunits encode YFP; in that organism, A. fischeri, the
lux operon's A and B subunits encode a luciferase, which catalyzes the oxidation of a luciferin into an
electronically-excited state, from which the luciferin then decays. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in
which a living organism emits light, observed in anglerfish and fireflies.
ANSWER: bioluminescence (accept chemiluminescence; prompt on "fluorescence")
This phenomenon is responsible for the so-called "milky sea" phenomenon whose origin was nearlycorrectly hypothesized in Jules Verne's 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea. Although this phenomenon is
not known to occur in Pleurobrachia, it does occur in most other members of Phylum Ctenophora.
This process is catalyzed by a luciferase, which oxidizes a luciferin to produce the namesake substance.
Though it is not fluorescence, it can occur with the aequorin-GFP complex. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon used by anglerfish and fireflies, the process of using biochemical reactions to produce light.
ANSWER: bioluminescence [prompt on chemiluminescence]
The most successful animal species, by this measure, is probably the Antarctic Krill, which accounts for
0.7% of the Earth's total for this measure. That estimate places them at five times the total for human
beings, but only about a quarter that of crops. In aquatic systems, primary consumers often have more of
this quantity than primary producers, because of the rapid turnover of phytoplankton. However, on land, the
slower life cycles of plants mean that pyramids organized around this quantity are always widest at the base.
FTP, name this measure from ecology, whose units are typically given in mass per unit area.
ANSWER: biomass (accept reasonable equivalents)
"Anthropogenic" examples of these classes include "wildlands" and "dense settlements," while the
endolithic one exists between pores in rock and is inhabited by extremophile bacteria. One way to define
these classes is called the Bailey system. Examples of these classes often take different names in different
places, like the Australian veldt and the African savanna. FTP, give this term for ecologically related ranges
of climate conditions, including riparian zones and taiga, as well as the dry, hot desert and the cold, dry
tundra.
ANSWER: Biomes
A commonly used scheme devised by Kuchler attempts to describe these entities according to similarities in
physiognomic cover types. A seminal paper by Ellis and Ramankutty attempts to describe "anthropogenic"
forms of these entities by incorporating information on population density and land use. Walter diagrams
describe these regions as functions of average rainfall and average temperature, while less frequently
observed ones include mangroves and chaparral. For 10 points, identify these regions which have similar
climatic conditions and vegetation, and are exemplified by tundra, taiga, and tropical forests.
ANSWER: biomes
This trait is correlated with an increase in the bicondylar angle. This adaptation is enabled by the anterior
positioning of the foramen magnum at the center of the skull's base, and the shift away from an abducted
hallux also facilitates it. The current accepted consensus is that large cranial capacity developed after this
trait, facilitated by the three major spinal curves and earliest found in genera like Ardipithecus. Evidence for
this trait in Australopithecus afarensis is provided by the Laetoli Footprints, and chimps use knucklewalking instead of this trait. Seen after babies stop crawling, this is, for 10 points, what evolutionary trait
which allows humans to stand and walk upright?
ANSWER: habitual bipedalism [or obligate bipedalism; or bipedality; or being a biped; or walking on two legs; accept equivalents; accept walking upright until mentioned; prompt on "walking" until "walk"]
An example of this class was discovered in China in 1993 and classified as the genus Confuciusornis [kunFYOOshus-OR-niss], while an early example in the Americas was the Phorusrhacos [for-us-RAH-kos],
which is similar to but larger than modern-day seriemas [sair-ee-AY-mahz]. Jacques Gauthier [goh-tee-ay]
claims that this class of animals descended from theropods. These vertebrates have a synsacrum [sinSAAK-rum] instead of a pelvis, and their constant-volume lungs are supplemented by anterior and posterior
air sacs. The earliest known example is the Archaeopteryx [ar-kee-AHP-tur-iks], which like modern
examples contained a furcula, or wishbone. Name these animals that include passerines, sandgrouse, loons,
cranes, and storks.
ANSWER: birds [or Aves]
These animals have a vocal organ called the syrinx, and their lymphatic system includes the Bursa of
Fabricus. Another important part of their bodies comes in pennaceous and down varieties. Discovered in
Solnhofen, Germany, the extinct Archaeopteryx is believed to be the most primitive species of these due to
the fact that it had feathers. For 10 points, name this modern class of vertebrates, examples of which include
the flightless emu and flying eagles.
ANSWER: birds [accept Aves]
The robust nucleus of the arcopallium in adults of this class was used to show that adult
vertebrates could grow new neurons. Animals in this class have a sternal keel and a fused clavicle
called a furcula. Modern members of this class are divided into Palaeognathae and Neognatha.
Organs found in this class include the syrinx and the (*) gizzard. The earliest example of this class is
Archaeopteryx. For 10 points, name this class of vertebrates that save for a few notable exceptions like the
cassowary, are capable of flight.
ANSWER: birds [or aves]
Some members of this class remain stationary with the help of byssal threads. The species Crassostrea
gigas in this class introduced the parasite MSX to a closely related species. When this class of animals first
evolved, they outcompeted and almost entirely replaced a phylum of similar-looking animals called
brachiopods. These animals often feed by using elongated siphons to filter water. These animals have an
open circulatory system with hemolymph, and like other members of their phylum they move using a single
fleshy foot. Unique parts of their anatomy include a hinge, and they are bilaterally symmetrical. For 10
points, name this class of mollusks with two shells, which includes clams and oysters.
ANSWER: bivalves [or bivalva; or pelecypoda; prompt on "mollusks" or "mollusca"]
Homogentisic acid has this color, which is why people with alkaptonuria have urine of this color. One
substance that is this color is the product of the oxidation of tyrosine derivatives. This is the color of the
dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain that are degraded in Parkinson's disease; those neurons comprise the
substantia nigra. For 10 points, name this color, which is possessed by melanin and by tissue that has died
through necrosis.
ANSWER: black [or brown]
The wall of this structure contains the trigone, and consists of layers of detrusor muscle external to a
transitional epithelium layer, which ranges from two to five cells thick. This structure, which is posterior to
the symphysis pubis, receives fluid from the ureters. An internal sphincter unique to males prevents semen
from entering it. At high pressures, fluid flows out of this structure through the urethra. For 10 points, name
this hollow container that stores urine.
ANSWER: urinary bladder
The only site in this organ where attachment of mucosa to muscle is tight is the trigone. This organ's
inflammation is known as cystitis [sis-TY-tis]. Preceded by the word "swim," it names an organ possessed
by bony fish that controls buoyancy. In men, the neck of this organ is adjacent to the prostate gland. The
detrusor muscle is located in the wall of this organ and is responsible for its emptying. Incontinence can be
caused by a disorder of this organ, which receives a waste product from the kidneys through the ureters. For
10 points, name this organ that stores urine.
ANSWER: bladder
One condition of this organ is characterized by Michaelis-Gutmann bodies and foamy histiocytes on
section; that condition is Malakoplakia. Markers of tumors of this organ include NMP22 and factor
H-related protein, and cancer of it is caused by Schistosoma haematobium and arylamines. The
compound acrolein, a byproduct of cyclophosphamide, causes hemorrhage and cancer in this organ.
A Mitrofanoff procedure is used to bypass the function of this organ in patients in which it becomes
neurogenic. A congenital defect involving exstrophy of this organ is commonly found alongside (*)
epispadias. This organ, whose lining has transitional epithelium, contracts via the detrusor muscle. This
organ is filled by a pair of ureters, which originate from the kidney. For 10 points, name this organ, found in
the lower abdomen, that stores urine.
ANSWER: bladder
Cancers of this organ are caused by extended use of cylophosphamide and phenacetin. The mucosa
located at the base of this organ consists of a smooth triangular portion called the trigone, and its walls
consist of transitional epithelium. The walls of this organ contain the detrusor muscles. Fluid backflow in
this organ is called vesicoureteral reflux. This organ is located above the prostate. For 10 points, name this
organ that collects urine excreted by the kidneys.
ANSWER: urinary bladder
The "chordin" and "noggin" expressing centers in this structure contain cells which are precursors
to Spemann's organizer cells, and the motility of cells during this stage may be classified as cavitation
or ingression. Newport and Kirschner described a "transition" that occurs at the middle of this stage
where transcription of zygotic genome begins and the cell cycle lengthens. The transition to its subsequent
stage involves the formation of the endoderm, ectoderm, and mesoderm, and it sees a layer of cells forming
a hollow sphere which encloses fluid called the blastocoel. For 10 points, identify this stage of development
which precedes the gastrula.
ANSWER: blastula
People who falsely deny that they are suffering from this condition have a form of anosognosia called
Anton-Babinski syndrome. This condition is generally the ultimate outcome of Stargardt disease. It
can result from infection by the nematode Onchocerca volvulus. It can result from serious cases of
ROP, a disease which affects premature babies. When it occurs transiently, it is sometimes known as
amaurosis fugax. Its leading infectious cause, which is transmitted by a bacterium of the genus (*)
Chlamydia, is known as trachoma. One disease which can cause this condition results from the buildup of
drusen and is not beriberi, but comes in "wet" and "dry" forms; that disease is macular degeneration. For 10
points, name this condition which can be caused by glaucoma or cataracts, in which vision is lost.
ANSWER: blindness [accept vision loss before mentioned]
In one infection, this condition is triggered by an inflammatory response to Wolbachia pipentis, which is
carried by Onchocerca volvulus. Anton's syndrome is a phenomenon in which patients refuse to believe
they have this condition after brain damage. A transient form of this condition is called amarosis fugax,
which is caused by transient ischemic attacks. Mutations in complex I of the electron transport chain cause
this condition in a mitochondrially inherited syndrome named for Leber. Another infectious cause of it is
caused by C. trachomatis, a subspecies of chlamydia, in infants. Most instances of this condition are caused
by glaucoma or cataracts. For 10 points, name this condition in which patients are unable to see.
ANSWER: blindness [or equivalents; accept anything involving the optic nerve, eye, lens, or retina being damaged]
One cause of this condition is hypoplasia of a certain nerve that leads to the organ involved. This
condition can result from the "open angle" or "closed angle" form of glaucoma or from the clouding of
cataracts. Sufferers of this condition possess acuity of 20/200 or worse. For 10 points, identify this medical
condition that results in people using white canes, guide dogs, and Braille.
ANSWER: blindness
Charles Drew developed an early method of storing this biological substance, and William Harvey
outlined the path of its transport throughout the human body. Karl Landsteiner developed the current
classification system for this substance, one type of whose cells can contain the Rh factor. That system
takes into account the presence of absence of two kinds of antigens and is called the ABO system. For the
point, name this substance transported by veins and arteries.
ANSWER: blood [accept blood banks before the first instance of "substance"]
Variations of this substance are created when different macromolecules bind to H antigen, the lack of
which is known as the Bombay phenotype. One type of cell comprising this substance differentiates into
types like neutrophil and eosinophil cells. This substance is also comprised of cells called thrombocytes,
which facilitate coagulation. For 10 points, name this bodily fluid comprised of white cells, red cells, and
platelets.
ANSWER: human blood
In medicine, Korotkoff sounds are used to guide the procedure for measuring this quantity, which is
increased by aldosterone and decreased by nitric oxide. Poiseuille's Law can be used to model this
quantity, and ACE inhibitors are commonly prescribed to decrease this value. The body detects this
quantity with baroreceptors in the carotid sinuses and aortic arch, and it is measured using a
sphygmomanometer. For 10 points, name this quantity, a ratio of systolic and diastolic values
representing the force circulating blood exerts on vessel walls.
ANSWER: blood pressure
This value can be increased by taking midodrine [MIH-doe-dreen] or by the release of aldosterones
[al-doe-STEHR-ones], and both fluid balance and this value are regulated by the renin-angiotensin [reh-nin
an-jee-oe-TEN-sin] system. If this value is low, the result is low perfusion, a symptom of shock. If this
value is high, the person is at risk for a stroke. Two numbers are found when this is measured. This value is
measured with a sphygmomanometer [sfig-moe-ma-NAH-mee-ter], which usually includes a cuff that goes
around the arm. Name this quantity that has systolic and diastolic values.
ANSWER: blood pressure
A so-called "antagonist" to a substance that increases this measure can be called a sartan or an ARB.
One mechanism by which this measure is controlled relies on the release of the enzyme renin and the
removal of amino acid residues from angiotensin I, preventing conversion into angiotensin II by the
ACE inhibitor. When measuring it with a (*) sphygmometer, an optimum reading of the systolic to
diastolic is "120 over 80." For ten points, name this measure which when too high is referred to as
hypertension.
ANSWER: blood pressure
Phosphomolybdic acid is used in the colorimetric Folin-Wu method to measure this quantity. A
low value for this measurement is diagnosed by Whipple's triad. Sulfonylurea-based pharmaceuticals
are designed to lower this value. Amylin regulates this quantity in the body. The C-peptide test
diagnoses why this quantity would be higher than normal. An HbA1C test indicates how this value
has changed over prolonged intervals. A high value for this measurement exacerbates symptoms of
(*) ketoacidosis. This quantity is usually higher in postprandial tests because the body is in the "fed", not
the "fasting state". Beta cells in the islets of Langherans secrete insulin when this quantity is high. For 10
points, name this measurement which is elevated in hyperglycemia.
ANSWER: blood sugar level [or blood glucose level; or blood sugar concentration; or same-knowledge equivalents]
When this classification is different for a fetus and its mother, HDN can occur, and must be treated with
Rho(D) immune globulin. This classification system is determined by whether A or B antigens are present;
if both are not, the person in question is an "O." For 10 points, name this classification system that governs
which donors provide fluids for transfusion.
ANSWER: blood type [or blood group; prompt on blood]
The XK gene determines one of these named after Kell. They are defined by how glycosyl-transferases
modify substance H, and they are tested for in the Coombs test. Their incompatibilities can cause
alloimmunity in erythro-blastosis fetalis. The gene coding for these traits has many allelic forms at the I
locus, making these an example of co-dominant inheritance. Cross-matching of these traits is performed by
adding an antibody serum and checking for agglutination. Also classified as Rh+ or Rh-, for 10 points,
name this trait classified as A, B, AB, or O.
ANSWER: blood types or blood groups [prompt on red blood cell antigens, or blood serum antibodies]
A 2007 study found that a bacterial glycosidase could remove the surface antigens used in this
classification scheme. This classification scheme is often appended with a plus or minus indicating the
presence or absence of a protein first discovered in the rhesus monkey. This classification scheme was
invented by Karl Landsteiner, who explained why some blood transfusions failed. For 10 points, name this
classification scheme in which a person is classified as A, B, AB, or O.
ANSWER: ABO blood groups [or blood types]
The gene ART4 codes a protein for one of these, while genes on chromosome 6 code for the Ii
system, a rare version. In addition to the Dombrock and Knops types of them, the Xk version is
encountered in chickens, and proteins for the Diego system are notably found in East Asian peoples. A
test for the best known system for them also detects the Rhesus factor; that system uses IA and IB as
alleles. For 10 points, name these systems, the most common of which yields A, B, AB, and O varieties.
ANSWER: blood type systems [or blood groups]
These structures are lined by the tunica intima, tunica media, and tunica adventitia. The tunica media
contains a circular layer of smooth muscle cells that contract and relax in vasoconstriction and
vasodilation, respectively. One subset of these structures is inflamed in phlebitis and contains valves
that fail to function in their "varicose" variety, while a second subset includes the aorta. For 10 points,
name these structures through which blood flows, which include capillaries, arteries, and veins.
ANSWER: blood vessels [prompt on veins; prompt on arteries]
These structures are composed of a basement membrane surrounded by the tunica intima, tunica
media, and tunica adventitia. These structures are formed from existing ones through angiogenesis.
In the liver, small ones called sinusoids are home to macrophages called Kupffer cells. (*) Vasopressin
causes these structures to constrict, and the lining of one type of them hardens in atherosclerosis. Another
type contains valves to prevent backflow and appears blue due to light scattering as it passes through the
skin. For ten points, name these structures exemplified by capillaries, veins, and arteries.
ANSWER: blood vessels (accept specific types like artery, veins, or capillaries before mentioned)
These feature a stratum called acrotelm over a layer called catotelm. Phosphates are bound by calcium, iron
and humus, which along with dissolved manganese, sulfur, and iron ions render these areas nutrient-poor
and inhospitable to plant life. Schwingmoor types are made up of a floating mat of organic material which,
because of the lack of oxygen, is unable to decompose fully, while the blanket variety holds that material
above ground and exists in flat areas in oceanic climates with high humidity. The high acidity requires
specialization of flora, including tyrphobionts such as sphagnum mosses. For 10 points, name these areas
where poor drainage causes accumulation of organic material, forming peat.
ANSWER: peat bogs [peat mires]
Wolff's Law governs the circumstances that cause density of this tissue to increase or decrease.
Precursors to this tissue are generated at the epiphyseal (EPP-ih-FIZZ-ee-uhl) plate. Since estrogen causes
cells that resorb this tissue to undergo apoptosis, this tissue becomes noticeably weaker in post-menopausal
(men-oh-"PAWS"-uhl) women. Blood is supplied to this tissue through Haversian (huh-VER-zee-uhn)
canals, and the hydroxyapatite ("high"-DROX-ee-APP-uh-tite) in this tissue's matrix is a major site of
calcium storage. For 10 points, name this tissue that comprises the majority of the skeleton.
ANSWER: bone
Cortical and cancellous tissues compose these organs, and the fusion of their epiphysis and diaphysis
signals the end of growth in humans. Haversian canals perforate the compact form of them, and they contain
large amounts of hydroxylapatite. Their tissue is produced by osteoblasts and strengthened by the
consumption of calcium. For 10 points, name these marrow-containing supportive organs of the skeletal
system, of which the adult body contains 206.
ANSWER: bone [accept osseous tissue before "these organs;" prompt afterwards]
Maffucci syndrome is characterized by the formation of benign tumors in these tissues known as
enchondromas. Ewing's Sarcoma affects these tissues, whose cells express high amounts of the enzyme
cathepsin K. A modified form of hydroxyapatite is found in these tissues, which contain Howship's lacunae.
Hematopoiesis occurs in these organs, which is targeted by parathyroid hormone. Vitamin D deficiency
lowers mineral content in this tissue, causing rickets. Its resorption is controlled by osteoclasts. A common
treatment for lymphoma is a transplant of its namesake marrow. For ten points, identify these rigid, hard
organs, examples of which include the sternum and femur.
ANSWER: bone (accept bone marrow before "Ewing's Sarcoma" and prompt on it thereafter)
The proteins noggin and chordin inhibit a "morphogenic protein" named after this substance. When this
substance is formed, younger cells gather along its epiphysis while older cells occupy the diaphysis in the
middle. The two types of tissue found in these substances include the "cancellous" type, which is spongy,
and the more rigid "compact" type. The interior of these substances contain Haversian canals. Certain
"clasts" break down this substance and certain "blasts" promote their formation. These substances serve as
reserves for calcium in the body and gradually replace cartilage. For 10 points, name these component parts
of mammalian endoskeletons.
ANSWER: bones
Wolff's Law governs the circumstances that cause density of this tissue to increase or decrease. Precursors
to this tissue are generated at the epiphyseal (EPP-ih-FIZZ-ee-uhl) plate. Since estrogen causes cells that
resorb this tissue to undergo apoptosis, this tissue becomes noticeably weaker in post-menopausal
(men-oh-"PAWS"-uhl) women. Blood is supplied to this tissue through Haversian (huh-VER-zee-uhn)
canals, and the hydroxyapatite ("high"-DROX-ee-APP-uh-tite) in this tissue's matrix is a major site of
calcium storage. For 10 points, name this tissue that comprises the majority of the skeleton.
ANSWER: bone
Noggin inhibits a protein that creates this tissue, which contains porous networks called trabeculae.
Volkmann's and Haversian canals perforate this tissue, which is partly composed of inorganic
hydroxyapatite and it contains a medullary cavity that is the primary site of hematopoiesis. Growth
generally occurs in children at the epiphyseal plates present in this tissue. This tissue becomes weakened by
low estrogen levels and during vitamin D deficiency. For 10 points, name this tissue created by osteoblasts
that comprises the skeletal system.
ANSWER: bone
Transverse structures in this tissue are called Volkmann's canals, and this tissue is classified as either
trabecular or cortical. "Morphogenic proteins" of this tissue were discovered by Urist and belong to the
TGF-beta superfamily. Caneliculi, which are separated by lamelle, are concentric rings that form around
central Haversian canals in this tissue. Some structures composed of this tissue are made up of epiphysis on
both ends and diaphysis in the central region. Resorption of this tissue to allow for the passage of blood
vessels is performed by osteoclasts, and osteoblasts generate this type of tissue. For 10 points, name this
tissue that makes up structures such as the femur.
ANSWER: bone tissue or osseus tissue
This tissue is weakened in a condition that presents Harrison's groove, and parathyroid hormone promotes
its resorption. Perforated by Volkmann's and Haversian canals, this tissue's inorganic component is in the
form of hydroxyapatite. Generally forming structures with a thinner diaphysis and wider epiphysis, this
tissue is weakened by the vitamin D deficiency rickets and another resulting from low alpha-estrogen levels.
For 10 points, name this calcium-rich tissue created by osteoblasts and destroyed by osteoclasts that makes
up the skeletal system.
ANSWER: bone
One tumor of this tissue is caused by an EWS to FLI1 translocation and presents with an onion skin
appearance, and tumors of this tissue often create Codman triangles. Mutations in the src kinase in mice
results in abnormally high density of this tissue. Besides Ewing's sarcoma, this tissue is usually destroyed
heavily in multiple myeloma, creating "punch-out" lesions. The cells that break down this tissue rest in
Howship's Lacunae, and Volkmann's canals run transversely through this tissue, perpendicularly to
Haversian canals. This tissue contains large amounts of hydroxyapatite, and parathyroid hormone causes its
resorption. It comes in cortical or compact and cancellous or spongy varieties, and its cells are known as
osteocytes. This tissue becomes porous in osteoporosis. For 10 points, name this white, hard,
calcium-containing tissue that composes the skeletal system.
ANSWER: Bone
The "woven" form of this tissue is less organized and weaker, while the stronger form is called "lamellar."
This tissue forms structures that are called "sesamoid" (SESS-uh-moyd) when they are embedded in
tendons. The inorganic component of this tissue consists of the mineral hydroxyapatite ("high"-DROX-eeAPP-uh-"tight"). This tissue can become porous after menopause in osteoporosis. For 10 points, name this
tissue, the component of the skeleton.
ANSWER: bone
This tissue is resorbed by cells that secrete protons at their ruffled borders in response to elevated blood
levels of PTH. One object formed from this tissue is described by the word "pisiform" and is classified as
"sesamoid". This tissue, which is primarily composed of hydroxyapatite, grows at epiphyseal plates, distal
to which is found a spongy variety of this tissue. Canaliculi house the processes of a type of cell in this
tissue that resides in lacunae; those cells are osteocytes. Inside "long" structures made from this tissue,
hematopoiesis occurs in red marrow. For 10 points, name this rigid tissue which constitutes the skeleton.
ANSWER: bone tissue [prompt on "connective (tissue)"]
One substance that promotes the growth of this material is inhibited by the NOG protein and is a
namesake "morphogenetic protein." This substance's Haversian canals contain spaces called lacunae.
This tissue contains a mixture of phosphate ions and magnesium that forms into a mineral called (*)
hydroxyapatite. One type of this tissue is less stiff than the other form and is called "spongy." The cells that
compose this tissue are called osteocytes. For ten points, name this type of tissue which is rich in calcium
and composes the skeleton.
ANSWER: Bone tissue
Sharpey's fibers adhere this tissue to its enveloping membrane. Cells located in Howship's lacunae resorb
this tissue using hydrochloric acid. The first step in repair of this tissue is the formation of a hematoma. This
tissue's breakdown is promoted by parathyroid hormone. This tissue grows at epiphyseal plates, and it
contains inorganic hydroxyapatite. The medullary cavity of long ones may contain hematopoietic tissue,
which also produces platelets. This tissue is weakened by rickets, and its mineral density is often reduced by
post-menopausal osteoporosis. For 10 points, name this tissue which usually surrounds marrow, is rich in
calcium, and makes up the skeleton.
ANSWER: bones [accept compact bone; accept cortical bone; accept long bones; accept flat bones; do not accept or prompt "bone marrow" at any point]
This tissue is weakened in a condition that presents Harrison's groove, and parathyroid hormone promotes
its resorption. Perforated by Volkmann's and Haversian canals, this tissue's inorganic component is in the
form of hydroxyapatite. Generally forming structures with a thinner diaphysis and wider epiphysis, this
tissue is weakened by the vitamin D deficiency rickets and another resulting from low alpha-estrogen levels.
For 10 points, name this calcium-rich tissue created by osteoblasts and destroyed by osteoclasts that makes
up the skeletal system.
ANSWER: bone
One type of this tissue is composed of trabeculae. Another type of this tissue includes tiny
channels called canaliculi as well as larger vertical channels called Volkmann's canals and horizontal
channels called (*) Haversian canals. This tissue occurs in spongy and compact forms. The latter type is
formed by osteoblasts, and its functional unit is the osteon. For 10 points, name this tissue that comprises
the fibula, the clavicle, and other elements of the skeletal system.
ANSWER: bone tissue [or osseous tissue; prompt on "connective" tissue]
The MEPE-ASARM peptides inhibit this process, which is upregulated by the five SIBLING proteins.
Expression of CBF-alpha-1, also known as RUNX2, is crucial for this process to occur. A namesake
sialoprotein may function as a guide for the accumulation of phosphate compounds during this process. This
process can proceed in either an intramembranous or an endochondral manner. Collagen deficiencies can
lead to a disease known as this process "imperfecta." This process requires the formation of a cartilage
layer, followed by mineralization. When the rate of resorption is faster than the rate of this process,
osteoporosis occurs. For 10 points, name this process by which structures such as the fibula and femur are
formed.
ANSWER: bone formation [or ossification; or osteogenesis; or bone morphogenesis; or dentinogenesis; or odontogenesis; or tooth development]
Fibrosis or infiltration of this tissue causes the appearance of dacrocytes, or teardrop cells.
Azathioprine and parvovirus B19 can cause a dangerous suppression of this tissue. One gigantic
type of cell found in this tissue undergoes repeated endoreplication to become 32-ploid before
fragmenting. Mesenchymal stem cells are found in this tissue, and it is commonly collected via
aspiration at the iliac crest, though that doesn't preserve its architecture. In mice, this tissue is
commonly ablated using ionizing radiation. Transplantation of this tissue can sometimes cause a
beneficial "graft-versus-tumor" phenomenon, and this tissue comes in red and yellow types. For
10 points, name this tissue located in the epiphysis, which is the source of lymphocytes and red
blood cells.
ANSWER: bone marrow
This organism comes in varieties A through G, and often first affects the cranial nerves before leading to
respiratory failure. It blocks acetylcholine (uh-see-tul-KOH-leen), paralyzing muscles, often first hitting
those in the eyelid. Named after the food it often contaminated, it is the reason infants should not be fed
honey. In 1980, its first clinical use was for strabismus, though it has more recently found wider use in
cosmetic surgery. The most lethal neurotoxin known to man, with an LD-50 around one microgram, name
this bacterial toxin found in poorly-stored food.
ANSWER: Clostridium botulinum [accept botulism; prompt on Botox]
The C2 form of this protein ADP-ribosylates actin in addition to its more well-known function,
and this substance is used to treat spasmodic torticollis. This substance was first used medically to
treat blepharospasm and strabismus. This substance includes both a non-hemaglutinin and
hemaglutinin component, and its main body is encoded by a cluster of BONT genes. This substance,
which cleaves the SNAP-25 component of the SNARE complex, leads to an inhibition of (*)
acetylcholine release. This substance, which like tetanus toxin is produced by a bacterium of the
Clostridium genus, causes paralysis by inhibiting nerve transmission. For 10 points, name this neurotoxin, a
purified version of which is used to remove skin wrinkles.
ANSWER: botulinum toxin [or botox]
The United States discovered that donkeys are immune to this disease after unsuccessfully trying to
infect them with it during WWII. One form of the toxin causing this disease is used to correct
strabismus and blepharospasms. That toxin works by cleaving SNAP-25, a type of SNARE protein.
Symptoms of this disease include respiratory depression and drooping eyelids. Although not tetanus,
it is caused by a genus of Gram-positive bacteria whose other species include (*) perfringens and
difficile. This disease causes flaccid paralysis of muscles because the toxin that causes it blocks the release
of acetylcholine. That toxin, which is produced by a species of the Clostridium bacteria genus, is also called
Dysport and is often used to remove wrinkles in cosmetic surgery. Often caused by poorly canned food, this
is, for 10 points, what disease caused by a bacterial toxin that is often called botox?
ANSWER: botulism
The coelomic (SEE-loh-mihk) sac, found in the coxal glands of crustaceans, is analogous to this
microscopic structure in mammals. It has both vascular and urinary poles, and Bright's disease causes this
structure to become blocked with crystals and epithelial cells. Ultrafiltering podocytes in this structure can
collect solutes smaller than eight nanometers, explaining the high concentration of salt and sugar in its
lumen. The proximal tubule links this structure to the loop of Henle and it forms the renal corpuscle
together with the structure it surrounds, the glomerulus. Named for a nineteenth-century anatomist, identify
this cup-like component of the nephron that first collects the blood filtrate during urine production.
ANSWER: Bowman's capsule [accept capsula glomeruli or glomerular capsule before "glomerulus"]
In this organ, the reticular activating system and the suprachiasmatic nuclei assist with sleep. It was
divided into 52 regions by Brodmann, and it also contains Wernicke's area and Broca's area.
Granule cells and Purkinje cells are located in a structure in this organ, which lies behind the pons
and above the (*) medulla oblongata. The amygdala is located in this structure and is part of the limbic
system, which also includes the hippocampus. This organ includes a portion involved in motor control
called the cerebellum. For 10 points, name this organ that is primarily composed of glial cells and neurons.
ANSWER: brain [accept brain stem or medulla oblongata before "suprachiasmatic nuclei"]
The outermost "marginal zone" of this organ contains the reelin-producing Cajal-Retzius cells. The central
sulcus in this organ is known as the fissure of Rolando. This organ is surrounded by the pia mater, a delicate
membrane that is the innermost of the three meninges that surround it. Areas named for Wernicke and
Broca are found in this organ, which also contains an almond-shaped area that is involved in fear
conditioning. For 10 points, the corpus callosum connects the two halves of what organ that contains the
amygdala, cerebrum, and cerebellum?
ANSWER: brain [prompt on cerebral cortex]
This organ contains the caudate [CAW-date] nucleus, internal capsule, and putamen [PYOO-tuh-men]. The
region that contains those sections includes cells classified as medium spiny, which impact movement. This
also includes the entorhinal [en-toh-RYE-nul] cortex, which is connected to a component containing
Ammon's horn and the dentate gyrus [JYE-rus]. That region, which is shaped like a seahorse, is the
hippocampus. This organ also contains the amygdala [uh-MIG-duh-luh] and cerebral cortex. Name this
organ that regulates the nervous system and is located in your head.
ANSWER: brain
When FGF is absent and BMP4 is inhibited, the precursors to this organ begin development. A layer of
endothelial (en-doh-THEE-lee-uhl) cells in this organ form a "barrier" with the blood. This organ forms
after a plate and groove become a crest, then a tube. One cell type in this organ stops production after birth,
in contrast with the glial cells. The corpus callosum acts as a bridge between different parts of this organ.
This organ and the spinal cord form the central nervous system. For 10 points, name this organ found inside
the cranium.
ANSWER: brain
This organ has been studied in the Aplysia genus of slugs by Eric Kandel. It is home to the
suprachiasmatic (SOOP-ruhk-eye-as-MAT-ic) nucleus. It was divided into fifty-two regions by Korbinian
Brodmann, and other regions of this organ include Wernicke's (VERN-ick-eez) area and Broca's area. It is
surrounded by three membranes collectively known as the meninges (men-IN-jeez), and its stem is home to
the pons and the medulla oblongata. For 10 points, name this organ which contains the temporal and frontal
lobes.
ANSWER: brain
Fatal familial insomnia and Creutzfeldt-Jakob [KROITS-felt YA-kob] disease both cause a breakdown
of tissue in this organ. The blood supply to this organ forms the Circle of Willis at its base, and astrocytes
and oligodendrocytes [oh-lig-oh-DEN-dro-sites] are found here. A type of cell in this organ contains long
projections with spaces in a fatty sheath called Nodes of Ranvier. This organ has frontal, parietal, occipital,
and temporal lobes. For 10 points, name this organ found in the skull.
ANSWER: brain
Two portions of this organ's superior temporal gyrus are named for Brodmann and for Wernicke
(VER-nick-ee). One par of this organ, the substantia nigra, produces dopamine; that part is part of the basal
ganglia, like its striatum. Those components are implicated in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease.
The lobes of one part of this organ include the occipital and parietal, and this organ includes a portion
involved in motor control called the cerebellum. For 10 points, name this central organ of the nervous
system, contained in the cranium.
ANSWER: brain
One structure located in this organ is divided into sections called the lentiform nucleus and the claustrum.
One section of this organ has some of its parts separated by structures such as the longitudinal fissure and
the central and lateral sulcus. That section of this organ contains the previously mentioned basal ganglia and
has increased surface area due to convolutions. Two other sections of this organ are internally connected by
the corpus callosum. This organ's various functions are split up and performed by separate structures such
as the temporal and parietal lobes. Containing the cerebrum, for 10 points, name this organ located inside
the skull.
ANSWER: brain
This organ includes the fornix (FOR-nix) and mammillary (MAM-uh-LAIR-ee) region in the
hypothalamus (HIGH-po-THAL-uh-mus). The amygdala (uh-MIG-duh-luh) is part of this organ's limbic
system. The pons connects the medulla oblongata (meh-DOO-luh obb-lon-GOT-uh) to the rest of this
organ.
In humans, the largest part of this organ is the cerebral cortex. For 10 points, name this organ housed inside
the cranium that controls the nervous system.
ANSWER: brain
One drug regimen often prescribed to combat this condition is known as CA and consists of
cyclophosphamide and adriamycin. When this condition presents with an overexpression of HER2/neu,
monoclonal antibodies may be used for treatment. Though not found in bones, Paget's disease may be a
symptom of this condition. This condition is linked to expression of the BCRA genes, and advanced cases
may require a mastectomy. For 10 points, name this malignant neoplasm that is detected via regular
mammograms.
ANSWER: breast cancer [prompt on cancer; or malignant breast neoplasm]
Paget's disease is symptomatic of this other disease. Digital tomosynthesis improves the current method of
detecting this disease, which has a 10% false negative rate. A common sign of this disease is overactive Neu
protein, also known as HER2, which is an EGF receptor. Familial mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 result in
a greater susceptibility to this disease. The method for detecting this disease scans for microcalcifications
and can also detect ductal carcinoma in situ, and is recommended for women over forty every two years.
For 10 points, name this disorder detected by a mammogram, a cancer most common in women.
ANSWER: breast cancer [prompt on "cancer"]
Precursors to this disease include DCIS and LCIS. The PARP inhibitor iniparib failed in a trial to
treat this disease. A particularly aggressive form of this disease results in the affected organ taking
on an "orange peel" appearance. A monoclonal antibody to HER2/neu, called Herceptin, was
originally developed to treat this disease. Genetic susceptibility to this disease is conferred by
mutations in BRCA1 and 2. This disease can be classified by its expression of ErbB-2, progesterone
(*) receptor, and estrogen receptor. It is subdivided into conditions of ductal and lobular origin. This
disease is screened for using mammograms and self-exams. For 10 points, name this type of cancer that is
usually treated with a mastectomy and radiation.
ANSWER: breast cancer [prompt on "cancer"]
In this group of organisms, Late Embryogenesis Abundant proteins are thought to play a role in
preventing damage during droughts. Members of one of its divisions use multi-cellular, branched rhizoids
as anchor. Their life cycles include a stage as protonema, a product of spore germination. Although
alternation of generation occurs, gametophytes tend to dominate sporophytes, and they require free water to
reproduce. For 10 points, name the group of non-vascular plants, which include hornworts, liverworts, and
mosses.
ANSWER: bryophytes [accept Bryophyta; prompt on mosses]
The prime example of these organisms was named by Linnaeus when he saw Laplanders using it to
caulk chimneys. The Kashyap is an endangered version of this type of organism found on muddy
slopes in India, and Asterella fall into the subgroup Marchantiophyta. That class of these organisms
is further divided into simple and complex (*) thalloids. These are the only land plants with a dominant
gametophyte, and they form root-like projections called rhizoids. They rarely grow beyond 2cm, as they
require water to sexually reproduce. Also coming in sporophyte varieties, this is, for 10 points, what oldest
group of land plants on earth which includes liverworts and mosses?
ANSWER: Bryophytes [accept liverworts until "subgroup";accept Bryophyta]
The life cycle of organisms in this group includes the calyptra phase, and the ova of these organisms are
produced in their archegoinia. These organisms have very low lignin concentrations, and some larger
members of this group have a central core of cells called hydroids that is analogous to the plant vascular
system. These organisms' life cycle is often used to demonstrate the alternation of generations, and this
division includes the genus sphagnum, which are utilized for their ability to break down organic material
into peat. For 10 points, name this plant division that includes hornworts, liverworts and mosses.
ANSWER: Bryophyta [or bryophytes; accept mosses before "hornworts"]
The male and female sexual organs of this divisions species are known as antheridia and archegonia. The
upper portion of the archegonia acts as a cap to the sporophyte, and is called calyptra. Their life cycle
begins when a protonema is produced from a haploid spore, and their water transporting tissue is called a
hydroid, as they do not possess a vascular system. For 10 points, identify this plantae division which
contains hornworts, liverworts, and mosses.
ANSWER: bryophytes
When these organisms reproduce, they form a thin structure called the protonema. These organisms can be
divided into two groups, one of which contains the antheridia and archegonia on the same body and are
referred to as monoicous. Throughout most of their life cycle these organisms exist as a haploid
gametophyte while during reproduction, the sporangium is encased in a stalk called a seta. This group,
which includes genus Marchantia, contrasts with tracheophytes in their lack of xylem and phloem. For 10
points, name this group of land plants that are non vascular and non flowering and include liverworts and
mosses.
ANSWER: Bryophytes
If left untreated, this lymph node infection spreads to a fatal septicemic [sep-tuh-SEE-mik] infection of the
blood or a pneumonic infection of the lungs. The pneumonic form is the only one that can be transmitted
human-to-human, which is rare. Named after the swellings associated with it, this disease causes skin
necrosis and gangrene, and about two-thirds of its untreated cases are fatal. The bacteria which causes it,
Yersinia pestis, is transmitted by fleas that have lived on infected rodents. Name this now very rare disease
responsible in 14th-century Europe for the Black Death.
ANSWER: bubonic plague [prompt on black plague or black death]
This animal names a short needle attached to a flexible tube and flanked by two rubber appendages. Both
Bates and Muller discovered their namesake types of mimicry while studying these animals. Their pupal
stage is known as the chrysalis. Due to their sensitivity to initial conditions, chaotic systems are said to
exhibit an effect named for them. For 10 points, identify these animals whose larval form, like moths, is the
caterpillar.
ANSWER: butterfly
Fred Nijhout described these creatures' coloration using the nymphalid ground plan. Bicyclus
anynana's pronounced seasonal polyphenism makes it a model organism of this type. In 2011,
sequencing experiments by Naomi Pierce, Kurt Johnson, et al. confirmed that the polyommatus blue
type of this creature migrated in waves from Asia into the Americas, validating a theory by amateur
scientist Vladimir (*) Nabokov. The Heliconius type of these lepidopteran insects serve as a textbook
example of Mullerian mimicry, as do the viceroy type. For 10 points, name these large-winged insects
which usually emerge from a chrysalis and include the poisonous orange monarch type.
ANSWER: butterflies [or moths until "Bicyclus" is read; prompt "Lepidopter" or "Lepidoptera" until read]
A hemoglobin known by this letter replaces lysine with glutamate in position 6 of the beta-chain. The
enzyme that cleaves PIP2 into DAG and IP3 at the cell membrane is a phospholipase designated by this
letter. The hepatitis virus designated by this letter is transmitted by IV drug use, establishes a chronic
infection, and has no cure. The nucleotide designated with this letter is an amine-containing pyrimidine and
base pairs with guanine. For 10 points, name this letter, the symbol for carbon.
ANSWER: C
Some chenopods (KEE-no-pods) exhibit a unique mechanism for this process. This mechanism's central
reaction forms oxaloacetate (ox-AL-oh-ASS-uh-TATE) and is catalyzed by PEP carboxylase
(car-BOX-uh-laze). This mechanism uses spatial separation to prevent photoresipiration
(FO-tow-RES-pur-AY-shun), and it is often named for its discoverers, Hatch and Slack. For 10 points, name
this carbon fixation mechanism named for the additional atom in the initial fixation product.
ANSWER: C4 photosynthesis [or Hatch-Slack pathway before it is read]
In certain organisms, it occurs in the mestome sheath, and it takes place in structures that display Kranz
anatomy. PEPC carboxylates a compound derived from pyruvate to produce oxaloacetate, which is shuttled
to bundle sheath cells and transformed into either malate or aspartate. This allows for concentration of CO2
to be used by Rubisco. Sometimes named for its two discoverers, M. D. Hatch, and C.R. Slack, for 10
points, identify this process employed by maize and sugar cane plants which spatially separates CO2 and
Rubisco unlike CAM.
ANSWER: C4 fixation or photosynthesis
The pathway for this process is sometimes known as the Hatch-Slack pathway, after its Australian
discoverers. Plants which have evolved to perform this process have a distinct advantage over plants that
perform a similar process because they lose much less water through transpiration. Specifically, this
advantage involves bypassing photorespiration in order to move Carbon Dioxide directly to RuBisCo for
Carbon Fixation. Although more effective than a more familiar process, this cycle uses 30 ATP rather than
the 18 used by that pathway, a simpler precursor to CAM Photosynthesis. FTP, name this carbon fixation
cycle, which uses PEP, oxaloacetate, and a certain number of Carbons.
ANSWER: C4 Cycle Accept equivalents to cycle Accept C4 Carbon Fixation
Notably for a eukaryote, it possesses a large fraction of operon-regulated genes. With time, it shows clear
aging signs, making it an ideal candidate for longevity studies; it furthermore is useful in nicotine studies, as
it experiences withdrawal symptoms. Exactly 131 of its embryonic cells undergo apoptosis, and remaining
cells proceed through a rigid pattern of differentiation, so it is employed in developmental studies as well.
This handy model organism may be administered RNAi by feeding it transformed bacteria, and luckily, it
was the first multi-cellular eukaryote to have its genome sequenced. For 10 points, identify this
hermaphroditic nematode popular as a research model.
ANSWER: Caenorhabditis elegans
Sarin and Hobert used Illumina sequencing in these organisms instead of positional cloning to identify
mutants in a forward screen, and mutagenesis in these organisms is usually carried out by adding EMS to
their growth media. Their gonads can be microinjected in order to create knockout lines, and RNAi
constructs can be fed to these organisms via E. Coli. Its development is partly controlled by the lin-4
miRNA, and mutants include dumpy, roller, and unc. They can shift into a dormant dauer state but usually
go through the larval stages L1 through L4 before hitting maturity. Used by Horvitz to study apoptosis,
these organisms were popularized by Brenner. Occuring as only hermaphrodites or males, every cell in the
adult has been fate-mapped. For 10 points, name this common model organism, a nematode.
ANSWER: C Elegans or Caenorhabditis elegans
During early embryonic development in this organism, PAL-1 and GLD-1 are localized to the
anterior and posterior respectively. X-inactivation in this organism occurs by downregulating both X
chromosomes equally rather than inactivating one or the other. The lin-4 non-coding RNA was
originally discovered in this organism, and Andrew Fire used this organism to elucidate RNAi. In
states of crowding or starvation, this organism can go directly from stage L2 to a dauer state, and
during development this organism undergoes exactly 191 apoptotic events. The fate of every cell in this
organism has been mapped, and Sydney Brenner originally pioneered its study. This organism has
hermaphrodite and male sexes. For 10 points, name this nematode and common model organism.
ANSWER: Caenorhabditis Elegans
This organism possesses GLR cells that aid in the development of its head muscles, and daf-2
mutants of this organism are unusually long-lived. This organism unusually possesses holocentric
chromosomes, and this organism expresses the lin-4 micro RNA, which suppresses the expression of
LIN14 during development. Martin Chalfie's GFP experiments were originally done in this
organism, as were Mello and Fire's experiments on (*) RNAi. Exactly 191 cells in this organism
undergo apoptosis during its development, and this organism occurs in male and hermaphrodite sexes.
Their use was popularized by Sydney Brenner, and they were the first organism to have their genome
sequenced. For 10 points, name this model organism, a small nematode.
ANSWER: Caenorhabditis elegans [or C Elegans]
One discovery in this organism was small, non-coding regions of RNA that bind to the 3-prime
untranslated region of mRNA; that discovery was microRNA, examples of which include let-7 and
lin-4. Mutant types of this organism include roller and dumpy. Application of a form of sequencespecific gene silencing, triggered by double-stranded RNA, to this organism won Craig Mello and
Andrew Fire a Nobel. In response to harsh environmental conditions, it can undergo dauer arrest, which
bypasses the L3 stage. That gene silencing technique is RNA interference. This pseudocoelomate can only
be male or hermaphroditic, and Sydney Brenner's work popularized its use as a model organism. For 10
points, name this nematode.
ANSWER: Caenorhabditis elegans
This organism's movement is described by the pirouette model. The myosin protein NMY-2 helps
establish developmental asymmetry in this organism. Tra-1 is a key controller of its sex
determination. Flattened branched cilia enclosed by an amphid shealth cell are characteristic of its
AWA, AWB, and AWC neurons. Its traditional "wild type" strain is N2. Their lifecycle sometimes
includes a (*) dauer stage. RNA interference was discovered in them and these invertebrates have a body
cavity that is only partially formed by mesoderm tissue. These pseudocoelomates have 131 cells die to
apoptosis and the fates of its original 959 cells are mapped out. It was the first multicellular organism to
have its genome completely sequenced. For 10 points, name this common model organism, a small
nematode worm.
ANSWER: Caenorhabditis Elegans [accept nematodes; prompt on roundworms before mention]
Chemotaxis in these organisms is maintained by GPCRs on the cilia of neurons found in the phasmid
at the posterior and the inner labial organs or amphid at the anterior. Possessing a 302-cell nervous
system, these organisms will be used to study molecular atrophy on the International Space Station
after it was found they (*) survived the 2003 Columbia disaster. One of these was the first multi-cellular
organism to have its genome sequenced, and because this organism eats RNA readily, RNAi studies are
commonly performed on it. For 10 points, name this model organism for RNAi and apoptosis studies, a
worm-like nematode common in biology research.
ANSWER: Caenorhabditis elegans
The principle chemosensory organ of these organisms is the amphid. The first transposon found in this
organism was the founding member of the Tc1/mariner family and was found by analysis of the unc-54
gene. Two commonly studied strains of this organism are Bergerac and Bristol, and they are grown on
NGM. Due to crowding, starvation or high temperature, their development can be sidelined to the
dauer stage. This organism can be either XO or XX, corresponding to a male and self-fertilizing
hermaphrodite, respectively. Mello and Fire discovered RNA interference in this organism, and it was
also studied by Sydney Brenner. For 10 points, identify this nematode model organism, which was the
first multicellular organism to have its genome sequenced.
ANSWER: Caenorhabditis elegans [prompt on nematodes or worms]
A structure similar in shape to one named for this man was first detected with the use of a survival of motor
neuron protein antibody. A structure named for this man contains a group of guide RNAs called scaRNAs
and is labelled using p80 coilin. The Kit receptor is required for the development of cells named for this
man. He co-names a neuron found in the embryonic marginal zone which displays radial ascending
processes that contact the pial surface and a horizontal axon plexus located deep in the marginal zone; the
other namesake of those neurons is Retzius. His best known work was done with the aid of a modified
version of Golgi's black reaction. Those above cells are interstitial cells that regulate pacemake activity in
the intestinal tract. That above structure is also known as a nucleolar accessory body. For 10 points, name
this biologist who formulated the neutron doctrine, founding modern neuroscience.
ANSWER: Santiago Ramon y Cajal
This hormone is a common treatment for Paget's disease, but under ordinary circumstances, it plays a
minimal role in the homeostasis of the ion with which it is most often associated. In many animals, it is
secreted in the ultimobranchial body, but in humans it is created by the C cells of the thyroid. It promotes
the mineralization of skeletal bone and can act as a mild appetite suppressant. FTP, name this endocrine
hormone, antagonist to parathyroid hormone, that in cases of hypercalcemia is used to reduce blood calcium
levels.
ANSWER: calcitonin
In nature, this element is prevalent in gypsum and dolomite, as well as a namesake birefringent
mineral that marks the 3 on Mohs hardness scale. Its presence in biological cells can lead to the
formation of inositol tri-phosphate and di-acyl-glycerol, and its influx into axons causes release of
neuro-transmitters. It is stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells, where it aids contraction
by binding to troponin. For 10 points, name this element that needs vitamin D to be absorbed, which joins
with phosphate to form the mineral basis of bone and is symbolized Ca.
ANSWER: calcium
One method of imaging the concentration of this ion is observing the oxidation of coelenterazine in
aqueorin, and its binding to synaptotagmin causes synaptic vesicle release. Phospholamban inhibits the
SERCA pump, which helps sequester this ion into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Its binding to troponin C is
responsible for initiating muscle contraction, and this ion is responsible for activating protein kinase C. For
10 points, name this biologically important ion symbolized Ca.
ANSWER: calcium ion [or Ca2+ before mention]
If the concentration of this nutrient in the blood gets too low, one of the symptoms is tetany, which is the
involuntary contraction of muscles. The concentration of this nutrient in the blood is increased by
parathyroid hormone, and this works in alternation with potassium to control heart muscles. This nutrient's
absorption from the small intestine is increased by Vitamin D, and its carbonate is commonly used as an
antacid. Name this nutrient which prevents osteoporosis by increasing bone density and which is highly
concentrated in dairy
products.
ANSWER: Calcium (accept Ca or Ca2+)
In fertilization, the release of this ion following the fusion of the gamete membranes triggers the
cortical reaction, which blocks against polyspermy. Along with cyclic AMP, this ion is a common
secondary messenger in cells. Inositol triphosphate, or IP3, causes the release of this ion from the
smooth ER, and the release of (*) parathyroid hormone activates vitamin D, which triggers the reuptake of
this ion in the intestines. The release of this ion triggers muscle contraction, and a deficiency of it can lead
to osteoporosis. For 10 points, name this essential mineral that is stored in bones and teeth, symbolized
Ca+2.
ANSWER: calcium (accept Ca+2 before end of question)
Phorbol esters and ionophores of this element can be used to activate Protein kinase C in the absence
of any upstream signals. Levels of this element's ions are elevated when signaling by phospholipase C
results in IP3, which binds to its transporter. In the immediate aftermath of fertilization, levels of its
ions rapidly increase, which helps prevent other sperm cells binding the fertilized egg. After its levels
spike when its ions are released from the (*) sarcoplasmic reticulum, it binds troponin-C, which changes
the conformation of muscle proteins and aids in muscle contraction. For 10 points, identify this element
whose divalent cation widely functions as a second messenger in signaling.
ANSWER: calcium
Channels that permit the passage of this substance can be divided into the L type, P type, and T
type, and it can trigger its own release by binding to the ryanodine receptor. Proteins that bind to it
often have the EF-hand motif, and by binding to synaptotagmin it triggers the release of
neurotransmitters into synapses. Like DAG, this substance activates protein kinase C. It can be
released by the action of inositol triphosphate after PIP2 cleavage by (*) phospholipase C. The
sarcoplasmic reticulum stores this ion, and when it is released it binds to troponin and causes muscle
contraction. Calmodulin binds to this ion, which is absorbed in the intestine by the action of vitamin D. For
10 points, name this ion, which in humans is principally found in bones.
ANSWER: calcium ion [or Ca2+ or C-a-two-plus]
In the pituitary gland, stimulation by LHRH causes repeated spikes in the cytosolic concentration of this
ion, while the TRP channel opens in response to low levels of this ion in the endoplasmic reticulum. This
ion is necessary for the formation of tight junctions, and cell-cell adhesion is prevented in solutions
deficient in this ion, but only when expressing E-cadherin. A rise in the concentration of this ion causes
secretion of insulin, and myosin light-chain kinase is activated by a complex of four of these ions and a
certain protein. For 10 points, name this ion that binds to calmodulin and is stored in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum, best known for being the most prevalent cation in bone matrix.
ANSWER: calcium [accept Ca2+]
When it interacts with ryanodine receptors, this element upregulates its own release, and this
compound forms the cell plates of coccolithophores. Stimulation of Gq ("g-sub-q") opens a channel
that allows for this ion's movement, and proteins that bind this ion have an EF hand motif. Cellular
concentrations of this ion are regulated by IP3. Parafollicular cells of the (*) thyroid produce a
compound that reduces the concentration of this ion in blood, and its intestinal absorption requires vitamin
D. This ion interacts with Troponin to stimulate muscle contraction, and the lumens of sarcoplasmic reticula
have high concentrations of this ion. For 10 points, name this divalent cation that is stored in bones.
ANSWER: calcium
An influx of this ion is thought to trigger release of neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. This ion also
binds to troponin to allow muscle contraction, before being pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
Vitamin D increases absorption of this ion via the small intestine. In conjunction with parathyroid hormone,
Vitamin D stimulates release of both this cation and phosphate from bone, where the vast majority of it is
stored. For 10 points, name this plus two ion of element number 20, a deficiency in which is known as
hypocalcemia.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca++]
A common helix-loop-helix binding region that binds this element to various proteins is known as an
EF hand. This element often forms pentagonal bipyramidal coordination structure when bound to
oxygen. This element is involved in the fast-block to polyspermy, and the intracellular concentration
of this element increases within the egg upon fertilization. Rhyanodine receptors allow the (*) ER to
release stored concentrations of this element, which binds to troponin in order to expose the tropoymosin
complex and allow muscle contraction. Parathyroid hormone increases the blood concentration of this
hormone, while calcitonin reduces it. FTP, name this element that is used by osteoblasts to form bones.
ANSWER: calcium (also accept Ca)
Proteins characterized by a binding domain of this element are anchored to actin by catenins and are
responsible for cell-cell adhesion. This element is decreased in the body by a hormone produced in
the parafollicular cells. Cadherins act on this element, large amounts of which are present in the (*)
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Parathyroid hormone stimulates the reabsorption of this element, which is acted
upon by calmodulin. For 10 points, name this element whose two-plus ion is stored in bone, with symbol
Ca.
ANSWER: calcium
Activated phospholipase C produces diacylglycerol, which triggers the release of this element inside of the
cell, and abscisic acid triggers the influx of this element's ion from vacuoles, causing stomata to close.
Parathyroid hormone causes the increased resorption of this element's ion in the distal tubules of the kidney,
and this element's ion binds to proteins to initiate SNARE-mediated vesicle fusion in neuronal synapses.
Osteoclasts break down a tissue that stores this element, a phosphate of which is termed hydroxylapatite.
For 10 points, name this alkaline earth metal, an element with a plus-2 oxidation state that is often found in
milk and bones.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca; or calcium 2+; or Ca 2+; the relative order of the "+" and "2" does not matter]
After a sperm cell releases ions of this element, the cortical granules of the egg to fuse with the
plasma membrane and block more sperm from entering the egg. A substantial decrease in the levels
of this element's ion can cause a condition called tetany, which can be corrected by the parathyroid
hormone. (*) Hydroxylapatite is composed of phosphates and this element. Vitamin D helps facilitate the
intestinal absorption of this element, and the actions of osteoblasts and osteoclasts can change the level of
this mineral in the bloodstream. For ten points, name this alkaline earth metal responsible for the hardness
of bones and teeth.
ANSWER: calcium (accept Ca2+)
The attachment of this substance to troponin displaces tropomyosin and allows
muscle contraction to occur upon its release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. In
humans, excess parathyroid hormone secretion can elevate blood levels of ions of
this element. It also binds calmodulin, and its absorption is regulated by vitamin D.
A dietary deficiency in this substance can lead to diseases such as osteoporosis. For
10 points, name this element found in high concentrations in teeth and bones.
ANSWER: calcium
Upon fertilization, the levels of this element in the egg's cytoplasm increase, possibly due to the action
of phospholipase C. This element's cation is released in response to stimulation of the T-tubules,
and this element is released when ryanodine [ry-AA-noh-deen] receptors are activated. When blood
levels of this element are low, parathyroid hormone helps stimulate release of this element. Vitamin D
helps with absorption of this element in the small intestine, and this element's phosphate makes up
hydroxyapatite [hy-DRAHK-see-"appetite"]. Osteoclasts [AHSS-tee-oh-klasts] help increase blood levels
of this element by breaking down a certain kind of tissue. Name this element that is found in milk
and is a primary component of bone.
ANSWER: calcium [prompt on Ca]
Two binding sites for this element are found on the dockerin protein domain, and CKD-MBD occurs
when the kidneys do not maintain proper levels of phosphorus and this element in the body. Along
with diacyl-glycerol, ions of this element activate enzymes in the protein kinase C family. The
albumin protein Parvalbumin is able to bind to ions of this element because it contains (*) three helixloop-helix domains: an AB-, a CD-, and an EF-hand, which directly binds to this ion. Stimulation of the Ttubules causes the release of these ions, which bind to troponin in order to move the tropomyosin complex.
Parathyroid hormone serves to increase levels of this ion in the blood by increasing osteoclast activity. For
10 points name this ion that is necessary for the contraction of muscles and is found in your bones.
ANSWER: Calcium (accept Ca2+)
Serum levels of this element are adjusted for binding to albumin in order to detect its surplus, which can
result in a hypothermia-like Osborn wave and short QT interval. The Chvostek sign can detect tetany from
low serum levels of this element, and parafollicular cell secretions lower the blood concentration of it stored
in sarcoplasmic reticulum. When this element bonds to troponin C, present in actin-containing myofibrils,
tropomyosin is allowed to move. Increased in the blood by parathyroid hormone, this element can help
prevent osteoporosis. For 10 points, name this element whose phosphate is found in bone, an alkaline earth
metal with atomic number 20 and symbol Ca.
ANSWER: calcium [accept Ca before mention]
In plants, this element opposes the action of potassium to close stomata while in the body, the
sarcoplasmic reticulum stores and releases ions of this element. In the body this metal is typically found in
the form of hydroxyapatite and the parathyroid hormone increases concentration of it in the blood. This
element is also released into the blood through a process of resorption regulated by osteoclasts. In nature,
this metal is found in the minerals gypsum and limestone. For 10 points, name this alkaline earth metal
found in bones.
ANSWER: calcium
Proteins that bind to this element, such as parvalbumin, often feature the "EF hand" motif. Although the
PMCA protein has a higher affinity for this element's ion, a protein that has a higher capacity for
exchanging this element's ions with sodium ions is responsible for removing this element from a cell
after a cardiac action potential. Ions of this element bind to a troponin complex after they are released
by the sarcoplasmic reticulum to initiate muscle contraction. Vitamin D helps maintain the levels of
phosphorus and this element, which is used to synthesize hydroxyapatite by osteoblasts. For 10 points,
identify this alkali metal found in bones and teeth.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca; or Ca2+]
This element causes vesicles to fuse with the presynaptic membrane at the axon terminal when
voltage-gated channels for its cation open. Troponin is activated by this element, which is released from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum in its 2+ charged ionic form to induce muscle contraction. Vitamin D regulates
blood levels of this metal, a key component of enamel whose deficiency is one cause of osteoporosis. For
10 points, name this alkaline earth metal present in bones.
ANSWER: calcium ion [or Ca2+]
This ion is released when the ryanodine receptor is activated and turns into a channel in the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Excess intake of this ion can lead to buildup of this ion's oxalate in the
kidney, which causes (*) kidney stones. Influx of this ion causes the release of synaptic vesicles, and it
binds to troponin to allow muscles to contract. Vitamin D helps the GI tract absorb this ion. Phosphoric
acid allegedly replaces this ion's phosphate in the tissue that most notably stores it. For 10 points, name this
ion that is found in teeth and bones.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca2+]
Cadherins and selectins are cell-attachment proteins that are dependent on this substance, although integrins
are not, and synaptotagmin senses the levels of this substance in order to allow the attachment of v-SNAREs
and t-SNAREs. Parafollicular cells of the thyroid release a hormone that counters the effects of parathyroid
hormone, which elevates serum levels of this substance, and vitamin D also helps regulate its blood level.
This substance, which is stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells, is incorporated into
hydroxyapatite, and its deficiency can lead to osteoporosis. For 10 points, name this substance incorporated
into teeth and bones and symbolized Ca.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca before mention]
During one of this man's lectures, CB van Niel jumped out of his seat and started crying in
happiness. This man introduced the use of Duolite A-3 anion exchange resin to his field, and he also
developed the TTA solvent extraction process to purify plutonium. This man used a "lollipop" flask
to grow Chlorella cells, which he periodically killed using alcohol in order to find the compounds that
fixed a (*) tracer. This man's most famous discovery used two-dimensional paper chromatography and
radioactive carbon-14 to label the products of carbon fixation. For 10 points, name this UC Berkeley
scientist, who with James Bassham and Andrew Benson discovered a namesake biochemical cycle in plants.
ANSWER: Melvin Ellis Calvin
This process is inhibited by compounds like iodoacetamide, and an important regulatory protein of it
is CP12. SBPase and FBPase are two enzymes crucial to this process, which can also be inhibited by
high levels of oxygen. This process includes a reversible step in which triose phosphate isomerase
converts a certain compound reversibly into DHAP. It involves the conversion of 3-phosphoglycerate
either to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate or to ribulose bisphosphate, and it produces two molecules of
NADP+. This process's first step is catalyzed by RuBisCO, and it uses carbon fixation to create the sugar
PGAL using ATP formed during light-dependent reactions. For 10 points, name this cycle of the lightindependent reactions in photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson cycle
Succulent organisms obtain a main reactant of this reaction series by breaking down malate to
pyruvate in crassulacean acid metabolism. In this reaction chain, G3P is formed after the reduction
of 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate (BI-FOSS-fo-GLISS-er-ate) by NADPH. The first step of this reaction
chain is catalyzed by (*) rubisco and requires an intake of carbon dioxide. The end product of this reaction
series in the stroma is converted to glucose. For 10 points, name this carbon-fixation cycle that follows the
light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson-Bassham Cycle
One enzyme in this pathway contains a carbamated lysine in its active site and requires
magnesium as an active site. In one step in this series of reactions, the enzyme transketolase catalyzes
the production of erythrose 4-phosphate. In an earlier step, PGA molecules are phosphorylated by
ATP then reduced by NADPH. This series of reactions begins with the carboxylation of RuBP by (*)
RuBisCO, and it takes place in the stroma of chloroplasts. For 10 points, name this series of reactions that
follows the light-dependent reactions in photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Calvin cycle [or Calvin-Benson cycle; or light-independent reactions; or dark reactions]
In this process, carboxylases bind with magnesium ions to form bridges with carbamate. Ferredoxin
activates this pathway by reducing thioredoxin, and ribulose 5-phosphate is phosphorylated in one step of
this process. Each iteration of this pathway produces a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate along with 6 NADP
from 3 CO2 and 6 NADPH. In C3 organisms, this pathway involves the fixation of carbon dioxide catalyzed
by the most abundant protein in the world, RuBisCO. Occurring in the stroma of chloroplasts, for 10 points,
name this light-independent cycle which synthesizes glucose in photosynthetic plants.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle [or CBB cycle; prompt on "dark reactions" or "photosynthesis" before mentions]
This process is started by the reduction of thioredoxin by ferrodoxin, and in some organisms, this process is
preceded by a step in which PEP carboxylase catalyzes the addition of a certain molecule to another for
storage purposes. In other organisms, this process is inhibited by the presence of oxygen, which inhibits a
certain enzyme in a process known as photorespiration; that enzyme is rubisco. Its most notable step results
in the production of two molecules of glyeceraldehyde-3-phosphate from an unstable intermediate, and it
takes place in the stroma. For ten points, name these "dark reactions" of photosynthesis which produce
glucose from carbon dioxide.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson cycle (prompt "dark reactions" or "light-independent" before mention)
Its last two phases are reduction and regeneration. Important enzymes in these steps include aldolase,
transketolase, and sedoheptulose bisphosphatase. C4 plants use PEP carboxylase to form oxaloacetate
before beginning these reactions, allowing them to increase productivity by carboxylating more often than
can C3 plants. NADPH is oxidized when it donates an electron to form G3P, which can be converted to
glucose. However, five out of every six G3Ps are used to regenerate RuBP, which is attached to CO2 by
Rubisco in the first step. For 10 points, name this reaction cycle that occurs in the stroma and produces
sugars from carbon dioxide.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson cycle [prompt on dark reactions]
Its last two phases are reduction and regeneration. Important enzymes in these steps include aldolase,
transketolase, and sedoheptulose bisphosphatase. C4 plants use PEP carboxylase to form oxaloacetate
before beginning these reactions, allowing them to increase productivity by carboxylating more often than
can C3 plants. NADPH is oxidized when it donates an electron to form G3P, which can be converted to
glucose. However, five out of every six G3Ps are used to regenerate RuBP, which is attached to CO2 by
Rubisco in the first step. For 10 points, name this reaction cycle that occurs in the stroma and produces
sugars from carbon dioxide.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson cycle [prompt on dark reactions]
In one portion of this pathway, transketolase removes two carbons from one compound to yield
erythrose-4-phosphate, and aldolase converts two compounds into sedheptulose-1, 7-bisphosphate.
One portion of this pathway produces five molecules of G3P. Sometimes partially named for (*)
Andrew Benson, this pathway utilizes the most abundant protein on earth as a catalyst, and it takes place in
the stroma of chloroplasts. For 10 points, identify this pathway which utilizes rubisco and follows the
light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson-Bassham Cycle [prompt on dark reactions]
This pathway contains the enzyme sedheptulose biphosphate, and results in the formation of G3P. This
process includes reduction and regeneration phases, and NADPH acts as a reducing agent during this
process. This process, which is partially named for Andrew Benson, uses the most abundant protein on
earth as an enzyme; that enzyme is RuBisCO. Taking place in the stroma of the chloroplasts, for 10 points,
identify this "dark reaction" which is paired with the light reactions of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson Cycle [prompt on C3, C4, CAM, or carbon fixation]
The first step of this process involves the carboxylation (car-BOX-ill-AY-shun) of
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RIB-yool-os "one, five" bye-FOSS-fate), leading to an unstable six carbon
molecule that splits and is eventually converted into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (gliss-er-AL-deh-hide
"three" FOSS-fate). Six of those G3P molecures are produced by this process's end. Its other products
include one carbon available to be converted into a sugar. Rubisco is a catalyst in, for 10 points, what cycle
of reactions that takes place in chloroplasts and are part of the dark reactions?
ANSWER: Calvin Cycle [prompt on dark reactions before it is read]
This pathway can be regulated through magnesium ion efflux from one structure's lumen. It can also
be regulated by thioredoxin, which facilitates hydrogen transfer between reduced ferredoxin and
NADPH. It involves the modification of ribulose bisphosphate by the enzyme rubisco, and its
penultimate step results in the formation of fructose-6-phosphate. Products generated by photosystems
one and two aid in the fixation of inorganic carbon dioxide in this pathway. For 10 points, name this
light-independent cycle of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson cycle [prompt on dark reactions or photosynthesis]
The reduction of thioredoxin regulates the beginning of this process. Its third step involves the
actions of aldolase and transketolase and is known as the regeneration phase. Another step of this
process is more efficient in organisms which use PEP carboxylase, which does not bind readily to
oxygen. In that (*) C4 version, this process occurs in the both the mesophyll and the bundle-sheath cells.
Inputs in this process include ATP and NADPH, while the major output is glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
RuBisCO is used for carbon fixation in, for 10 points, what biological process, the "dark reactions" of
photosynthesis?
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson Cycle [accept light-independent reactions ordark reactions before mentioned; prompt on photosynthesis]
The molecule produced in the most famous step of these reactions is oxidized to phosphohydroxypyruvate
in serine biosynthesis, and one phase of this process sees Xu5P formed via a transketolase. This pathway's
best-known step produces two molecules of PGA. One alternative pathway employs PEP carboxylase to
avoid the tendency of this pathway's central enzyme, rubisco, to promote photorespiration. For 10 points,
name this sequence of reactions conducted in the stroma of the chloroplast whose net effect is to fix carbon
dioxide into three-carbon sugar molecules, the counterpart to the light reactions of photosynthesis, a cycle
not named for Krebs.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle
In this process, a reduced form of thioredoxin is used to activate several enzymes, and in some instances,
malate is stored in vacuoles and converted to malic acid. Six molecules of G3P are produced by the end of
this pathway, which are reduced via a reaction involving NADPH. Nnine molecules of ATP are consumed
to complete this pathway, whose first step sees carbon fixated onto RuBP by the enzyme RuBisCo. The
light-independent reactions make up, For 10 points, what cycle that takes place in the stroma of chloroplasts
during photosynthesis?
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson-Bassham Cycle [accept C3 Cycle or Reductive Pentose Phosphate Cycle; accept Dark Reactions or Light-Independent Reactions before "light-independent"; prompt on photosynthesis before the end]
The reduction of thioredoxin by ferrodoxin activates many enzymes in this process, while another
enzyme central to it is activated by the binding of magnesium ions to a carbamate group. It also sees
the epimerization of Xylulose-5-phosphate to Ru5P. Its second stage sees phosphorylation of 3-PGA to
yield six glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecules, only one of which is later used to produce glucose. For
10 points, name this carbon-fixing pathway which occurs in the stroma of chloroplasts, a cycle
sometimes called the "dark" reactions.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson cycle [prompt on "dark reactions" until mentioned]
It was elucidated at Berkeley by exposing Chlorella pyrenoidosa to a radioactive substance and killing its
cells with boiling methanol. Noted for using sedheptulose-1,7-bisphosphate phosphatase, this process uses
five molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to regenerate the starting material. This process occurs in the
stroma of chloroplasts, and is associated with the most abundant protein on Earth, rubisco. For 10 points,
name this eponymous cycle that is part of the light independent reactions of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson cycle
Pettersson and Ryde-Pettersson created a model of this process that hinted at a second steady state
condition in it. One intermediate in this process is stabilized by lysine 334. That lysine is found in an
enzyme whose states in this process are referred to as E, EC, and ECM. That enzyme requires a
namesake activase enzyme for proper functioning. In this process, aldolase creates 2 SBP from (*) 2
DHAP and 2 E4P. Its key protein requires magnesium ions and this process regenerates RuBP using 5 of
the 6 G3P produced in another step. Oxygen competes with carbon dioxide in the main enzyme for it during
photorespiration. For 10 points, name this cycle catalyzed by RuBisCO that fixes carbon into sugars using
ATP formed during the light dependent reactions, a part of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Calvin-Benson cycle [prompt on photosynthesis]
Many of the enzymes involved are activated by the reduction of thioredoxin. This pathway occurs in
bundle sheath cells in C4 plants. This series of reactions does not devolve to photorespiration because of the
function of the enzyme Rubisco, and it takes place in the stroma of the chloroplast. For 10 points, name this
series of biochemical reactions that convert carbon dioxide and water into organic compounds, also known
as the "dark reactions."
ANSWER: the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle [or dark reactions before mentioned; or light-independent reactions before "dark;" or carbon fixation]
Ontogeny of this pathway is often studied using species of genus Peperomia, while another common model
organism for studying it, Mesenbryanthemum crystallinum, switches to it in response to increased salinity.
PCAT-1 is a promoter for the Ppc1 gene transcribed to produce a unique isoform of PEP carboxylase used
in this pathway. Unlike a similar pathway, this pathway performs both the fixation and decarboxylation
steps in the mesophyll cells, and during it, isocitric and malic acid are shuttled to the vacuole for storage.
For 10 points, name this alternative to the C3 and C4 pathways that temporally separates the steps of
photosynthesis and is used in plants such as cacti and pineapples.
ANSWER: CAM photosynthesis [or Crassulacean acid metabolism photosynthesis; prompt on photosynthesis by itself; do not accept or prompt on "C3" or "C4"]
Facultative users of this process tend to switch to it in saline soils; the adaptation decreases both
frost resistance and heat resistance. To decrease the incidence of photorespiration, organisms using
this process have temporal controls to concentrate carbon dioxide around rubisco, unlike in the
spatially controlled C4 pathway. For 10 points, name this water-preserving photosynthetic pathway,
named for the family of one of the first known plants to do it, jade.
ANSWER: CAM pathway [or Cressulacean Acid Metabolism pathway]
The mechanism of its circadian control involves 1,4,5 P-gated tonoplast calcium channels. Pierce, Winter,
and Griffiths discussed the advantages of it in epiphytic bromeliads living in cloud forests, which display
the obligate form of this mechanism. In the first step, PEP is carboxylated into oxaloacetate and is
subsequently reduced to malate, and the "temporal separation" of its pathway is often confused with the
"spatial separation" of the C4 pathway. CO2 is captured in the night because stomata are closed in the day
time in, for 10 points, which photosynthetic mechanism common in desert plants.
ANSWER: Crassulacean Acid Metabolism photosynthesis/pathway/plants
Not found in monocots, this substance includes fusiform initial cells that can be storied or nonstoried.
Other cells in this substance are ray initial, and this is created by the division of pericycle cells. One type of
this substance is called phellogen, and this substance can also be referred to as (*) secondary or lateral
meristem. One type of this is responsible for creating cork. Name this layer of cells whose vascular type
creates secondary xylem and phloem.
ANSWER: (vascular pro)cambium (accept (secondary or lateral) meristem until (*))
Greenland's Sirius Passetis is one of the three major lagerstatten containing fossil evidence from this
period. Common organisms during this period included the first known chordate Pikaia and the trilobite
predator Anomalocaris. Preceded by the Vendian and followed by the Ordovician periods, fossils from this
period were found in Canada's Burgess Shale. Events occurring near the beginning of this period include
the the Pan-African Orogeny and Varanginian Ice Age. This period is known for its namesake "explosion"
and subsequent mass extinction. For 10 points, name this first period of the Paleozoic Era.
ANSWER: Cambrian Period
The duplication of Hox genes may explain a notable event during this time period, whose major
landmasses include Laurentia, Baltica, and Gondwona. Archaeocyathids both appeared and went
extinct during this period, and the Ediacara organisms appear to have gone extinct early in this first
period of the (*) Phanerozoic Eon. The fossil record from it is dominated by trilobites, and this period of
the Paleozoic Era was followed by the Ordovician Period. For 10 points, name this geological period which
saw the proliferation of many new species of life, an event known as its namesake "explosion."
ANSWER: Cambrian Period
A later epoch of this period is the Furongian. During this epoch, Laurentia, Baltica, and Siberia
separated from the Neoproterozoic supercontinent Pannotia. This is due to Geologists claim that
continental drift rates in this period were unusually higher than those in layer periods. Panthalassa
also covered most of the southern hemisphere. Described as an explosion of multi-cellular organisms and
major diversification, FTP, identify this period that started 540 million years ago and ended around 488
million years ago at the start of the Ordovician period.
ANSWER: Cambrian
This period is associated with an increase in the number of burrowing animals known as its substrate
revolution. This includes the Montezuman and Furongian Subdivisions, and its study has been aided by
findings at the Burgess Shale. One of the arguments against evolution is the rapid growth of fossils known
as this period's explosion. Name this Period between the Ediacaran and Ordovician, the first Period of the
Paleozoic Era.
ANSWER: Cambrian period
Fossils from this period come from the laggerstatten of Sirius Passet and Chengjiang, and the
Treptichnus pedum assemblage of trace fossils is used to define its base. The breakup of Pannotia
began at its start. Archeocyathids are index fossils for this period, which features the first known
crustacean fossils. Many of the most important fossils from this period were found in the (*) Burgess
shale. This period is the first of the Paleozoic and is followed by the Ordovician. Trilobites make their
debut in the fossils of this period. The time period before it is simply dubbed "pre-" this, and it featured a
large boom in diversity of Earth's fauna, its namesake explosion. For 10 points, name this geologic period
named for the Latin name of Wales.
ANSWER: Cambrian period
A section of rock at Fortune Head, Newfoundland marks the beginning of this period, which
featured animals such as the armored slug Wiwaxia. The beginning of this period is marked by the
appearance of Trichophycus pedum and Tommotian fauna. The (*) Burgess Shale contains fossils from
this period in which brachiopods, echinoderms, and numerous other phyla first appeared. For 10 points,
name this first period of the Paleozoic era that preceded the Ordovician, known for an increase in
biodiversity known as its "explosion."
ANSWER: Cambrian period
In this period, the Ediacara biota from the previous period diminished greatly, which is possibly explained
by the Snowball Earth or the Light Switch Theory. It is divided into Terreneuvian and Furongian epochs,
and the first species with compound eyes emerged. The supercontinent of Pannotia broke up at the
beginning of this period, whose fossils are preserved in the Doushantuo Formation and the Burgess Shale.
Named by Adam Sedgwick from the old name of Wales, it is also known the Age of Trilobites. For 10
points, what geologic period is known for sudden appearance of diverse species, its namesake Explosion?
ANSWER: Cambrian period (accept Age of Trilobites before mentioned)
It has nothing to do with retinopathy, but the characteristic leaky vasculature present in tissues
affected by this disorder allows for drugs targeting against it via the EPR effect. Anthracyclines are a
class of antibiotic used to treat this non-bacterial disorder. 5-FU combats this disorder by inhibiting
the action of thymidylate synthase. Another type of drug used to treat this disorder are
topoisomerase inhibitors. Alkylating agents and (*) cisplatin work to combat this disorder by chemically
modifying DNA in a way which leads to apoptosis. The protein p53 works to prevent the onset and spread
of this disorder. This disorder spreads from its initial site to other tissues in a process termed metastasis. For
10 points, name this disorder characterized by rapid out-of-control cell growth.
ANSWER: cancer
For this disease to spread, affected cells synthesize bFGF and VEGF to cause uncontrolled angiogenesis.
This disease can be caused by an overactive ras gene, whose resultant cascade can override the action of
the p53 gene. This disease is caused by carcinogens, can metastasize to different organs, and is caused by
mutations disrupting the cell cycle. For 10 points, name this disease characterized by out-of-control cell
growth that results in malignant tumors.
ANSWER: cancer [or specific types, such as lung cancer; breast cancer; kidney cancer; etc.]
A double mutation of the gene Rb may lead to this phenomena occurring in the eye, and a regulator of a
process associated with this disease is PUMA, whose expression is induced by the protein p53. That protein
may initiate apoptosis, the programmed cell death whose absence is responsible for the proliferation of this
disease, and manifestations of this disease can be classified as either benign or malignant. For 10 points,
name this disease characterized by the growth of tumors.
ANSWER: cancer
This condition can result from upregulation of the Ras pathway, and the onset of this condition is described
by Alfred Knudson's two-hit hypothesis. This disease's byproducts are suppressed by the proteins pRb and
p53; histological grading can determine how anaplastic, or poorly differentiated, those byproducts are on a
scale from 1 to 4. Cells affected by this can produce excess telomerase. Associated with the mutation of
proto-oncogenes, and spread via metastasis [accent on "ta" as in "tap"], for 10 points, name this
malignant disease state where excessive cell growth causes the formation of tumors after exposure to
carcinogens.
ANSWER: cancer [accept cancerous or malignant neoplasm; prompt "carcinoma," "sarcoma," "blastoma," or "tumor" formation]
One theory about the causes of this disease is known as the Warburg hypothesis. Li-Fraumeni syndrome
causes a predisposition to this disease. Transmissible forms of this disease can occur in dogs and
Tasmanian devils. Tamoxifen can be used to treat one form of this disease. The so-called "guardian of the
genome," p53, is involved in preventing this disease, forms of which include Hodgkin's lymphoma and
leukemia. For 10 points, name this disease which is studied in oncology.
ANSWER: cancer
One type of this disease is caused by a mutation in the RB gene and a loss of heterozygosity, meaning no
functional Rb protein is produced. Another type was found by Peyton Rous to be caused by a retrovirus,
and this disease often begins with a gain-of-function mutation in a proto-oncogene. Later stages of this type
of disease may involve the metastasis of a malignant tumor. For 10 points, name this unchecked
proliferation of mutated cells, forms of which include leukemia and those affecting the lung and skin.
ANSWER: cancer
The two-hit hypothesis is about the development of this class of diseases. Cells under the influence of
this disease induce angiogenesis to increase their supply of nutrients and oxygen. Expression of oncogenes
contribute to this disease. Cells with the phenotype of this disease spread through metastasis. The most
common type of this disease in the U.S. is that of the lung followed by that of the prostate. For 10 points,
identify this type of disease in which cells divide uncontrollably and invade other tissues.
ANSWER: cancer
According to the Warburg effect, these cells produce ATP almost exclusively through glycolysis.
Telomerase is produced in these cells, so that the Hayflick limit is never reached. HeLa cells and
other immortal cell lines consist of these cells. Caretaker and gatekeeper genes fail in these cells,
which often have defective p53 production. These cells move to different parts of the body in (*)
metastasis. A defect in their cell cycle leads to unrestricted mitosis. For 10 points, name these cells which
make up tumors.
ANSWER: cancer cells [or word forms; or tumor cells until "tumors" is read]
Gamon et al showed that the amount of these things of a certain color is well-correlated with the
NDVI, a quantity that is typically computed from near-infrared satellite imagery. YPLANT is a
popular tool for simulating energy balance in these things that also accounts for the propagation of
sunflecks past them. The Penman-Monteith equation contains a term equal to the ratio of this
macroscopic thing's resistance and the aerodynamic resistance and computes the total water lost by
it. Lianas ascend into these places, connecting disjointed parts of them. Hemispherical photography is
used to determine the degree of closure of these places; that closure process is part of the final stage
of ecological (*) succession. Characterized by the leaf area index and composed of tree crowns, for 10
points, name this most photosynthetic, uppermost part of a forest.
ANSWER: forest canopies [accept tree crowns until it is read; accept any specific type of canopy like rainforest canopies; prompt on "forests" or "trees" or specific examples like "rainforests"]
The net fluid movement across them is measured by the Starling equation, and superfused ATP
causes constriction of these near regions where pericytes are located about these structures.
Discontinuous endothelial cells allow for higher permeability of one variant of these, which are usually just
one cell thick. They form the vasa recta, which is critical in the production of urine in the kidney. Occurring
in formations known as "beds," for 10 points, name this smallest of the three major animal blood vessels.
ANSWER: capillaries [or capillary]
Fluid movement across these entities is calculated by the Starling equation. In the kidney, the glomerulus is
formed of these entities, whose activity was first observed by Marcello Malphigi. A "fenestrated" type of
these allows small amounts of protein and small molecules to diffuse through it. Many of these structures
are only one cell thick. Oxygen is delivered to cells by diffusing across the walls of these vessels. For 10
points, name these smallest blood vessels in the human body.
ANSWER: capillaries [or capillary; or capillary bed before mentioned]
The Starling equation describes forces along these structures. Podocytes (POH-doh-sites) wrap around
one set of these structures in the kidney. Pores are found in the endothelial (en-doh-THEE-lee-ull) cells
surrounding this structure in the fenestrated (FEN-uh-stray-ted) variety. The more metabolically active a
tissue is, the more of these structures it will require. These structures exchange nutrients with surrounding
tissue and are only 1 cell thick. For 10 points, name these structures found in "beds," the smallest type of
blood vessel.
ANSWER: capillary [or capillaries; prompt on blood vessels]
In Henoch-Schonlein pupura, these structures in the skin are attacked by antibodies, and these structures
become excessively permeable in Clarkson's disease. Pericytes are responsible for regulating these
structures within the brain. One type of these lack pinocytotic vesicles and are only found in the liver,
known as the sinusoidal type, which is a specific version of the fenestrated type. An equation describing
these entities contains the reflection and filtration coefficients and shows the balance between hydrostatic
and oncotic pressure; that equation is named for Starling. They contain a single layer of endothelial cells,
and glomeruli of the kidney are balls of them. In the lungs, O2 from the alveoli move into these structures,
beds of which exchange nutrients and waste with body tissues. For 10 points, name this class of blood
vessels, the body's smallest.
ANSWER: capillaries [or blood vessels before "Clarkson's disease" is read; prompt after]
In high dosages, it drives four fifths of prostate cancer cells to apoptosis and can freeze the remaining
testosterone-dependent ones in the G0 phase. TRPV1 appears to be this alkaloid's only receptor. It
downregulates the production of a certain tachykinin derivative, the neurotransmitter and neuromodulator
substance P, whose activation stimulates vomiting and which may be involved in fibromyalgia. Like
tarantula venom, it induces inflammation without causing actual chemical burn. FTP, name this substance
measured by the Scoville scale, famously produced by many chili peppers.
ANSWER: capsaicin
The data generated by this technique is usually analyzed by a program written by Gary White. The
Jolly-Seber model is often used to analyze data derived from using this because it better accounts for
inter-sample dynamics making it superior to the two iteration Lincoln-Peterson model. The
malfunction of (*) tags is a problem frequently ignored and solved using ad-hoc methods. Models for it
depend on whether the population is opened or closed and it generally begins by visiting an area and
placing devices on animals. That step is then followed by a later visit to the same area and identifying how
many animals are those that were labeled earlier. For 10 points, name this method used in ecology used for
estimating population size.
ANSWER: capture mark-recapture [accept capture-recapture; accept sight-resight; accept markrelease-recapture; accept mark-resight; accept multiple systems estimation; accept band recovery; accept reasonable equivalents involving synonyms of marking and recapturing/resighting; prompt on partial answers]
The "D-" and "L-" configurations of these molecules are distinguished in the Fischer Projection. The
absence of these compounds can force the body into ketosis and accelerate the breakdown of proteins into
amino acids for use in gluconeogenesis. More complex examples of these compounds are built up from
several of them linked by glycosidic bonds. These compounds include chitin and starches. For 10 points,
name these molecules including glucose and other sugars that are made up of hydrogen, oxygen, and
carbon.
ANSWER: Carbohydrates [or sugars before it is read; or saccharides before it is read; or poly saccharides; or disaccharides; or monosaccharides]
When oxygen competitively inhibits this substance in a certain enzymatic reaction, 2-phosphoglycolate is
produced. Some xerophytes only uptake this substance during the night when it is cooler, while those that
employ the C-4 pathway temporarily fix it in mesophyll cells before shuttling it to a location where
RuBisCO adds it to its substrate, thus preventing photorespiration. Peat bogs have been proposed as a way
of sequestering this substance. Its uptake must co-occur with transpirational loss, because it is absorbed via
the stomata. For 10 points, name this triatomic gas that is converted into G3P and eventually into sugars,
resulting in the exhalation of oxygen by plants.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [or CO2; do not accept or prompt on "carbon"]
A common bacteria genetic structure for the assimilation of this molecule is the cbb operon. One of the
most important ecological consumers of this substance is Prochlorococcus. In some organisms this is
captured using the enzyme PEPC (pep c). An zinc containing enzyme reacts this with water to produce an
alkaline substance critical to buffering the pH of blood. This inorganic molecule is bound into an organic
compound by RuBisCO during the Calvin cycle. For 10 points, name this byproduct of cellular respiration
that is exhaled by animals.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [or CO2]
Along with water and urea [yoo-REE-uh], this compound is a product of pyrimidine (peer-IH-mih-deen)
catabolism [kuh-TAA-buh-lizm]. This compound is stored as malate [MAAL-ayt] in bundle sheath cells,
and in the Krebs cycle each molecule of acetyl-CoA [uh-SEE-tul koh-"A"] will result in the production
of two equivalents of this molecule. This molecule's reaction with water is the primary cause of ocean
acidification; the same reaction also forms a buffer in the blood. This compound is the primary
substrate of the most common enzyme on Earth, RuBisCO [roo-BISS-koh], and the net reaction of
photosynthesis combines water with six molecules of this gas to form glucose. Name this byproduct
of respiration, which is released when animals exhale.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [or CO2]
Ketogluterate becomes succinate when this molecule is lost, and the absence of this molecule causes
alkalosis. Hemoglobin absorbs more oxygen when this compound is present in blood. It is bubbled
through water to form carbonic acid, and it is fixed by (*) chloroplasts in the dark reactions. After
water, it is the most significant greenhouse gas. Used in photosynthesis, for 10 points, name this compound
exhaled by humans, abbreviated CO2.
ANSWER: Carbon Dioxide (accept CO2 before mentioned)
In 2002, Dioum et. al. discovered that this compound lowers NPAS2's ability to bind to DNA, enabling it to
partake in circadian rhythm control. Iron, nickel, and sulfur partially comprise the dehydrogenase named
for this compound in methanogenic bacteria, for which this compound is a nutrient needed for acetyl CoA
synthesis. Biliverdin and this compound are produced when heme oxygenase cleaves heme. Along with
cyanide, this compound inhibits complex IV of the electron transport chain. Exposure to this compound
results in myocardial and brain ischemia because it shifts the dissociation curve of hemoglobin to the left by
binding to it several times more strongly than oxygen does. For 10 points, name this poisonous diatomic gas
resulting from incomplete combustion.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide [or CO]
This enzyme's alpha form can catalyze the hydration of aldehydes to gem-diols. In parietal cells it
aids in introducing H+ to the lumen, while it plays the opposite role in pancreatic duct cells. Its
catalytic site contains three histadine (*) residues which coordinate a central zinc bound water molecule
for nucleophilic attack on a carbon dioxide molecule in the substrate binding domain. For 10 points, name
this enzyme found within red blood cells, which catalyzes the inter-conversion between carbon dioxide and
carbonic acid.
ANSWER: carbonic anhydrase
Structures that connect cells into a syncytium in this tissue include the fascia adherens, macula
adherens, and gap junctions; those structures are known as intercalated discs. Action potential in this
tissue is activated by sodium but then prolonged by (*) calcium influx into an extended plateau phase.
Special types of this tissue make up the SA node, and its activity is recorded in an EKG. This tissue is more
resistant to fatigue than smooth or skeletal types. For 10 points, name this muscle tissue found in the heart.
ANSWER: cardiac muscle (accept heart muscle tissue until mentioned)
Among this group of organisms, D. lusitanicum is the only species routinely found in dry regions. The
namesake organ of another member, the bladderwort, can generate an internal vacuum underwater.
Charles Darwin first noted that this group relies on the movement of prey to trigger a response, and
all species described by this term are native to areas with nitrogen-poor soil. The sticky fluid of
the sundew and slippery walls of the pitcher plant are two methods used by species of this type to
trap their targets. These plants are mainly found in bogs and wetlands. Name these plants like the
Venus flytrap that specialize in catching insects and that are given the same name as animals that
eat animals.
ANSWER: carnivorous plants [accept carnivores; prompt on plants or Plantae before "plant"; accept insectivorous plants before the end]
The groove ventral to these structures is covered by the flexor retinaculum. These structures include the
trapezium and triquetrum. One of these, which has a hook, forms a boundary of Guyon's canal along with
the pisiform. They include the lunate, hamate, and scaphoid, the last of which articulates with the radius.
The median nerve can be compressed in the "tunnel" named for these entities in a namesake syndrome. For
10 points, name this set of eight bones that form the wrist.
ANSWER: carpals [prompt on bones; prompt on bones of the hands; prompt on bones of the wrists; do not accept "metacarpals"]
An ill-intentioned attempt to destroy the wolf population at the Kaibab reserve caused another
species to substantially violate it. Name this term referring to the supportable population of any
environment for an organism given the food, habitat, water, presence of predators, and other biotic and
abiotic factors.
ANSWER: carrying capacity
This quantity appears in the denominator of the competitive Lotka-Volterra equations, and the World3
simulation attempted to determine if this measure had been exceeded for humans. Species adopting the
strategy named for this concept typically have long life expectancy, produce fewer offspring, and display a
high level of parental care. Populations experiencing exponential growth are not affected by this concept,
which marks the plateau of a logistic growth curve. Achieved when the birth and death rates of a population
are equal and symbolized K, name this concept, the maximum population size that an ecosystem's limited
resources can support.
ANSWER: carrying capacity [accept K early]
This quantity appears in the denominator of a differential equation formulated by Verhulst. In the logistic
growth model, this quantity is graphically represented by a horizontal asymptote. A population of rstrategists can overshoot this quantity because growth is not dependent on a stable equilibrium phase, but a
population of k-strategists tends to grow towards this quantity gradually. The rate of growth of a population
is zero when this quantity is reached, at which the birth and death rates are equal. For 10 points, name this
biological quantity determined by limiting factors, the maximum population size of a given species that an
environment can sustain indefinitely.
ANSWER: carrying capacity [prompt on "K"]
It's not the Tragedy of the Commons, but Garrett Hardin promoted the cultural variety of this value. This
value appears in the denominator of both the Verhulst-Pearl and competitive Lotka-Volterra equations to
study predator-prey relationships, as it explains the necessity of both adequate amounts of predators and
prey. Serving as the horizontal asymptote of a sigmoidal growth curve, this number is symbolized K.
China's projected declining agricultural production may negatively impact this number, which is thought to
be anywhere from 4 to 16 billion for humans on Earth. For 10 points, name this limit to the size of the
population an environment can support.
ANSWER: carrying capacity
The breakdown of this tissue can be combatted with the supplements glucosamine and chrondroitin suflate.
This tissue, which contains proteoglycans and collagen, comes in three types, one of which is the hyaline
type, which covers the articular surfaces of bone. Degradation of this tissue leads to a disorder, often treated
by COX-2 inhibitors such as Celebrex, called osteoarthritis. Another type of this tissue makes up the medial
and lateral menisci of the knee and is frequently torn. For 10 points, name this constituent tissue of ears and
noses.
ANSWER: cartilage
This type of tissue can be divided into hyaline and fibro- types based on the amount and distribution of
proteoglycans and collagen fibers. The fibro- type is found in intervertebral disks, and the hyaline type is
replaced in rheumatoid arthritis. A third, elastic type of this highly nonvascular tissue gives structure to the
external ear. For 10 points, give this type of connective tissue found in the nose and on the surface of bones.
ANSWER: cartilage
Protrusions of this substance in the spine are called Schmorl's nodes, and Tietze syndrome occurs
when this is inflammed. Its fibro type can be found in symphyses, while the pinna is composed of its
elastic type. The hyaline type of this substance is covered by the perichondrium. (*) Intervertebral
discs are made of this substance, which heals slowly due to its lack of blood vessels. Chondrocytes are cells
found in this substance, and during endochondral ossification, it is replaced with bone. Patients with
osteoarthritis have a loss of this substance, which normally helps lubricate joints. For ten points, name this
connective tissue which makes up the human nose and ear.
ANSWER: cartilage
This substance has limited repair capabilities due to its lack of blood flow, and because, like bone tissue, it
is contained within lacunae. The hyaline type of this substance is rich in type two collagen and forms the
smooth surface of joints. This substance, which is comprised of chondrocytes, is depleted in osteoarthritis,
leading to painful bone-on-bone wear. Sharks and rays have skeletons comprised entirely of this material.
For 10 points, name this tissue that gives structure to the human ear and nose.
ANSWER: cartilage
The breakdown of this tissue can be combatted with the supplements glucosamine and chrondroitin suflate.
This tissue, which contains proteoglycans and collagen, comes in three types, one of which is the hyaline
type, which covers the articular surfaces of bone. Degradation of this tissue leads to a disorder, often treated
by COX-2 inhibitors such as Celebrex, called osteoarthritis. Another type of this tissue makes up the medial
and lateral menisci of the knee and is frequently torn. For 10 points, name this constituent tissue of ears and
noses.
ANSWER: cartilage
Williams and Klisch have developed a method of creating this substance artificially that uses "cellular
scaffolding." Tietze syndrome occurs when the "costal" type of this material in the chest is inflamed. The
most common type of this material in humans is characterized by high concentration of Type I collagen.
Elastic, Fibro-, and hyaline are the three forms of, for 10 points, what connective tissue that makes up
human ears and the skeletons of sharks?
ANSWER: cartilage
This tissue can be visualized by staining with Safranin O and FCF. ADAMTS 4 and 5 degrade one
type of this tissue by cleaving aggrecans, which are a type of proteoglycan that binds to a hyaluronan
filament in this tissue. The articular type of this tissue is not surrounded by perichondrium, unlike its
elastic type, which contains more elastin and less (*) collagen than the hyaline type of this tissue. This
tissue breaks down in osteoarthritis, which often is treated with hip or knee replacement surgery. The
skeleton of sharks and other members of chondrichthyes is composed of, for 10 points, what type of
connective tissue that in humans is found in the ears, nose, and the joints between bones?
ANSWER: cartilage
During this period in the fossil record, dogs and bears developed hyper-carnivorous
features, to fill an empty ecological niche. Its cause is not known, although one theory is
that decreasing temperatures caused North American forests to evolve into savannas,
making it difficult for the titular family of animals to hunt. This period ended when North
America was recolonized by surviving populations in Asia descended from Pseudaelurus.
Lasting from 25 to 17 million years ago, this is for ten points what paleontological period during
which most felines went extinct?
ANSWER: Cat gap
Jabri et al. discovered that mice with this disease can be treated by blocking IL-15 signaling. Poorly
managed cases of this disease can lead to a form of T-cell lymphoma called EATL, and this disease also has
a connection to the single itchiest condition known to man, dermatitis herpetiformis. Pathologic findings in
this disease include crypt hyperplasia and lymphocyte invasion of the lamina propria. Like type 1 diabetes,
this disease is associated with the 0201 allele of HLA-DQB1. This disease, which is diagnosed by finding
antibodies to tissue transglutaminase, is triggered by antibodies to gliadin peptides and causes villous
blunting. For 10 points, name this disease that manifests as gluten intolerance.
ANSWER: celiac disease [prompt on "gluten intolerance" until it is read]
According to the endosymbiotic [EN-doh-SIM-by-AH-tik] theory, some of these objects were
absorbed into others. Their cycle includes the S phase, and the fluid mosaic model describes their
boundary. They were named by Robert (*) Hooke, who found them in cork, for their resemblance to
monks' chambers. Cytoplasm [SY-toh-"plasm"] makes up much of the interior of these objects, which have
parts called organelles and reproduce in mitosis [my-TOH-sis]. For 10 points, name this smallest unit of
life.
ANSWER: cells (accept prokaryotes or bacteria before "cycle" is read)
This structure becomes invaginated and buds inwardly in a process mediated by clathrin. During apoptosis,
this structure bulges out in a process known as "blebbing." Signaling proteins that span this structure often
have a seven alpha-helix motif. Sphingolipids and cholesterol are elevated in this structure's "lipid raft"
domains, which help localize proteins in this structure. It is modeled as a phospholipid bilayer in the fluidmosaic model. For 10 points, name this selectively permeable barrier structure, which, in plant cells, is
located just inside the cell wall.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane; or plasmalemma; prompt on phospholipid bilayer]
Molecule movement within this structure is aided by enzymes like flippases. Integrins and
sphingolipids are found within this structure, and cholesterol is a factor in determining its fluidity.
Sodium-potassium pumps are embedded in this structure, which can be considered to act as a twodimensional liquid with solid components in the (*) fluid-mosaic model. Multiple ion channels are
located in this structure, which is primarily composed of a phospholipid bilayer. For ten points, name this
semi-permeable structure that surrounds and encloses cells.
ANSWER: cell membrane (or plasma membrane)
The phosphatidylserine ("foss-fuh-tie-dil-ser-een") in this structure is redistributed by scramblases and
flippases, which facilitate the transverse diffusion of its components. SNARE complexes and clathrin coats
facilitate one of its functions. During apoptosis, localized decoupling of this structure leads to blebbing.
Components of this structure include G protein-coupled receptors, aquaporins, sodium-potassium pumps,
and ion channels. Described by the fluid mosaic model, this structure consists of a phospholipid bilayer. In
plants, this semipermeable structure is found just inside the cell wall. For 10 points, name this organelle
marking the boundary of a cell.
ANSWER: cell membrane or plasma membrane
Cadherins (cad-HERE-inz) and integrins (IN-tuh-grinz) are among the many proteins that span this
structure, and flippases aid molecule movement in it. The fluid mosaic model of this structure states that it
is composed of structures like lipid rafts and protein complexes floating freely in a phospholipid bilayer
(FOSS-fo-LIP-id BY-lay-ur). Ion channels aid ion transport through this entity to enter or exit the cell. For
10 points, name this barrier that separates a cell from the outside environment.
ANSWER: cell membrane
Chromophores conjugated to cholera toxin B are used to visualize dense regions in these structures which
are characterized as rafts for aggregating proteins. The glycocalyx lines the outside of this structure in some
cells. Enzymes in these structures include flippases and scramblases. Enzymes that catalyze movement of
ions and other molecules across this structure are referred to as transporters, examples of which include the
sodium-potassium pump. For 10 points, name this structure which is described by the fluid mosaic model
and is composed of a phospholipid bilayer that separates a cell's cytosol from the extracellular space.
ANSWER: plasma membrane [Accept cell membrane, do not accept cell wall; prompt on phospholipid bilayer]
Budin and Devaraj discovered a de-novo method in which this structure can be formed. One protein in this
structure contains the NPA motif. Components of this structure can have snorkeling or antisnorkeling
orientations. Proteins can be targeted to this structure through the actions of the enzyme NMT or by having
an attached GPI. Mammalian adenylate cyclases are located in this structure. This structures is made of
molecules exemplified by Phosphatidylcholine. Cholesterol helps maintain the fluidity of this structure and
the fluid mosaic model models it as a phospholipid bilayer. For 10 points, name this selectively permeable
structure that surrounds a cell.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane; prompt on partial answers; prompt on lipid raft]
The receptors associated with G proteins cross this structure 7 times. The FRAP method quantifies how
proteins move around this object, and proteins that span it are known as integral. Those proteins include ion
pumps and ion channels that transport ions across this object, which is typically only permeable to small
molecules that can diffuse through its lipid bilayer. For 10 points, name this organelle that separates a cell
from its environment.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane; prompt on membrane]
Single proteins in this structure can be studied in isolation by measuring an electric current in a technique
called patch clamping. Inducers of apoptosis located in this structure include the TNF and Fas receptors.
Enzymes that transport molecules through the interior of these structures include scramblases and flippases.
Neurons transmit signals by creating a voltage difference across these structures through the use of ion
pumps. This structure can be modeled by the fluid mosaic model. For 10 points, name this structure
consisting of proteins embedded in a phospholipid bilayer, which separates the cell from its outside
environment.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
Flippases ["flip aces"] allow movement between this structure's two "leaflets". The glycocalyx is a
layer just outside this structure, which is described by the fluid mosaic model. Hydrophobic "tails"
and hydrophilic ["hydro"-FIL-ik] "heads" comprise the (*) "phospholipid [FAHS-foh-LIH-pid]
bilayer" that is the main part of this structure. Plants have an extra "wall" around this object that is
interrupted by aquaporins and sodium-potassium pumps. For 10 points, name this organelle that makes up
the exterior of a cell.
ANSWER: cell membrane (accept plasma membrane; accept phospholipid bilayer before "phospholipid"; prompt on "cell" before it is mentioned; do not accept "cell wall")
As this cellular structure separates from the cytoskeleton during apoptosis, it can form a bulge called a
bleb. They are made of protein receptors that are rich in sphingomyelin and cholesterol called lipid rafts,
which are more tightly packed than their surrounding lipid bilayer. Visualized by the fluid-mosaic model,
they engulf and take in materials through endocytosis. For 10 points, name these selectively permeable
structures that surround cells.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
The majority of molecules in this thing are synthesized from CDP-choline. Integrins pass through it to
couple microfilaments to the ECM. One ATPase in it maintains this structure's resting potential by actively
exchanging 3 of one ion for 2 of another; that is the sodium-potassium pump. In some bacteria, the
periplasm lies outside it. The tonicity of an animal cell is defined by the pressure gradient across it. Clathrin
may coat vesicles that bud off of it during endocytosis. It broadly consists of mosaic of proteins embedded
in a fluid-like phospholipid bilayer, and sometimes lies beneath a cell wall. For 10 points, name this thin,
deformable structure that encloses the cytoplasm.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane; do not accept "cell wall"]
The Davson-Danielli proposal for this structure was replaced by one by Singer and Nicolson.
Integrins and transporters cross this structure, which fuses to vesicles with the aid of SNARE
proteins. One model for this structure is the (*) fluid mosaic model. It is imbued with molecules of
cholesterol, and it consists of a phospholipid bilayer. For 10 points, name this structure that encloses the
organelles of the cell.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
This structure is often coated with a layer of oligosaccharide molecules on one side, and this structure is
often surrounded by carbohydrate rich zones called glycocalyx ["gly-co-kal-ix"]. The amount of cholesterol
in this structure is regulated by the temperature and maintains its fluidity. Integral and peripheral proteins
are found on this structure, and this structure is described by the fluid mosaic model. It is composed of
molecules with hydrophilic heads and fatty acid tails. For 10 points, identify this structure, a phospholipid
bilayer that separates the insides of a cell from its surroundings.
ANSWER: cell membrane [accept plasma membrane; prompt on phospholipid bilayer before mentioned; do not accept "cell wall"]
This structure's potential, factoring in all relevant ions, can be found using the Goldman equation. G
protein-coupled receptors are found in this structure. This biological structure contains "lipid rafts"
according to the fluid mosaic model, and it is partly made of inward-facing hydrophobic fatty acid "tails"
in a phospholipid bilayer. For 10 points, name this semi-permeable molecular structure which appears
without a cell wall when surrounding animal cells.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
An outdated model for the structure of this entity was proposed by Davson and Danielli. Enzymes such
as flippases ("FLIP"-"aces") move molecules within this structure. It contains glycolipids such as
gangliosides (GANG-lee-oh-"sides"). The fluidity of this structure is regulated by the amount of
cholesterol within it. The fluid mosaic model of this structure holds that proteins and lipid rafts are
embedded in a freely moving phospholipid (FOSS-fo-LIP-id) bilayer. For 10 points, name this structure that
encloses the cell and separates it from the outside environment.
ANSWER: cell membrane
Antibodies to the constituents of this structure are sometimes called lupus anticoagulants. Beta barrel
motifs are often found in proteins on this structure. Sphingomyelin forms lipid rafts at these structures,
which are known as sarcolemma in muscle. Phagosomes are formed from material that breaks off this
structure. The fluid mosaic model describes this structure, which is made up of a phospholipid bilayer.
Often surrounded by a cell wall, this is, for 10 points, what semipermeable, protective layer which
surrounds the cell?
ANSWER: plasma membrane [or cell membrane]
The components of this structure are rearranged by flippases (FLIP-aze-iz) and scramblases
(SCRAM-blaze-iz). The sodium-potassium pump transports ions through it. The Davson-Danielli model of
this structure was supplanted by the fluid mosaic model, which characterizes it as a phospholipid
(foss-foe-LIP-id) bilayer embedded with proteins and other molecules. For 10 points, name this
semi-permeable structure which surrounds cells.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
The transverse asymmetry of this structure can be altered by flippases (FLIP-ay-says), floppases
(FLOP-ay-says), and scramblases (SCRAM-blay-says). This structure contains peripheral, integral, and
lipid-anchored proteins. Some of those proteins function as pumps and channels to transport substances that
cannot diffuse across this structure. This structure is often modeled as a "fluid mosaic" or a "phospholipid
bilayer" (FOSS-fo-lip-id BYE-lay-ur). For 10 points, identify this structure that surrounds a cell.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
This structure contains several members of the ABC protein family, and another major component of
these objects is a derivative of sphingosine. Singer and Nicholson developed the fluid mosaic model of
this structure. Clathrin-coated pits in it are involved in endocytosis, and specialized areas of this
structure include tight junctions and gap junctions. In plants this structure is surrounded by the cell
wall. Often described as a phospholipid bilayer, for 10 points, name this barrier between the cell and its
outside environment.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
Mucins in digestive tracts interact regularly with this structure. This structure is referred to as the
sarcolemma in muscle cells. Cholesterol molecules embedded in this structure regulate its mobility.
Proteins embedded in this structure include the sodium-potassium pump. It is described by the fluid mosaic
model. For 10 points, name this layer made of phospholipids that separates the cytosol of a cell from its
environment.
ANSWER: plasma membrane [or cell membrane; prompt on membrane; do not accept "cell wall"]
As this cellular structure separates from the cytoskeleton during apoptosis, it can form a bulge called a
bleb. They contain protein receptors that are rich in sphingomyelin called rafts, which are more tightly
packed than the surrounding bilayer. Visualized by the fluid-mosaic model, they engulf and take in
materials through endocytosis. For 10 points, name these selectively permeable structures that surround
cells.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
The GLUT family of proteins is associated with this structure, and one model of its movement is
known as the elastic Brownian ratchet model. In epithelial cells, the GPI anchor sorts proteins into
those designated for the apical or basolateral domains of this structure. Singer and Nicholson
modeled this structure as a (*) fluid mosaic, and it is composed of a hydrophilic outside and a
hydrophobic core, which make up its phospholipid bilayer. For 10 points, name this outermost structure
of an animal cell.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane; accept phosopholipid bilayer early; prompt on biomembrane; prompt on membrane]
Helfrich's formula gives the curvature energy per unit area of this entity. Capovilla studied the boundary
conditions of modeling the opening-up process of this structure by talin. Its dynamics are often studied
using FRAP, and the distribution of its components are altered by scramblases and flippases. Singer and
Nicolson developed a model of it to improve upon the Davson-Danielli model. Chloesterol is used to
mediate its fluidity, and peripheral and integral proteins are embedded in it. The fluid mosaic model
concerns, FTP, which semipermeable phospholipid bilayer that controls movement of substances into and
out of molecules and encloses the cytoplasm?
ANSWER: cell membrane or plasma membrane [do not accept "cell wall"]
Molecules loosely associated with this structure are removed using carbonate extraction while
molecules embedded in it are removed using Triton X-100. This structure is separated into the N and P
faces by freeze fracture, and contains microdomains called rafts. This structure, modeled by Singer and
Nicolson's fluid mosaic model, consists of amphipathic phospholipid molecules arranged in a bilayer. For
10 points, name this structure which separates the inside and outside of a cell.
ANSWER: plasma membrane [or cell membrane; or cytoplasmic membrane]
Proteins with a CAAX box are anchored to this structure by prenylation. One method of studying
the dynamics of this structure is Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching, or FRAP. The
polarity of this structure is maintained by flippases and scramblases. Constituents of it are used to
synthesize prostaglandins and IP3. Singer and Nicholson modeled this structure as a two-dimensional
liquid crystal within which (*) proteins freely diffuse, known as the fluid mosaic model. Its constituents
contain polar head groups and hydrophobic tails, which form a bilayer. In plants, this phospholipid-laden
structure lies just inside the cell wall. For 10 points, name this structure that protects cells from the outside
world.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane or phospholipid bilayer; prompt on "membrane"]
A replica of this structure is made by evaporating a thin layer of carbon together with a metal in
freeze-fracture electron microscopy. According to a recent theory, the inhomogeneity of this
structure's composition suggests that it is made up of many micro-domains. Some components of it
are translocated with the aid of scramblases, flippases, and floppases, resulting in a preponderance of
phosphatidyl serine on its (*) inner leaflet. Integral proteins, such as G-protein coupled receptors, span the
width of this structure, which becomes more packed as cholesterol is added. This structure is visualized as a
fluid mosaic and it consists of a phospholipid bilayer. For 10 points, name this outer covering of most
eukaryotic cells which is further reinforced by a "wall" in plants.
ANSWER: plasma membrane [or cell membrane; accept a buzz of membrane in the first sentence, but prompt on it afterwards]
Constituents of this structure are cleaved in order to form arachidonic acid, which in turn can be used to
form leukotrienes or prostaglandins. G-protein coupled receptors traverse it seven times. This structure's
constituents can move laterally, but not intrafacially, in accordance with the fluid mosaic model. This
structure consists of a double layer of phospholipids. For 10 points, name this structure just inside the cell
wall, the barrier between the inside and outside of a cell.
ANSWER: cell membrane [or plasma membrane]
Enzymes called flippases regulate a form of movement in this organelle. The sodium potassium pump is
another enzyme found in this organelle. Attached to this organelle are peripheral and integral proteins,
whose movement is described by the fluid mosaic model. Stabilized by cholesterol, it is primarily
composed of phospholipids which form a bilayer that contains a hydrophobic interior. Materials can pass
through it via diffusion or active transport. For 10 points, name this cell organelle that surrounds an animal
cell.
ANSWER: cell membrane or plasma membrane [do not accept "cell wall"]
Some methanogens in the domain Archaea contain pseudomurein in this organelle. This organelle is
composed of biogenic silica in diatoms; in that case it can be called a frustule. Some fungi contain these
organelles composed of zymosan, mannoproteins, and chitin. Gram staining in bacterial cells can group
cells based on the presence of peptidoglycan in this organelle. In plants, the pectin-rich space between
these organelles is called the middle lamella. It is responsible for maintaining turgor pressure in plants, and
it is typically made of cellulose. Name this organelle, a rigid outer layer that is notably absent in animal
cells.
ANSWER: cell wall [do not accept or prompt on "cell membrane"]
Tyrosine bridges between extensins give support to this structure. The primary component of these
structures is synthesized in hexagonal rosette terminal complexes. Arabinogalactans and xyloglucans
are located in this structure. Expansins in this structure are used to loosen them, causing them to
expand when pH is low, a phenomenon called acid growth. Gaps in this structure which allow for
transport are called (*) plasmodesmata. Minor components of this structure include pectins and lignin. In
bacteria, the Gram stain is used to detect the presence of peptidoglycan in this structure. For 10 points,
name this structure comprised of cellulose in plants, which provides structural support for the cell.
ANSWER: cell wall
Multinet growth only occurs in this structure's outer layers, but the microfibrils that primarily compose it
are laid mostly transverse to its direction of growth. Its growth occurs via the loosening of the microfibrils,
pectins, and other polymers, as regulated by expansins and caused by acidic conditions stimulated by auxin.
The interconnection of these structures is the apoplast. It is very thin for parenchyma and growing cells,
while its lignified secondary type makes up much of xylem tissue. There are usually primary and secondary
instances of this structure. For 10 points, name this outer layer made mostly of cellulose, that provides
structural support to a plant cell.
ANSWER: plant cell wall
The lactic acid MurNAc comprises this structure and is broken down by lysozymes. This structure
can contain a wax-like material made of suberin called the Casparian strip. The pectin-rich middle
lamella allows these structures to transfer substances like cytosol with the use of (*) plasmodesmata.
The S-layer can be another part of this structure, which for bacteria is composed of peptidoglycan. This
structure becomes stiff due to turgor pressure and can be composed of repeating units of chitin or cellulose.
For ten points, name this structure which helps plant cells support their inner constituents.
ANSWER: cell wall (do not accept "cell membrane")
One polymer found in this structure consists of N-acetylglucosamine (ah-see-tull-glue-KOH-suh-meen)
and N-acetylmuramic (ah-see-tull-mer-AH-mick) acid. One form of this structure is composed of xylan
(ZIE-lan) and lignin. It is composed of chitin (KIE-tin) in fungi, and it is divided into the middle lamella,
primary, and secondary components. Gram-positive bacteria have peptidoglycan (pep-tih-dog-GLY-kan) in
these structures. Protozoa do not have these structures, but fungi, algae, and bacteria do. For 10 points,
name this outer cellular covering lacking in animals.
ANSWER: cell walls
In one species, this structure is held together by bridges made of five glycine molecules. Beta lactam
antibiotics act by preventing the synthesis of this structure. In bacteria, this structure's constituents are
shuttled to the site of synthesis by bactoprenol. The Casparian strip runs along this structure in plants. This
structure's arrangement determines whether bacteria are gram positive or negative and for them, it is
composed of peptidoglycan. In plants, it is made of cellulose. For 10 points, name this protective layer of
the cell, which usually surrounds the cell membrane.
ANSWER: cell wall
Beta-lactam antibiotics like penicillin work by inhibiting the formation of this cell structure. One
form of this structure is composed of a material consisting of alternating N-acetylglucosamine and Nacetylmuramic acid units, while a small gap found in certain forms of this structure are called
plasmodesmata. In bacteria they are composed of * peptidoglycan while in plants they contain an outer
layer of pectin and an inner layer of lignin. In fungi they are composed of chitin. For 10 points, name this
structure which in plants cells is composed of cellulose and surrounds the cell membrane.
ANSWER: cell wall (do not accept "cell membrane", accept peptidoglycan before mentioned)
In bacteria, this structure is composed of beta-1,4 linked N-acetylglucosamine and
N-acetylmuramic acid, which is a polymer known as peptidoglycan. This structure is composed of
silica and is called a frustule in diatoms. In fungi, the constituent of this structure is chitin. Holes in
this structure are called plasmodesmata. This structure is usually fairly rigid as a result of (*) turgor
pressure, and it is not found in animal cells. For 10 points, name this outer layer, constructed of cellulose
for plants, that surrounds the cell membrane.
ANSWER: cell wall
These structures can undergo stress relaxation and an extension called creep that is catalyzed by
expansins. Another method of growth of these structures is caused by proton ATPase [A-T-P-"ace"].
Two of these are joined by a middle lamella. A polysaccharide that is highly concentrated in these
structures and in the peels of citrus fruits is used to make jellies. A different polysaccharide that is
highly concentrated in these structures and cotton is used to make paper; those chemicals are pectin
and cellulose. Name these relatively rigid structures not found in protozoa and animals that surround
other types of cells.
ANSWER: cell walls [prompt on cells]
This compound is turned into xanthate (ZAN-thate) before being rebuilt through a spinneret in the process
to create viscose rayon. This compound has beta-1,4 glycosidic (gly-co-SID-ic) linkages; those linkages are
the only difference between this compound and starches, which are likewise made up of repeating chains of
glucose. This most abundant organic compound on earth is indigestible by humans; however, it can be
broken down by microorganisms that live in cows and termites. For 10 points, name this compound that
makes up the majority of a plant's cell wall.
ANSWER: cellulose
Procuste mutants have defects in the synthesis of this compound. Sarcina and Acetobacter are
bacteria that synthesize this compound, which in other organisms uses a sitosterol dextrose primer
for its synthesis. This compound is synthesized by the product of the CesA gene, which forms
hexagonal rosette-shaped complexes. This compound, which is often strengthened by (*) pectins and
lignins, contains beta-1,4 linkages between D-glucose molecules, forming microfibrils that then form
paracrystalline arrays. Ruminants are able to digest this compound, which allows them to eat grass. For 10
points, name this most common organic compound on earth, a complex polysaccharide that makes up the
cell walls of plants.
ANSWER: cellulose
In plants, this compound is made from particles that constitute a hexagonal rosette. The extraction of this
compound occurs in both the sulfite and kraft processes. In a Western blot, proteins are transferred to a
membrane composed of the nitric acid ester of this compound. The viscose process makes rayon from this
polysaccharide, which consists of glucose molecules linked by beta glycosidic bonds. For 10 points, name
this main constituent of the cell walls of plants.
ANSWER: cellulose
Regenerated fibers of this compound can be used to make lyocell and viscose; those products in turn
can be used to make rayon. This compound is a straight chain polymer containing many hydroxyl
groups that form hydrogen bonds, explaining its high tensile strength. This compound contains beta1,4 glycosidic (*) bonds. In plants, this compound is created by namesake synthases, encoded by CesA
genes, in rosette terminal complexes of the plasma membrane. Humans cannot digest this compound, but
cows and termites can, with the aid of microorganisms. For 10 points, name this compound found in the cell
wall of plants.
ANSWER: cellulose
Anselme Payen isolated and discovered its chemical formula in 1838. Beta 1, 4 linkages link its monomeric
subunits, contrasting with alpha 1,4 glycosidic bonds which link together glycogen polymers.
Polyvinylidene fluoride has replaced a derivative of this compound for western blotting membranes. Early
rayon fibers were made by dissolving and reconstituting it into thin fibers; later it was reacted with carbon
disulfide in solution to form viscose. It can be nitrated to form "gun-cotton", and thin sheets of the material
were once used for film. For 10 points, name this polymer of D-glucose which makes up the majority of
plant matter.
ANSWER: cellulose
This compound is turned into xanthate (ZAN-thate) before being rebuilt through a spinneret in the process
to create viscose rayon. This compound has beta-1,4 glycosidic (gly-co-SID-ic) linkages; those linkages are
the only difference between this compound and starches, which are likewise made up of repeating chains of
glucose. This most abundant organic compound on earth is indigestible by humans; however, it can be
broken down by microorganisms that live in cows and termites. For 10 points, name this compound that
makes up the majority of a plant's cell wall.
ANSWER: cellulose
The alpha type of this cannot be dissolved in a 17.5% solution of sodium hydroxide at 20 degrees
Celsius. It is a straight chain polymer derived from beta-glucose, whose hydroxyl groups form
hydrogen bonds with each other, contributing to its high tensile strength. In 1908, a Swedish textiles
engineer treated it with alkali and carbon disulfide to create viscose, which was extruded through a
slit to create a clear film. Rayon can be made by extruding viscose though a hole rather than a slit. In
vascular (*) plants it is synthesized at the cell membrane by rosette terminal complexes. Although it cannot
be digested by humans, it acts as a dietary fiber, absorbing water and making defecation easier. Some
animals, for example cows and termites, can digest it with the help of certain micro-organisms. FTP, name
this structural polysaccharide found in the cell walls of green plants.
ANSWER: cellulose or (C 6 H 10 O 5)n
The applied strength of this technique is measured in RCFs, and tabletop versions of these
instruments usually have a "Fast Temp" option. Polyribosome binding to mRNA is commonly
measured using the isopycnic version of this technique. Using a sucrose gradient with this technique
allows sedimentation velocity analysis, and in that case the coefficients are measured in Svedberg
units. Cell fractionation uses this technique to extract (*) organelles, and this technique typically forms
a pellet with a supernatant on top. It can also be used to remove blood plasma from formed elements. For
10 points, name this technique whose power is measured in units of g, which is used to separate mixtures
by spinning them around really quickly.
ANSWER: centrifugation [or word forms of centrifuge]
One study on clam oocytes speculated that one structure that contains them might have its own RNA
genome. The protein ninein (ny-NAY-in) and two of them make up a cell-cycle regulating structure.
Centrin and tektin help to form the characteristic pattern of their walls, which in Drosophila embryos consist
of doublets, rather than triplets, of microtubles. FTP, identify these structures whose astral fibers comprise
the mitotic spindle, which in anaphase anchor chromosomes to either side of a cell.
ANSWER: centrioles
Theodor Boveri discovered that they contained their own genetic material in 1888, and he attributed
genetic mutations in them to the mechanism underlying cancer. A recent experiment done on fruit
flies has shown that exposure to radiation causes them to disappear, resulting in flies without cilia or
flagella. These structures are duplicated during the G1 phase of the cell cycle, and they have been
identified as the middle components of centromeres. For 10 points, identify these cell structures which are
involved in forming the mitotic spindle during the cell cycle.
ANSWER: centrioles [prompt on centromeres before it is read]
The size of these objects which are NOT found outside the cell is regulated by Orofaciodigital
Syndrome 1 protein. The stabilization and formation of these structures is aided by ANA2. In C. Elegans,
formation of these objects requires ZYG-1 to phosphorylate SAS-6, but in humans the ZYG-1 is replaced
in its role by PLK4. These cellular components have 9 fold symmetry and are replicated once per cell
cycle. These objects are found in a larger structure along with the gamma-tubulin ring complex. These
objects and basal bodies have a similar structure and composition. For 10 points, name these microtubule
structures that are found in centrosomes, which serve as attachment points for the mitotic spindle and have
a 9+3 structure.
ANSWER: centrioles [prompt on centrosomes; prompt on basal body]
Some members of this class detach their sperm-carrying arms and leave them attached to females.
Many members of this class possess a bone-like structure called a gladius. Some representatives of
this class have long strands of tissue called siphuncles. Vampyroteuthis infernalis is a member of one
of the only two extant subclasses of this class, Coleoidea. Their penises are called (*) hectocotyli and
the nerve fibers of most members of this class exhibit little to no myelination and large diameters, leading
those fibers to be used as medical study aids. Other members of this class include the extinct ammonites and
the shelled nautiloids. For 10 points, name this class of intelligent mollusks that have their own jetpropulsion systems, which includes squids and octopi.
ANSWER: Cephalopoda
Most male members of this taxonomical class have an arm-like structure used to transfer sperm to females
called the hectocotylus. One member of this taxonomical class has a large axon that was used by Hodgkin
and Huxley to study nerve conduction. Extinct members of this class include belemnoids and ammonites. It
is part of a phylum whose other classes include bivalves and gastropods. Most members of this class can
release "ink" when threatened by predators. For 10 points, name this class of mollusks whose members
include the nautilus, squid, and octopus.
ANSWER: cephalopods [or Cephalopoda]
Booting and inflorescence emergence are the fifth and sixth steps of several scales detailing the
development of these plants such as the Zadoks Growth Scale. Their definitive characteristic is the
presence of features in which the pericarp is fused with the outer coat called caryopses. Amaranth and
quinoa fall into the class of "pseudo" these. Their cultivation includes the steps of winnowing, chaffing,
and threshing. For 10 points, name these grasses which are cultivated for their edible seeds, which include
maize, rice, and wheat.
ANSWER: Cereals [accept Grains]
One type of malformation in this anatomical feature is a protrusion of it into the foramen magnum
and is called Arnold-Chiari malformation. A certain type of cell in this anatomical feature is
progressively destroyed in Niemann-Pick syndrome. Parallel fibers connect granule cells in the cortex
of this anatomical feature to that type of large GABA-ergic neuron, (*) Purkinje cells. Its two
hemispheres are divided by the vermis, and it also contains mossy and climbing fibers. This extremely
neuron-dense portion of the brain is located adjacent to the pons and beneath the cerebral cortex, and it
helps maintain balance. For 10 points, name this anatomical feature involved in coordination and motor
control whose name means "little brain."
ANSWER: cerebellum [prompt on brain before "cortex"]
Climbing fibers send information to Purkinje (purr-KIN-jay) cells in this region. Due to this region's
supervisory rather than initiating role, damage to it tends to not cause paralysis. Unlike the larger structure
it resembles, its folds are symmetrical. Located behind the pons of the brainstem and located beneath the
cerebral cortex, this structure is evolutionarily older than the cortex. For 10 points, name the structure that
regulates and coordinates posture, balance and movement, known as the "little brain."
ANSWER: cerebellum
One theory which explains this part of the body's functioning relied on data collected by J.C Eccles and is
known as the Marr-Albus theory. One component of this structure, which arises from the pontine nuclei
creates the series of enlargements known as rosettes. In addition to mossy fibers, one type of cell in this
structure receives input from the inferior olivary nucleus via climbing fibers. Known as Purkinje cells, the
above mentioned theory notes that those fibers in this structure provide a "teaching signal" associated with
synaptic plasticity. For 10 points, name this part of the brain, which is responsible for motor control,
equilibrium and posture, and is not the cerebrum.
ANSWER: cerebellum [prompt on brain]
Part of this structure is herniated in the Type I Chari malformation, while one population of cells active in it
are inhibited by Golgi cells. It is the site of the globus, embelliform, and dentate nuclei, and one type of
cells in this organ projects upwards to form a series of parallel fibers in its topmost layer. Complex
responses are generated here by inputs from the inferior olives, while more diffuse inputs are provided by
mossy fibers. Resting on superior, middle, and inferior peduncles, it contains a granule and molecular layer
sandwiching a layer of Purkinje cells. Its divided into a flocconodular lobe, two hemispheres, and a central
vermis, and lesions here often cause dysmetria and ataxia. For 10 points, name this structure which is
responsible for motor coordination, latin for "little brain".
ANSWER: cerebellum
Part of this structure is absent in a syndrome that can cause mega cisterna magna, and which is named for
Dandy and Walker. This structure contains the fastigial, globose, emboliform, and dentate nuclei, which are
collectively called its namesake "deep nuclei" and are located in the arbor vitae. Marr and Albus proposed
theories of this structure's function. This structure includes a narrow medial tissue called its namesake
vermis. Inputs in this structure diverge to stimulate a huge number of namesake granule cells, then converge
to stimulate a much smaller number of Purkinje cells, which are among the largest neurons. For 10 points,
name this portion of the brain involved in balance and motor skills, which is located under the cerebrum.
ANSWER: cerebellum [prompt on brain until "namesake" is read]
This structure features a "climbing fiber" system originating from its contralateral inferior olive. This
structure's flocculonodular lobe is connected by Purkinje neurons to its vestibular nuclei. Though it is not
the cerebrum, this stucture's cortex is involved in motor learning. For 10 points, name this division of the
grain that governs coordination and motor control, and whose name means "little brain."
ANSWER: cerebellum
Medulloblastomas originate in this structure, and deep nuclei and vestibular nuclei are the only path for
output from it. Climbing fibers stimulate the Purkinje cells that make up much of this feature, and damage
to it can result in ataxia. It is made up of tightly folded gray matter, and its functions include processing
language and managing attention. It is located beneath the occipital lobe and behind the brainstem. For 10
points, name this structure that deals primarily with coordination and movement, whose name means "little
brain" in Latin.
ANSWER: Cerebellum [prompt on Brain]
It projects to two areas of the thalamus called the oral PL and area X. Its so-called spino section goes to the
interposed nuclei, and its vestibulo region feeds the fastigial nucleus. On its way to the thalamus, axons
from this organ's dentate area decussate in the superior peduncle. Its molecular layer consists of stellate and
basket cells that inhibit GABAergic input to the deep nuclei, which also receive excitatory connections from
pontine-derived mossy fibers and error-correcting climbing fibers. Granule cell axons in its cortex are
parallel fibers that excite its primary output, the Purkinje cells. FTP name this back part of the brain
involved in motor control, often described as "little brain."
ANSWER: cerebellum
Along with the pons, this structure develops from the rostral rhombencephalon
(rom-been-SEPH-ah-lon). The vermis separates the two hemispheres of this structure, whose other
subdivisions include the flocculonodular node. The substantia nigra (sub-STAN-sha NEE-gra) are located
within it, while mossy and climbing fibers converge upon it. Featuring Purkinje neurons, this structure is
located below the cerebral cortex. For 10 points, name this "little brain," whose responsibilities include
coordinating motor actions.
ANSWER: cerebellum
Llinas and Nicholson found that, in alligators, cells in this structure have dendritic spikes
originating from a massive, 2D dendritic arbor. The red nuclei receive signals from the motor cortex
and this part of the brain. Damage to this structure is checked with the vestibuloocular reflex.
Signals from it originate in its vestibular, fastigial, intersposed, and dentate nuclei, known collectively
as its (*) deep nuclei. Like the hippocampus, this part of the brain receives signals from mossy fibers. Its
cortex is comprised of Purkinje cells. This structure sits behind the pons. For 10 points, name this part of
the brain important for balance and motor control, whose name means "little brain."
ANSWER: cerebellum
One type of input to this region is through the mossy fibers. Two types of neurons here are called granule
and Purkinje cells. This region is located beneath the cerebral cortex and behind the pons, and damage to
this part of the brain results in uncoordinated or incorrectly timed motions. For 10 points, name this region
of the brain whose name means "little brain," and that is responsible for motor control.
ANSWER: cerebellum
SpikeFORCE and Tensor Network Theory were two attempts to model the
function of this region. It contains a dentate area that decussates in one of its
peduncles, and the molecular layer of this region contains stellates and basket cells.
Its center contains four deep nuclei, and two pathways for adherence to this region
are the climbing fiber and mossy fiber-parallel fiber systems. Its cortex contains
granule cell axons that stimulate its output, the Purkinje cells. For 10 points, name
this "little brain," a portion of the back brain responsible for motor output.
ANSWER: cerebellum
People with lesions in this structure can fail the pronation-supination test because they are unable
to perform rapid alternating movements. The deep nuclei of this structure accepts input from the
inferior olive via climbing fibers, while mossy fibers synapse on granule cells and deep nuclei. This
structure is attacked by anti-Yo antibodies in a paraneoplastic syndrome in which this structure's (*)
Purkinje cells are destroyed. This structure contains floccular and nodular lobes independent of a pair of
foliated hemispheres separated by a vermis. Along with the pons, it originates from the metencephalon. It is
located underneath the cerebrum. For 10 points, name this part of the brain responsible for coordinating
movements, whose name means "little brain."
ANSWER: cerebellum
This structure has three main divisions, including the flocculonodular lobe, and it is composed mostly
of minute granule cells. One portion of this structure is called the arbor vitae and contains "deep
nuclei" that receive excitatory input from mossy fibers and inhibitory input from Purkinje fibers.
Three peduncles connect it to other portions of the (*) brain. Its hemispheres are divided by the vermis,
and this structure is responsible for maintaining balance and coordinating and regulating muscle activity.
For 10 points, name this structure found below the cerebrum whose name means "little brain."
ANSWER: cerebellum
Disease in one part of this structure is associated with Friedrich's ataxia. This structure is connected
to the rest of the brain by three peduncles, including the brachium pontis which connects it to the
pons. The dentate nucleus is located in this structure, which also contains Purkinje cells and is
divided into two hemispheres by a (*) central vermis. Intention tremor, ataxia, and abnormal eye
movements are symptons of damage to this brain structure, because it is responsible for balance and
involuntary motor movements. For 10 points, name this brain structure located at the back of the brain,
contrasted with the cerebrum.
ANSWER: Cerebellum
The Marr-Albus model attributes learning in this region to the weakening of parallel fiber synapses. This
organ's cortex includes the molecular, Purkinje, and granular layers, the last of which is the innermost and
originates at the pontine nuclei. Many forms of ataxia, a gross loss of muscle movement, can be traced to
lesions here, since this region coordinates voluntary muscle movement such as walking. For 10 points, name
this region at the base of the brain responsible for coordination and balance, which comes from the Latin for
"little brain".
ANSWER: cerebellum
The Marr-Albus theory applies to this human organ; though located in the medulla oblongata, the inferior
olives provide inputs to this organ, so do mossy fibers. Three lobes can be seen in this organ, and the vermis
is located between the two hemispheres of this organ. Some of the largest neurons, the Purkinje cells, and
the smallest, the granule cells, are found here. Lesions in this organ can cause dysmetria or other forms of
ataxia, which are mostly motor-related. For 10 points, identify this organ located just below the cerebrum in
humans whose name means "little brain" in Latin.
ANSWER: cerebellum [do not accept or prompt on "cerebrum"]
Radiographic studies sometimes reveal that this substance is found in cavum velum interpositum in
infants. The median and lateral apertures, respectively named for Magendie and Luschka, are pathways for
it. The strongest positive result for a beta-2 transferrin assay occurs in this substance. Ependymal cells,
which secrete this substance, beat their cilia to form a "barrier" to its access. This substance may be tested
by a procedure that indicates Guillian-Barre syndrome if there are too many proteins. Its presence in
ventricles and the space between the arachnoid and pia maters mediates intracranial pressure. For 10 points,
name this liquid removed by lumbar puncture, found in and around the central nervous system.
ANSWER: cerebrospinal fluid [or CSF]
High concentrations of proline in this substance can increase the rate of glutamate release. This substance is
produced by and circulated via the ependymal cells of the choroid plexus. It is typically found in the
subarachnoid space, and arachnoid villi are sites of its reabsorption. Increased white blood cell count in this
substance can indicate Gullain-Barre syndrome, and testing this liquid is one half of the diagnostic
procedure for encephalitis. For 10 points, identify this fluid, the target of a lumbar puncture, a procedure
colloquially known as a "spinal tap."
ANSWER: cerebrospinal fluid [or CSF]
This substance can be identified by testing for beta-2 transferrin. The protein content of this
substance is analyzed by Pandy's Test. The density of another substance relative to this substance is
defined as baricity. Arachnoid villi restrict it to flow one way. This substance is produced by
ependymal cells of the choroid plexus. Oligoclonal banding in this substance is an important
diagnostic test for multiple sclerosis. When it is collected from a patient, they are usually laid on their side
in a fetal position and a very long needle is inserted between two lumbar vertebrae. For 10 points, name this
clear bodily fluid that protects the brain and is usually known by a three letter acronym.
ANSWER: cerebrospinal fluid [or CSF]
The Munro-Kellie hypothesis concerns a decrease in volume of this substance upon injury, and the
Dandy Walker malformation obstructs the flow of this substance. The beta-2 transferrin assay is used to
detect this substance, and infection by Cryptococcus neoformans causes the pressure of this substance to
increase. Oligoclonal bands appear in this substance in sufferers of multiple sclerosis, and this substance is
produced in the choroid plexus before flowing through a series of four ventricles. It occupies the
subarachnoid space. A lumbar puncture is commonly used to collect this substance, which makes up seven
percent of the volume of the skull. For 10 points, name this clear substance that cushions the brain and
spinal cord.
ANSWER: cerebrospinal fluid [or CSF]
Parkinson's disease is a disorder of the substantia nigra, which is located in this brain structure's basal
ganglia. Another subregion of this structure is the limbic system, which contains the amygdala and the
olfactory bulb. The two major physical sections of this structure are divided by the corpus callosum. The
name "gray matter" comes from the color of this structure's outermost layer. This structure, which is
divided into hemispheres, controls voluntary action along with the cerebellum. For 10 points, name this area
of the brain that has a namesake "cortex."
ANSWER: the cerebrum [or telencephalon; do not accept or prompt on "cerebellum"]
The telencephalon is the embryonic structure from which this part of the body develops. In humans
subdivisions include Broca's area and Wernicke's area, and executive functions are thought to be controlled
by the basal ganglia in this part of the body. The corpus callosum connects the left and right hemispheres of
this part of the brain. For 10 points, name this part of the brain that controls much of the higher level
functioning of organisms and is usually paired with the cerebellum.
ANSWER: cerebrum [prompt on brain until mentioned]
46 stages of this organism's development are posited by the Hamburger-Hamilton model, which
helped popularize its use as a model organism. Experiments on these organisms led to the discovery
of the first oncovirus. The src ["sarc"] oncogene was discovered in these organisms after Peyton Rous
infected them with a sarcoma virus. Bateson and Punnett showed that traits can be controlled by
multiple genes while doing experiments with the Brahma and Wyandotte types of these organisms. A
disease (*) informally named for these organisms is caused by the varicella zoster virus and may manifest
as shingles in adult life. For 10 points, name these creatures of genus Gallus that can flap their wings and
run around after decapitation.
ANSWER: chickens [or Gallus gallus before mention]
A mutant talpid2 gene in this organism induces teeth, and the first identified tumor virus to be
found, the Rous sarcoma virus, was isolated in this organism. Its embryo, an important
developmental model, has a Hensen's node. B cells are named after the Bursa of Fabricius of this
organism. It was first (*) domesticated in southeast Asia, and the most common breed of this creature is
the Leghorn. For 10 points, name this species of bird whose current population is highly inbred because
humans prefer eating ones with more meat.
ANSWER: chicken [or Gallus gallus domesticus; prompt on bird; prompt on jungle fowl]
Although not the simplex virus, the virus that causes this disease is most commonly treated with
acyclovir. A reappearance of that virus that causes this disease can cause postherpetic neuralgia.
That virus is varicella (*) zoster, which causes shingles when it reappears. Calamine lotion or oatmeal
baths are often used to relieve the symptoms of this disease, which is no longer contagious after its
associated rash crusts over. For 10 points, name this disease that causes itchy red spots to appear on the
body.
ANSWER: chickenpox [or varicella until it is read; prompt on shingles until is read]
The progress of this process is measured using the modified Bishop's score, and lack of blood
during this process causes necrosis of the pituitary in Sheehan's syndrome. This process is impeded
by shoulder dystocia, and Group B streptococcal infection is a common side effect of it. Immediately
after this process, appearance, activity, and respiration are measured on a zero to two scale in order
to obtain the (*) Apgar score. This process is eased by using a Tuohy needle to inject bupivacaine into the
epidural space. During this process, dilation of the cervix and rupture of the membrane occurs. An
alternative to this process is a Caesarean section. For 10 points, name this process in which a child is
expelled from the uterus.
ANSWER: childbirth [or labor; accept equivalents]
One of these creatures performed the "masking task" after learning how to match Arabic numerals
to objects bearing the corresponding numbers. These creatures formed male-only "border patrols" to
kill individuals who wandered off from the main group. Some of these creatures stacked boxes to
reach food in an experiment designed by (*) Wolfgang Kohler. At Columbia University, Herbert Terrace
taught American Sign Language to one of these creatures, who was given a name punning on "Noam
Chomsky." Another scientist observed them using stalks of grass to dislodge termites from mounds,
disproving the notion that only humans could use tools. For 10 points, name these primates studied
extensively by Jane Goodall.
ANSWER: common chimpanzees [or Pan troglodytes; prompt on primates until mentioned; prompt on monkeys; prompt on apes; in case anyone's curious, the chimp's name was "Nim Chimpsky"]
One of these named Enos went into space, and other scientific examples of these animals include Washoe
and Nim, namesakes of animal language acquisition studies. Another researcher of these creatures named
one "David Graybeard" after going to Gombe Valley, Tanzania to document social patterns among these
members of genus Pan. Investigated by Jane Goodall, for 10 points, name these large-eared primates often
studied due to their brain power and similarity to humans.
ANSWER: chimpanzees [accept Pan troglodytes; prompt "monkeys" or "primates" until read]
Wrangham and Peterson observed these creatures' violent behavior before positing the "demonic males"
hypothesis. Their vocalizations include the crescendoing, accelerating "pant hoot." Beatrix and R. Allen
Gardner ran a study on one of these named Washoe. The book In the Shadow of Man describes the splitting
of a group of these creatures at Gombe stream. The failure of Project Nim verified Noam Chomsky's
opinions on these creatures' cognitive ability. These closest relatives of the hypersexual bonobo were
studied in the wild by Jane Goodall. For 10 points, name these members of genus Pan who can be taught
linguistic hand signs, a type of great ape.
ANSWER: chimpanzees [or Pan troglodytus before mention]
The relict agnurognathid pterosaur Dendrorhynchoides and the dinosaur-eating mammal
Repenomamus are some of the fossils from this country's Lower Cretaceous Jehol biota. Dinosaurs
from this country include Euhelopus, Caudipteryx and Mamenchisaurus. The Zomia massif includes
the southwestern mountains of this country, where the tiny four-winged dromaeosaurid Microraptor
and the early tyrannosaurid Dilong were discovered. This country is the location of the loess plateau.
(*) In this country, stress between the Amurian plate and the Eurasian plate caused a 1976 earthquake in
Tangshan. For 10 points, name this country where Sinosauropteryx was discovered, the location of the
Maotianshan Shale in Chengjiang.
ANSWER: People's Republic of China
Interleukin-4 builds up in mice treated with high levels of this substance, which citrus plants have the
ability to break down in a self-defense mechanism. Two forms of it comprise the different zones of the
Buccinum radula, and along with proteins and toxins, it makes up the beaks of cephalopods. Two
Nglucosamine units repeat to form chains of it, and when encrusted in calcium carbonate, it forms the
arthropod exoskeleton. For 10 points, name this polymer that differs from cellulose by one acetylamine
group.
ANSWER: chitin
This material can be used industrially to purify water because of its ability to bond with both organic
PCBs and heavy metals often found in waste water. This material consists of repeated N-acetylglucosamine residues linked together by beta-1-4 glycosidic bonds, although those bonds can be
hydrolyzed by lysozyme, which protects mammals from infection. Although in its natural state this material
is soft and leathery, when it mixes with sclerotin, it becomes encrusted with calcium carbonate. It is
believed to have made up the bodies of trilobites as early as the Pre-Cambrian Era. 10 points, name this
hard protein that makes up the cell wall of fungi and the exoskeleton of insects and arachnids.
ANSWER: chitin
A research team showed that mice injected with this material have a buildup of interleukin-4 cells,
characteristic of an allergic reaction, and this material has also been used by medical teams as a
biodegradable suture. A similar structure has random portions of deacetylation and is more soluble in water,
while a sample of this material over 25 million years old was discovered, proving its longevity. It has a
structure that is similar to cellulose, with a hydroxyl group replaced by an acetylamine, and its unique
properties are largely derived from the hydrogen bonding due to this difference. Composed of monomers of
N-acetylglucosamide, FTP, identify this polymer found in the cell walls of fungi and the exoskeleton of
arthropods.
ANSWER: Chitin
This polymer can be deacetylated using sodium hydroxide to form a compound used as a pesticide and
coagulant. Because members of the genus Rozella do not synthesize this material, they are placed in a
separate clade called cryptomycota. In some invertebrates, the protein sclerotin cross-links with this
substance. Teeth containing this substance lie in a membrane on the odontophore in the radulas of some
molluscs. This material consists of N-acetyl-glucosamine monomers linked by beta 1,4 bonds, giving it a
toughness suitable for inclusion in the cell walls of fungi. For 10 points, name this polysaccharide which
forms part of the exoskeletons of arthropods.
ANSWER: chitin [prompt on "N-acetylglucosamine", "NAG", or "GlcNAc" until mentioned]
Vibrio and Aeromonad bacteria have enzymes that can break down this molecule, and that enzyme is often
abnormally active in asthma sufferers. Deacylating this molecule results in a more water-soluble version
which is given the suffix -osan. This molecule derives its structural differences from a similar molecule due
to the substitution of a acetylamine for a hydroxyl, which allows increased hydrogen bonding. Composed of
beta-1,4 linkages, For 10 points, name this long-chain polymer found in fungal cell walls and arthropod
exoskeletons.
ANSWER: chitin
This material can be isolated using hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, and ethanol to remove the living
substance it usually is part of, and it can then be used to cover solar panels because of its high light
transmittance. A layer of this substance coats the midgut in many arthropods, and it provides hardness in the
gladius [GLA-dee-us] of some cephalopods [SEH-fah-loe-pods]. Though it does not exist in vertebrae and
plants, it is found in fungi [fun-gie] cell walls and arthropod exoskeletons. Name this substance with
similarities to keratin [KEHR-ah-tin] and cellulose.
ANSWER: chitin
This molecule is used as a flocculating agent in the industrial treatment of fluid waste. Membranes
made of this molecule are used in electrodialysis and the dressing of wounds. This molecule consists of
units with the formula C8H13NO5, forming a long chain from N-acetylglucosamine. This molecule
structures the cell walls of hyphae and the beaks of cephalopods. For 10 points, name this polymer that
comprises the walls of fungi and the exoskeletons of arthropods.
ANSWER: chitin
This organism can cause violin-string adhesions to the liver in FitzHugh-Curtis syndrome. This
organism cycles through elementary body and reticular body phases. This organism also causes a form of
conjunctivitis with inclusion bodies in the newborn children of infected patients. This bacterium, like
Neisseria, can cause pelvic inflammatory disease and urethritis. For 10 points, name this causative agent of
the most common sexually transmitted disease.
ANSWER: chlamydia trachomatis [or C. trachomatis]
Ivermectin inhibits glutamate-gated channels that conduct this ion, and mutations in another channel
that conduct it cause myotonia congenita. Because this ion has an equilibrium potential close to
negative 65 millivolts, it causes shunting inhibition in neurons. Via G-protein hyperactivation,
cholera toxin causes diarrhea by driving the (*) efflux of this ion. A co-transporter that moves two of
this ion, along with sodium and potassium, is inhibited by loop diuretics. Another channel that conducts
both this ion and thiocyanate is stuck to the cytoskeleton by a PDZ domain, and a deletion at phenylalanine508 of that protein causes cystic fibrosis. For 10 points, name this anion, the predominant negativelycharged species in both the cytosol and extracellular fluid.
ANSWER: chloride [or Cl-]
FMO protein and an analogue of this substance are uncharacteristically synthesized by Cab.
thermophilum under oxic conditions. Aerobic oxidative cyclase is critical in the formation of this
substance as is either LPOR (ell-"poor") or DPOR (dee-"poor"). The genes psbA and psbD encode
two proteins that bind it, D1 and D2. This (*) porphyrin chelates a magnesium ion, and its a and b types
differ in their absorption spectra and are found in "special pairs" called P680 and P700. Pheophytin is
provided with high-energy electrons by this substance, which is embedded in the thylakoid membrane. For
10 points, name this substance that absorbs light in photosynthesis, a green pigment found in plants.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
The D1 and D2 proteins bind to this compound, which can be synthesized from succinyl-CoA and
glycine. This compound includes a phytol chain composed of twenty carbons, and it consists of a porphyrin
(POR-fu-rin) ring coordinated with a magnesium atom. This compound, which comes in P680 and P700
types, is found in the thylakoid membrane and is used by plants to absorb light. For 10 points, identify this
green pigment found in plants.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
Durning senescence, this compound is metabolized into tetrapyrrole catabolites known as NCCs.
Though not heme, it is often synthesized from succinyl-CoA and glycine, and it often includes a long
phytol chain. Consisting of a [*] porphyrin coordinated to an atom of magnesium, the a and b varieties
absorb light at slightly different wavelengths, and it can be found in the thylakoids. For 10 points, name this
pigment molecule, located in a similarly named plant organelle, which is the key factor in photosynthesis.
ANSWER: Chlorophyll
Cell bodies in which this substance has not yet been synthesized are called etioplasts. The synthesis of
this substance is stimulated by cytokinin and can be inhibited by iron deficiency. Its catabolism is
accompanied by an increase in pheophytin a and results in its conversion into a set of tetrapyrrole
compounds. This porphyrin contains a central (*) magnesium ion, and its "E" type is found only in two
species of golden algae. It is located in structures that are arranged in grana, thylakoids, where it is arranged
with protein complexes called photosystems. For 10 points, name this green plant pigment that helps
capture light energy.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
Some versions of this compound are distinguished by having a long phytyl side chain, and variations in
its fluorescence properties are the subject of the Kautsky effect. Removing the central metal of this
compound gives pheophytin. This compound, which typically contains a magnesium atom coordinated to a
porphyrin ring, is present in the reaction centers of photosystems I and II of the chloroplast. For 10 points,
name this pigment used to absorb light, that gives plants its green color.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
This molecule contains four cyclic tetrapyrroles that form a macrocycle. It also contains a 20-carbon
phytol chain. A magnesium atom found in a porphyrin ring is characteristic of this compound, which comes
in P680 and P700 types. Found in the thylakoid membrane, there are "a" and "b" types of this substance,
which is used in photosynthesis to absord light. For 10 points, name this green pigment in plants.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
This molecule was studied by Theodor Engelmann, who used aerobic bacteria to determine its action
spectrum. In diatoms, fucoxanthin masks the presence of this molecule, creating a golden color. A
magnesium atom is at the center of its porphyrin ring. Special ones designated P680 and P700 are found in
the reaction centers of photosystems. The two "c" forms are found in algae, while the "a" and "b" forms are
used by plants. This pigment is located in the thylakoid membrane. For 10 points, name this pigment used in
photosynthesis, which makes plants green.
ANSWER: Chlorophyll [accept chlorophyll a until "c" form is mentioned]
The F-type of this molecule was recently discovered in Western Australia and is able to utilize lower
energies then its more common counterparts. This compound's central pyrrol-derivative ring is often
esterified to include a phytol substituent, and this molecule's central ring surrounds a magnesium ion. The
more common A-type of this molecule is a primary electron acceptor in the electron transport chain and
absorbs light at 680 or 700 nanometers in photosystems I and II. For 10 points, name this green pigment
used in photosynthesis that is found in all plants.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
This substance consists of a central magnesium atom surrounded by a four nitrogen porphyrin
(POOR-fih-rin) ring that is attached to a long carbon-hydrogen phytol (FIE-tohl) chain. The e types
of this entity are found in golden algae while the a and b types are found in green algae. They can be
found in membrane bound structure called a (*) thylakoid (THIGH-luh-koids) and provide energy for
the light dependent reactions. For 10 points, name this class of pigments that absorbs light and provides the
energy for photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
NASA's Sea-WIFS [sea-whiffs] sensor is specifically designed to measure the concentration of it in the
ocean. Its absorption in the visible red region and reflectance in the near-infrared region of the
electromagnetic spectrum allows for remotely sensed proxy measures such as NDVI and EVI. Its a form is
its most common, while other varieties include the b, c1, c2, and d. Fischer, Woodward, and Fleming made
major discoveries of its different forms, while a deficiency of it can be caused by unsuitable soil pH, which
reduces nitrogen and magnesium availability. For 10 points, name this polyphyrin compound coordinated
with magnesium, which converts sunlight into chemical energy in green plants.
ANSWER: Chlorophyll
Oxygen production was dependent on this molecule in an experiment performed by Theodor Wilhelm
Engelmann that used freshwater algae. Min Chen recently identified the "f" type of this molecule in
stromatolites. Located in an organelle that is mainly in mesophyll cells, this molecule has a porphyrin ring
coordinated to a central magnesium ion. A common experiment involves separation using paper
chromatography of carotene, pheophytin, xanthophyll, and the "a" and "b" types of this molecule.
Photosystem I contains a dimer of this molecule whose peak absorption is at 700 nanometers. For 10 points,
name this green pigment located in the chloroplasts of plants.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
This molecule is synthesized stepwise using succinyl-CoA and glycine precursors, and one derivative of this
molecule has a fixed orientation and is known as pheophyti. The a and b types are distinguished by the
presence of an aldehyde group on one of its pyrrole rings, and most of these compounds have a long phytol
chain. Two molecules of this magnesium-containing compound are present at the reaction center of
photosystem II. For 10 points, name this compound which channels energy towards it during the light
reactions of photosynthesis and which is found in the chloroplast.
ANSWER: chlorophyll
Transport across this organelle's membrane is facilitated by the tic and toc proteins. Lynn Margulis
theorized that this lumen-containing organelle, like the mitochondrion, originated as a separate prokaryotic
organism before it was taken into the eukaryotic cell in a process called endosymbiosis. Thylakoid stacks
arranged in this organelle create grana, which are the location of a process in which ATP and NADPH are
used to turn carbon dioxide into glucose. For 10 points, name this green plant organelle, the site of
photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chloroplasts
The rpo genes encodes one of this structure's RNAPs, while the other is a nuclear encoded
polymerase. Among the materials found in this structure are cytochrome b6f, the protein P680, and a
class of molecules called plastoquinones. One reaction in this organelle uses (*) RuBiSCo. In this
structure, the stromal lamellae connects disk like structures called granum. This organelle consists of stacks
called granum which consist of several thylakoids; the thylakoids contain this organelle's characteristic
green pigment. For 10 points, name this plant organelle that is the site of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chloroplast [prompt on plastid before P680]
In some organisms, DNA associated with this structure can confer atrazine resistance via the
psbA gene. Organisms also express a family of envelope protein translocases for this organelle
called Tic and Toc. That aforementioned type of DNA often forms trimers and tetramers.
Molecules associated with this structure include plastoquinone and NADPH, which is used in
this structure's electron transport chain. Stacks of thylakoids are found dispersed throughout
the stroma of this organelle. For 10 points, name this organelle, the main site of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chloroplast
This organelle contains pheophytin and is located in the antenna complexes. This organelle uses Tic
and Toc complexes to process transit peptides, and certain structures within this organelle are
connected by lamellae. In this organelle, stroma fluid surrounds grana, which are stacks of [*]
thylakoid disks, and P680 and P700 are the reaction centers of photosytems I and II. One process occurring
in this organelle uses NADPH and rubisco to convert carbon dioxide to glucose. The site of the Calvin
cycle, for 10 points, identify this green plant organelle, the site of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chloroplasts
One structure in this organelle forms in the presence of VIPP1 and contains the cytochrome b6f complex;
that structure contains plastocyanin. The presence of a peptidoglycan cell wall in this organelle in certain
glaucophyte algae supports the hypothesis that this organelle arose from endosymbiosis with cyanobacteria.
This organelle's lamellae connect the grana, stacks of structures called thylakoids, which sit inside its inner
membrane. For 10 points, identify this common organelle, whose stroma contains enzymes like rubisco, the
site of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chloroplast
In some organisms, this organelle possesses a structure called a pyrenoid, which regulates diffusion.
Another structure in this organelle contains the cytochrome b6f complex. This organelle contains the TIC
and TOC translocases. Lamellae connect the grana within this organelle, and the stroma is the fluid which
surrounds thylakoids in this organelle. The aforementioned stroma is the site of the Calvin cycle in this
organelle, which is found in photosynthetic organisms. For 10 points, identify this organelle whose color
comes from its chlorophyll.
ANSWER: chloroplasts
This organelle contains ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase, an iron-sulfur enzyme that increases electron
transfer. Though it does not take part in oxidative phosphorylation, it uses ATPase to separate a phosphate
from ATP. The fluid inside of it, which contains enzymes such as RuBisCO, is the stroma. The enzyme
cytochrome b6f complex is located in its thylakoids, disks which are stacked to form grana. The stroma
within this organelle is the location of the Calvin cycle, which is also known as the dark reactions, and these
organelles are often contrasted with mitochondria because both convert energy. Name these organelles
evolved from cyanobacteria that conduct photosynthesis and are green.
ANSWER: chloroplasts
This organelle's outer membrane contains an antiporter that exports triose phosphate, and precursor proteins
are imported here using Tic and Toc proteins. Like mitochondria, these organelles are thought to have
evolved through endosymbiosis. Lamella connect the grana inside this organelle. Those grana are stacks of
suborganelles inside of which photophosphorylation (FO-toe-FOSS-for-ill-AY-shun) occurs. These
organelles contain thylakoids, which possess light-absorbing pigments like chlorophyll. For 10 points,
identify this organelle responsible for photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chloroplasts
Lamellae (LAH-muh-lay) are found within this organelle, in which cyclic electron flow occurs. The free
space in this organelle is called the stroma, and it also contains many thylakoids (THIGH-luh-koids)
arranged in stacks, or grana. A type of plastid, they are said to be descended from cyanobacteria that
underwent endosymbiosis. Functions carried out by this organelle include the Calvin cycle and light
absorption. For 10 points, name this plant organelle in which photosynthesis occurs.
ANSWER: chloroplast
The b6f complex, a reductase, travels in this structure between two protein complexes which use quinone,
iron-sulfur proteins, and the groups P680 and P700 in their function. Mereschkowsky was the first to
suggest that this structure originated from endosymbiotic cyanobacteria, a theory supported by its
possession of its own circular DNA. Surrounded by a double-layered composite membrane with an
intermembrane space, the interior consists mainly of stacks of thylakoids called grana in stroma. FTP, name
this organelle that is the site of photosynthesis in a plant cell.
ANSWER: Chloroplast
A complex found in this organelle has the Ycf4 (read out letters/numbers) domain and evolved from
green sulfur bacteria. Another enzyme found in this organelle transfers electrons between four manganese
atoms in the Kok ("KOHK") cycle. A membrane in this organelle contains centers called P700 and P680.
This organelle has lamellae (LUH-mell-ee) connecting grana (GRAH-nuh), which are stacks of thylakoids.
For 10 points, name this organelle that conducts photosynthesis in the plant.
ANSWER: chloroplasts [prompt on plastids]
In some cells, these organelles can be linked together by tubes called stromules, while one of their functions
is performed by the namesake molecule in antenna complexes. They are thought to have arisen from
cyanobacteria through endosymbiosis, and they are composed of thylakoids stacked into grana and
suspended in stroma. For 10 points, name these organelles, found only in the cells of plants and some
protists, where photosynthesis occurs.
ANSWER: chloroplasts [accept plastids before "molecule"]
Some sea slugs have the klepto type of these. They contain translocons called Tic and Toc, which transport
essential proteins into them from the cytoplasm. Multiple ones can function as a network when
interconnected by stromules. When electromagnetic radiation enters one of these, an electron transport
chain is set off, resulting in NADPH. Made up of stacks of thylakoids called grana, they are filled with a
liquid containing ions and enzymes, including RuBisCO. Found in bacteria, algae, and plants, their
distinctive color comes from the a and b types of chlorophyll. For 10 points, name these green organelles
where photosynthesis takes place in plants.
ANSWER: chloroplasts (prompt on plastids until "Tic" is read)
One sub-structure in this organelle develops with the aid of VIPP1, a protein present in every organism
that contains this organelle, from Arabidopsis Thaliana to cyanobacteria. Besides a similarly-named
compound, these organelles contain carotenoid pigments. Lamellae connect parts of the stroma, the fluid
that surrounds stacks of thylakoids. These structures also consist of a fluid stroma, where NADP is reduced
to NADPH after light energy is captured. For 10 points, identify these organelles that carry out
photosynthesis in plants.
ANSWER: chloroplasts
Like cyanobacteria, this structure contains the cytochrome B6F complex, which works to transfer
protons and electrons over a membrane in this structure. This structure contains carotenoids like
beta-carotene, which have yellow and red pigments, and in this organelle, (*) rubisco is used in a cycle
that fixes carbon within the stroma. This organelle is the site of the Calvin cycle, and contains the thylakoid
membrane that makes up grana. For 10 points, name this organelle that generates glucose and fructose after
performing photosynthesis, a plant organelle that has the green pigment chlorophyll.
ANSWER: chloroplast [or thylakoid until "organelle"]
Stengel et al found that in Pisum satium, preprotein import into these via translocons is regulated by redox
signals. An eponymous peripheral reticulum increases the surface area for transport between the cytoplasm
and a fluid containing its namesake DNA. That DNA is usually combined into one large ring, though
dinoflagellate algae contain forty plasmids with these genes. The TIC and TOC complexes import proteins
into this organelle. The internal stroma fluid contains grana, stacks of thylakoids, the site of photoreduction.
Identify this organelle which is the site of photosynthesis and contains chlorophyll.
ANSWER: chloroplast
Linolenic (LIE-no-leen-ik) acid from this organelle is used to make jasmonic acid, and the Tic
and Toc translocons help transport molecules into this organelle. This organelle contains the
strongest known biological reducing and oxidizing agents in P700 and P680, respectively. This
organelle likely originated as cyanobacteria which formed an (*) endosymbiotic
(END-oh-sim-bee-AH-tik) relationship with a eukaryote. It contains sacks called thylakoids which are
surrounded by the stroma, where the Calvin cycle occurs. For 10 points, name this chlorophyll-containing
organelle found in plants.
ANSWER: chloroplasts [prompt on plastids]
Proteins required for transport of molecules into this structure include the Tic and Toc complexes,
and adding two arginine residues to the N terminus of proteins marks them for one part of this
structure. Along with an analogous structure found in all eukaryotes, this organelle is evidence for
the (*) endosymbiotic theory. It consists of stacks of thylakoids called grana; outside the thylakoids is a
space called the stroma in which the Calvin cycle occurs. For 10 points, name this organelle responsible
for carbon fixation through photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chloroplasts
This organelle's membrane contains a triose phosphate/phosphate antiporter. Proteins are shuffled
within it via the twin-arginine translocator system. Proton pumping within this organelle creates one
compartment with pH 8 and another with pH 4. Lamellae connect grana within this organelle. P700 and
P680 reaction centers are found within the membranes of small sacs within this organelle known as
thylakoids. For 10 points, name this photosynthetic organelle.
ANSWER: Chloroplast
The tic and toc proteins facilitate transport across the membrane of this organelle. Cyanophora is considered
to be one of the first organisms to contain this organelle, and a variety of sea slugs possess the klepto
variety of these organelles. Along with mitochondria, this organelle is theorized to have started out as an
individual prokaryote before undergoing endosymbiosis. Grana in this organelle are formed from stacks of
thylakoids, whose membranes are the location where this organelle turns carbon dioxide and water into
glucose. For 10 points, name this plant organelle in which photosynthesis occurs.
ANSWER: Chloroplasts
In this organelle, plastoquinone acts as an electron acceptor for the cytochrome b6f complex.
Proteins are transported across this organelle's membrance through the TIC and TOC complexes.
This organelle is thought to have formed from endosymbiosis with (*) cyanobacteria, and grana in it are
formed from stacks of thylakoids. The stroma of this organelle is the site of the Calvin cycle. For 10 points,
identify this plant organelle that is the site of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: chloroplasts [prompt on plastids]
During an 1853 outbreak of this disease in London, the prevailing theory that it was caused by noxious
gases emanating from piles of manure was largely debunked. Name this intestinal disease caused by a
bacterium of genus Vibrio. Its severe form can result in massive diarrhea, rapid dehydration, shock, and
eventually death.
ANSWER: cholera
One possible treatment for this disease involves stimulating enkephalins, which inhibit the overproduction
of cAMP. The El Tor strain is much milder than the classic strain, but unlike the classic strain, it is capable
of host-to-host transmission. The method of its spread was discovered in 1854 when an outbreak in Soho,
London was traced by Dr. John Snow to a pump on Broad Street. Electrolyte replacement therapy is
essential, as a patient infected with this disease quickly becomes dehydrated through the vomiting and
diarrhea it causes. For 10 points, name this gastroenteric disease caused by a bacterium of genus Vibrio,
usually spread through contaminated water.
ANSWER: Asiatic or epidemic cholera (prompt on gastroenteritis before mentioned, accept "Vibrio cholerae", I guess)
Efforts to control this disease in Russia in 1830 led to riots. Caused by the genus Vibrio, the seventh and
current pandemic of this disease is named after a town on the Sinai Peninsula, El Tor, though it is now
believed to have spread from Bangladesh. This disease, which recently spread to Haiti and the Dominican
Republic, can usually be treated by rehydration but leads to one hundred thousand annual deaths worldwide.
Name this disease which is rare in developed countries largely because of water purification.
ANSWER: cholera
The bacteria responsible for this disease can form colonies with rugose morphology. The toxin in
this disease ribosylates G proteins leading to constitutive cAMP production. Serogroup O1 of its
causative agent is responsible for its Asiatic form. It is caused by a bacterium in genus (*) Vibrio, and
death from this disease often is because of dehydration. For 10 points, name this severe disease of the
intestines that can be contracted from drinking water contaminated with fecal material.
ANSWER: cholera
The toxin associated with this disease causes G proteins to be constitutively active, and sufferers of
cystic fibrosis may be less prone to this disease. One famous outbreak of this disease was preceded by
outbreaks in Newcastle and Gateshead, and occurred in the Soho district. That epidemic of this disease is
named after Broad Street, and was a case study in epidemiology as investigated by John Snow. For 10
points, name this disease that the aforementioned doctor discovered was transmitted by contaminated
water.
ANSWER: cholera
Tetracycline is the primary antibiotic for this illness. However, antibiotics are not enough and the
primary treatment of this illness is oral rehydration therapy. The illness itself is due to a gramnegative strain of bacteria that produces its namesake toxin and enterotoxin which attacks the
mucosal epithelium of the small intestine which results in severe diarrhea; the primary symptom. Other
symptoms include pale fluid stools and dramatic fluid loss. First isolated by Filippo Pacini in 1854, FTP,
identify this disease whose most recent pandemic killed 16,000 in Zimbabwe in fall 2008.
ANSWER: Cholera
Risk factors for this disease are hypochlorhydria and, for unknown reasons, type O blood. Because of a
deficiency in transmembrane proteins, people who are heterozygous for cystic fibrosis are more resistant to
this disease. Its toxicity to the body results from enterotoxins produced by a Gram-negative bacteria, with
the one that shares a name with the disease causing ion channels to open in the intestines, causing severe
osmotic fluid loss. As such, the most common treatment is oral rehydration therapy to replace lost fluids and
electrolytes. For 10 points, name this disease caused by a bacteria of the genus Vibrio that is characterized
by severe, watery diarrhea.
ANSWER: cholera
A mutation in the enzyme catalyzing the final step of its biosynthesis gives rise to Smith-Lemli-Opitz
syndrome, while its presence in plasma is measured by the Lieberman-Burchard test. The SREBP
transcription factors are regulated by this molecule. One step of its biosynthesis sees the creation of a
certain 2,3-epoxide, which then cyclizes, and it is sometimes stored in chylomicrons. Farnesyl
pyrophosphate and squalene are intermediates in that process and that pathway begins with the
condensation of three acetyl coAs to yield HMG-CoA, which is reduced to mevalonate. That step is
regulated by drugs called statins. For 10 points, identify this ubiquitous steroid that can cause
atherosclerosis when bound to lipoproteins.
ANSWER: cholesterol
It is generated by the 14-demethylation of lanosterol, but its synthesis begins by proceeding through the
mevalonate pathway, and squalene is one of its close precursors, like all steroids. It prevents the cell
membrane from becoming too fluid at high temperatures while maintaining some fluidity at low
temperatures, but it is best known for the associated molecules that transport it, lipoproteins. FTP, name this
molecule transported by HDL and LDL, which can, according to the lipid hypothesis, damage heart health.
ANSWER: cholesterol (accept mevalonate pathway before "mevalonic acid;" prompt on mevalonate pathway before mention)
Rab9 is hyperactive in NPC1-deficient cells to ensure transport of this molecule. Enzymes in the
endoplasmic reticulum's membrane convert squalene to this molecule, whose derivatives include bile
acids and Vitamin D. Crystals of this molecule form during atherosclerosis, and this molecule can be
carried by both high-density and low-density lipoproteins. For 10 points, name this lipid and precursor
to steroid hormones.
ANSWER: cholesterol
Transcription factors that regulate this compound's synthesis recognize the sequence TCACNCCAC;
those transcription factors are activated when high levels of this compound are detected by SCAPs.
This compound is a precursor to glucocorticoids and estrogens, and the synthesis of this compound is
regulated by SREBPs. A decrease in Coenzyme (*) Q is a side effect of a class of drugs that reduces this
compound's synthesis by inhibiting HMG Co-A Reductases; those drugs are called statins. This compound
maintains fluidity of the plasma membrane at extreme temperatures. For 10 points, name this compound that
is transported by the lipoproteins LDL and HDL, which are called its "bad" and "good" types.
ANSWER: cholesterol
This compound binds to Glycine 257 of Hedgehog protein to activate it, and this compound's production is
modulated by class 2 SREBP transcription factors. A precursor to this molecule is synthesized by the
epoxidification of squalene. Side effects of drugs that inhibit the production of this compound include a
drop in coenzyme q 10 levels, and those drugs inhibit HMG CoA reductases. This compound is the starting
material for the synthesis of aldosterone and other steroid hormones. Building up of this material along
arterial walls can cause atherosclerosis. For 10 points, name this compound, often classified into LDL and
HDL, which are its "good" and "bad" types.
ANSWER: cholesterol
This substance is synthesized by the cyclization of squalene epoxide. The rate-limiting step in this
molecule's production is catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase, an enzyme inhibited by statins. The liver
converts this molecule to bile acids, while the skin converts it into Vitamin D. Its uptake is the canonical
example of receptor-mediated endocytosis. It is transported via lipoproteins, including HDL, the "good"
kind, and LDL, the "bad" kind. For 10 points, name this precursor to most steroids.
ANSWER: cholesterol
Compounds synthesized from this molecule include progesterone, cortisol, and Vitamin D. This 27-Carbon
molecule is converted into bile in the liver, and it makes up the majority of gallstones. It is carried through
the bloodstream by high and low density lipoproteins, or HDLs and LDLs, which are sometimes referred to
as its "good" and "bad" varieties. High levels of this molecule are often associated with atherosclerosis and
cardiovascular disease and are treated with statins. FTP, name this waxy fatty substance, probably the most
famous sterol.
ANSWER: Cholesterol
ABCA1 and ABCG1 are responsible for pumping excesses of this compound into the bloodstream,
and Type C Niemann-Pick disease results in this compound building up in lysosomes. INSIG-1
binding to SCAP is responsible for down-regulating the biosynthesis of this molecule, which is
regulated by SREBP-dependent transcription. Esters of this compound are commonly transported by
an ApoB100-containing complex, and it can also be transported by chylomicrons. One step in its
synthesis is the condensation of acetoacetyl-CoA with acetyl-CoA, which is catalyzed by HMG-CoA
synthase, and the step catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase is inhibited by statins. It contains 4 fused rings, is
the precursor for all steroid hormones and bile salts, and regulates membrane fluidity. HDL and LDL are
the "good" and "bad" kinds of, for 10 points, this common 27-carbon lipid.
ANSWER: Cholesterol
Squaline epoxidase and prenyl transferase are two enzymes involved in the synthesis of this substance,
which is upregulated by SREBP. Mevalonate is an intermediate in the synthesis of this substance, which
begins with HMG-CoA. This substance is used as a precursor in the synthesis of vitamin D. This substance
can be produced by the liver, and like tryglycerides, it can accumulate and lead to heart disease. For 10
points, name this fat-like compound, which comes in HDL and LDL types.
ANSWER: cholesterol
The enzyme LCAT catalyzes the formation of an ester from this compound. Intermediates in the synthesis
of this compound include squalene [SKWAY-leen] and mevalonate [muh-VAL-uh-nate], the latter of which
is produced by HMG-CoA reductase. Vitamin D is formed from the 7-dehydro form of this compound,
which reduces membrane fluidity. This compound, which is transported to the liver by high-density
lipoprotein, is linked to heart disease. For 10 points, name this compound whose amount in the blood is
lowered by statins such as Crestor and Lipitor.
ANSWER: cholesterol
The last step in this compound's synthesis is the demethylation (DEE-meth-uh-LAY-shun) of lanosterol
(luh-NOST-uh-rawl). Cholestyramine (koh-luh-STY-ruh-meen) prevents bile acids from being used to
resynthesize this compound. The rate-determining step of this compound's synthesis is determined by
HMG-CoA ("H"-"M"-"G" co-"A") reductase activity. That step is targeted by drugs known as statins, to
prevent this compound's synthesis. This compound is transported in assemblies that contain the APOB
("A"-"P"-"O"-"B")protein and whose "low-density" variety is mainly responsible for atherosclerosis
(AATH-er-ohs-cler-OH-sis). For 10 points, name this waxy, steroid compound.
ANSWER: cholesterol
Increased levels of this substance in the blood causes tendon xanthomas and senile arcus in the eyes.
The rate-limiting step of the synthesis of this compound is catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase. This
substance is the final common product in the production of terpenes. It is the predecessor of steroid
hormones and is responsible for regulating the fluidity of cell membranes. For 10 points, name this
substance, whose levels in the bloodstream are decreased by statins.
ANSWER: cholesterol
PCSK9 targets molecules of this for destruction, and Goldstein and Brown identified a Mendelian
disorder in which individual died as a result of high levels of this. Bile acid binders can be used to
treat that disease, as this compound is a precursor of bile acid. HMG-CoA reductase interrupts the
key committed step in the formation of this compound from (*) acetate. This compound is a structural
component of cell membranes and a precursor to vitamin D. HDL is known as the "good" type of this, while
LDL is known to cause heart disease. Dietary sources of this compound include egg yolks and beef. For 10
points, identify this compound, a member of the steroid family.
ANSWER: cholesterol [accept LDL until HDL is mentioned]
This substance accumulates in the bodies of patients whose receptors for this substance's carriers are
unable to recognize apoprotein B100. Drugs that inhibit the synthesis of this substance target HMG-CoA
reductase, which catalyzes the formation of mevalonate. This derivative of squalene is a precursor of
estrogens, androgens, and other steroid hormones. This molecule maintains the fluidity of the plasma
membrane at low temperatures. High levels of this compound can build up in arteries and form plaques,
leading to myocardial infarctions and strokes. For 10 points, name this lipid substance, whose "good"
and "bad" kinds are carried by HDLs and LDLs, respectively.
ANSWER: cholesterol [or 3-beta-cholest-5-en-3-ol]
During synthesis of Sonic hedgehog, this compound is added post-translationally to the N-terminus.
ABCA1 transports this compound out of cells and is defective in Tangier disease. At high cellular levels of
this compound, SCAP binds to SREBPs, transcription factors that activate its synthesis. Receptor-mediated
endocytosis of this compound requires ApoB to bind its receptor. Lipid rafts mostly contain sphingolipids
and this compound. The rate-limiting step of its biosynthesis is the reduction of HMG-CoA to mevalonate.
That step can be inhibited by statins like Lipitor. Bile acids and vitamin D are formed from this compound.
For 10 points, name this compound which normally maintains the fluidity of the cell membrane, but clogs
arteries in atherosclerosis.
ANSWER: cholesterol [or LDL or HDL or high-density lipoprotein or low-density lipoprotein before mention]
The key step in the production of this compound involves the reduction of mevalonate
(meh-vah-LOH-nate) by the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase (ree-DUCK-tase). It structure contains a
partially unsaturated steroid with a seven member carbon chain attached. This compound provides
structural support for the cell membrane over a wide range of temperatures and is regulated by a class of
drugs called statins. For 10 points, name this biological substance that comes in HDL and LDL variants, the
so called "good" and "bad" types.
ANSWER: cholesterol
In March 2008, the Karolinska Institute identified 37 genes associated with this compound. The mevalonate
pathway for its synthesis is targeted by HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, also known as statins, which are
used to lower its quantity in humans. In animal cells, its molecules are present between phospholipid tails
throughout cell membranes, promoting the stability of the membrane. The major constituent of gall stones,
for 10 points, identify this molecule whose harmful LDL form can lead to cardiovascular diseases.
ANSWER: cholesterol
Certain members of this phylum mate with males of a related species and discard their sperm after
fertilization in a process known as hybridogenesis, while some unisexual members of the same class
cryptically steal heterospecific sperm through kleptogenesis. Basal members of one clade in this
phylum eat their way out of deep-sea carcasses and have caudal hearts. Though initially placed in
this phylum, acorn worms were later reclassified into a related (*) "hemi" phylum. Distinguishing
features of this phylum include a post-anal tail, pharyngeal slits, and a dorsal nerve chord. This
deuterostome phylum contains lancelets, tunicates and craniates. For 10 points, name this phylum whose
notochord-possessing members include the vertebrates.
ANSWER: Chordata [or Chordates]
Members of this phylum possess a structure that generates mucus to aid in food transportation, called an
endostyle. Many members of this phylum retain pharyngeal slits for their entire lives, particularly those
dwelling in aquatic habitats. At some stage in their development, all members of this phylum possess a
post-anal tail, and members of this phylum also have a dorsal, hollow nerve bundle. For 10 points, name
this phylum including the vertebrates, such as fish, birds, and humans.
ANSWER: Chordata [or chordates]
The most primitive members of this group are sea squirts, whose motile larval stage sports a
muscular post-anal tail. In craniates, the nervous system develop into a brain and head, while
pharyngeal slits become gills, such as those in hagfishes, which technically are not true fish. True
fishes have jaws while lampreys do not, but since they both belong to the subphylum (*) vertebrates,
they have an extensive skeletal system, including a spinal column evolved from the shared notochord. FTP
- name this phylum in the Animal Kingdom to which amphibians, reptiles, and mammals all belong.
ANSWER: Chordates or Chordata
Two subphylums of this phylum contain a groove in the pharynx which produces mucus to gather
food known as the endostyle. Those two subphylums are known as tunicates and lancelets. This
largest phylum in the superphylum deuterostome includes a subgroup known as the craniates along
with a class known as agnatha. Members of this phylum contain a post anal tail, although this feature
often disappears during development of the fetus. Other characteristics of this phylum include pharyngeal
clefts, a dorsal nerve chord and a notochord. For 10 points, name this phylum of animal that includes
mammals.
ANSWER: chordate or chordata (prompt on "vertebrates")
This phylum's most primitive species include the tunicates and lancelets. All members of this phylum
have an iodine storage organ called an endostyle, along with pharyngeal slits and a post-anal tail.
The early (*) notochord disappears during development of this phylum's vertebrates. Containing the fish,
amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, for 10 points, name this phylum of backboned animals.
ANSWER: Chordates (accept: Chordata)
This phylum contains the marine animals salps and pyrosalmas, both of which are like doliods in that
they are sea squirts and tunicates. Another member of this phylum is amphioxi, called lancelets. It
includes caecilians, agnatha, tetrapods, synapsida and chondrichthyes. This phylum is defined by a
presence of an endostyle and pharyngeal slits. Containing such members as anacondas and lemurs, for ten
points, name this phylum that includes all vertebrates, of which humans are a member.
ANSWER: Chordates or Chordata
Small-cell carcinomas cause this substance to have a granular, "salt-and-pepper" appearance.
Smc complexes bind to this substance, forming loops separated by scaffold-associated regions.
Proteins with a bromodomain motif will bind this substance. It is remodeled by the SWI/SNF
complex. Immunoprecipitation of this substance is followed by a microarray in ChIP-on-chip. The
30-nanometer fiber is composed of this substance. It (*) condenses when HATs methylate lysine. The
-hetero- form of this substance stains more darkly than its open -eu- state, which looks like beads on a
string. Nucleosomes are repeating regions of this substance. During prophase, it condenses into
chromosomes. For 10 points, name this substance composed of DNA and histones.
ANSWER: chromatin
One type of this structure contains Balbiani rings, and another type features granular and fusion loops. In
addition to the polytene type, amphibian oocytes have the lampbrush type of these structures. Chronic
myelogenous leukemia is associated with the one named Philadelphia, and the inactive form of one of these
named for a letter is known as a Barr body. Giemsa's stain is used in the preparation of a karyogram that
shows these objects, of which most humans have 23 pairs. FTP name these coiled strands of DNA.
ANSWER: chromosomes
"Artificial" structures of this type can be made using bacteria or yeast. Abnormal ones can be diagnosed
through their namesake "painting" or through banding analysis, and a set of these structures is called a
karyotype. Linear ones must include a replication origin, a centromere sequence, and two telomere
sequences, and they are highly condensed during metaphase. For 10 points, name these structures of which
humans have twenty-three pairs.
ANSWER: chromosomes
Monoclonal antibody A33/22 recognizes a protein on the loop of the "lampbrush" type of these
objects. Treating them in hot alkaline solution before staining them with Giemsa reagent produces R
bands, and the presence of Bcr-Abl diagnoses one of these named for (*) Philadelphia. Missing or extra
ones of these objects is usually due to nondisjunction, and a karyotype portrays all of them. For 10
points, name this structure visible during metaphase consisting of two sister chromatids, of which
humans have 23 pairs.
ANSWER: chromosomes
The difference in the number of these things possessed by the various castes of hymenopterans is believed
to be linked to the evolution of eusociality. Distances along them are measured in centimorgans.
Haplogroups based on mitochondria or one of these are the most frequently investigated ones. Telomerase
lengthens the ends of these things. Having an abnormal number of these sub-cellular structures is called
aneuploidy, and one example of that is Downs's syndrome. Staining and viewing them under a microscope
is known as karyotyping. For 10 points, name these things that number forty-six in most human cells and
contain densely-packed DNA.
ANSWER: chromosomes [accept chromatids]
The Boveri-Sutton theory explains the importance of these structures. A fusion between two of these
structures produces the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase and is named for Philadelphia. The Drosophila
(drohw-SOF-uh-luh) salivary gland contains their polytene kind. These structures are imaged by
karyotyping, and their existence violates Mendel's law of independent assortment. For 10 points, name
these condensed structures of DNA and protein found in the nucleus of cells.
ANSWER: chromosomes
An unusually large type of this structure is found within the cells of the salivary glands of
Drosophila and is called polytene. Scaffolding proteins and histones help comprise these structures.
They can be viewed on a karyogram, which can detect (*) aneuploidies. These structures are formed
from condensed genetic material before a cell divides. For 10 points, name this DNA-containing structure,
of which 23 pairs are found in humans.
ANSWER: chromosomes [prompt on chromatin]
These entities may be described as acrocentric, while holocentric ones are found in C. elegans. One region
of these objects sees the formation of the kinetochore. To allow more compact storage, they contain
proteins called histones, around which their major component, a polymer, wraps. They may be visualized in
karyotypes, which allow the detection of conditions like Down syndrome. These entities condense during
prophase out of chromatin. FTP, identify these genetic elements, twenty-three pairs of which are found in
humans, examples of which include X and Y.
ANSWER: Chromosomes
In the salivary glands of drosophila, these entities can be characterized by a staining pattern
involving dark band separated by light integrands wherein they are elongated. In addition to being
enlarged in polytene cells, their shorter arms and longer arms are denoted p and q respectively. The
inactive one described by the letter X is called a Barr body, and forty four of them are called autosomal,
which do not possess any information about sex. For 10 points, identify these structures made of
chromatin material, of which there are forty six in humans.
ANSWER: chromosomes [accept polytene or polyteny until "these entities"]
Mary Lou Pardue and Joe Gall developed their namesake banding technique, and the one named for
Philadelphia is associated with chronic myelogenous leukemia. Polytene and lampbrush are large types
of these structures, whose ends are protected by telomeres. An extra copy of a certain one of these is
the cause of Down syndrome, and the term polyploidy is used to describe a cell with more than two sets
of them. For 10 points, name these thread-like strands of DNA, of which most humans have forty-six.
ANSWER: chromosomes
The laboratory process of G-banding uses Giemsa dye to stain these bodies, and an error in which a large
portion of one joins to another is named for Robertson. Largely composed of spherical proteins called
histones wound in supercoils, their ends contain repetitive telomeres. These bodies can undergo
translocation, and are spread out for viewing in a karyotype. For 10 points, name these dense DNAcontaining structures of which human cells have 46, including X and Y.
ANSWER: chromosomes [accept karyotype or idiogram before "these bodies" is read]
A translocation between the RARA gene on chromosome 17 and the PML gene on this chromosome
causes nearly all cases of acute promyelocytic leukemia. A pair of sister syndromes both due to a
partial deletion on the q arm of this chromosome are classic cases of genomic imprinting and are
Angelman and Prader-Willi syndrome. Mutations in the gene that codes for fibrillin-1, located on
this chromosome, results in patients with elongated fingers that are at greater risk for aortic
dissection in Marfan syndrome. Patients with an autorecessive disorder associated with this chromosome
sport a cherry red macula and cannot break down GM2 gangliosides. For 10 points, identify this
chromosome that contains the gene that codes for hexosaminidase A, which is mutated in Tay-Sachs
disease.
ANSWER: chromosome 15
The recessive form of polycystic kidney disease is caused by mutations in proteins that localize to
these structures, and their ultrastructure is disrupted in DNAI1 and DNAI5 mutants. In the nose,
these structures are covered with G-protein coupled olfactory receptors, and modified ones make up
the dendritic knob of olfactory neurons. A series of BBS proteins localize to these structure, whose
mutations cause Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Defects in them also cause situs inversus in Kartagenar's
syndrome, which occurs because they are needed for propelling morphogens around during
development. The presence of these organelles in Fallopian tubes propels the egg towards the uterus, and
they're also found on the surface epithelium of the respiratory tract, where their beating helps clear mucous
and debris. For 10 points, name these small hairlike projections on the surface of some cells.
ANSWER: Cilia (do not accept Flagella, accept basal body due to ambiguities)
Cycads are some of the only plants to have them, and they are unique to eukaryotes. Like a longer structure,
they have a 9+2 arrangement of constituent structures which make up the axoneme. The Fallopian tubes use
them to conduct eggs from ovary to uterus and the trachea has a lining of them for cleaning purposes.
Rotifers have a crown of them, which in some species makes them spin like wheels, and several of them are
also found on paramecium. For 10 points, identify these short organelles which allow many eukaryotic cells
to move.
ANSWER: cilia [or cilium]
These structures are defective in Kartagener's syndrome, leading to its symptom of situs inversus, as they
are important in creating the left-right asymmetry of the internal organs during embryonic development.
The outer segments of photoreceptor cells are variants of these structures. They are responsible for making
water currents in clam siphons. Their two actions are power and return strokes, unlike the continuous
motion of a similar structure. These structures are relatively common in the respiratory tract where they
help move mucus. For 10 points, name these structures with a characteristic whipping or beating motion that
are similar to flagella.
ANSWER: cilia [or cilium]
The dendritic knob of olfactory neurons contains the primary type of these structures. A group of
protozoans named for their possession of these structures have both one small diploid nucleus and a larger,
polyploid nucleus.These structures, unique to eukaryotes, are organized around an axoneme, an
arrangement of microtubule doublets. These structures have prominent roles in the trachea, the hair cells of
the inner ear, and the Fallopian tubes. For ten points, name these cellular structures, many of which work in
concert to aid in cell motility.
ANSWER: cilia
Bardet-Biedl syndrome has been linked to a mutation in these, which are also defective in renal
tube cells in PKD and in Senior-Loken syndrome. These structures contain well-spaced nexin links and
inwardly-facing radial spokes, and are somehow found in cycads of all plants. A mechanism known as
IFT is essential in moving its constituent proteins, which includes MAPs and dyneins. Assisting the ovum
in reaching the uterus for implantation, it is built from tubulin. For 10 points, name these tail-like
projections containing a basal body, which are not flagella.
ANSWER: cilia
Dysfunction of these organelles can cause situs inversus, because they orient the internal organs during
embryonic development. Certain organisms with these organelles have micro- and macronuclei, and they
consist of an axoneme made of tubulins. Unlike a similar structure which moves continuously, these
organelles have action and return strokes. Lack of these organelles can impede fertility, as they line the
inner surface of the Fallopian tubes. They are found in a namesake phylum of protists which includes
paramecia. For 10 points, name these structures similar to flagella.
ANSWER: cilia or cilium
In rotifera (roh-TIH-fer-ah), flame cells contain a group of these projections surrounded by a
tubule, and they serve to move ova down the fallopian tubes in the uterus. Like flagella, they contain
a 9+2 doublet of microtubules around a central pair. These structures also line the respiratory
epithelium (eh-pih-THEE-lee-um), where their (*) beating helps move debris out of the lungs. For 10
points, name these motile hairlike projections used by some cells to move around and sense their
environment.
ANSWER: cilia or cilium
The expression of BMAL is integral to the development of these processes. In humans, they are partly
controlled by the dimerization of ARNTL2 and NPAS2, and in Drosophila, Seymour Benzer discovered the
Per and Cry genes, which are integral to these processes. Established through zeitgebers via a process called
entrainment, in humans they are largely controlled by signals from the retinohypothalamic tract to the
suprachiasmatic nucleus in the hypothalamus. Also controlled by the release of melatonin from the pineal
gland, they are disrupted in individuals with seasonal affective disorder and jet lag. FTP, name these 24hour cycles of behavioral and biochemical processes in living beings, the prime example being sleep.
ANSWER: Circadian rhythms (prompt on things like "day-night cycles")
Augustin de Candolle demonstrated these phenomena using the action of a plant's leaves. These
phenomena can be shifted by stimulating the suprachiasmatic nuclei in the hypothalamus, and they are
influenced by cues known as zeitgebers. These phenomena are partially influenced by melatonin, though
they are more heavily influenced by environmental cues such as light. For 10 points, identify these
"biological clocks" which influence our daily cycles and sleep patterns.
ANSWER: circadian rhythms
In plants, this phenomenon is usually studied using a luciferase reporter assay, and it is hypothesized that
auxin sensitivity is regulated by this phenomenon. A plot of the phase shift and the time of stimulus is useful
in understanding this phenomenon. Certain retinal ganglia project directly to the suprachiasmatic nucleus,
which regulates this phenomenon, and it is also influenced by melatonin secretions from the pineal gland.
Light is thought to be the major environmental cue triggering it. For 10 points, identify these rhythms that
regulate behavior and physiology such as sleep patterns.
ANSWER: Circadian rhythms [accept Circadian clocks]
In mammals, these entities may be influenced by light-sensitive melanopsin ganglion cells. They are
entrained by a periodic environmental signal called the zeitgeber and are called "free running" in the
absence of such a signal. Their occurrence is coordinated by an area within the anterior hypothalamus, the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, and disorders related to these in humans include advanced sleep phase syndrome.
In diurnal animals these are controlled by levels of melatonin. For 10 points, identify these cycles
providing the body with an internal clock lasting approximately 24.3 hours in humans.
ANSWER: circadian rhythms
They are controlled by the PER and TIM proteins, and they can be lost if the pineal gland is
removed from birds. In fungi and protists, they are a property of individual cells, and in mammals,
they are controlled by the (*) suprachiasmatic nuclei. They can be either free-running or entrained by
zeitgebers, such as a cycle of light and dark. For 10 points, name these "biological clocks" that govern
activities that repeat roughly every 24 hours.
ANSWER: circadian rhythms
The application of ATP can induce this process in cyanobacteria, and the suprachiasmatic nuclei controls
this entity in mammals. It is often displayed in plants by the movement of leaves in relation to the sun.
Studies have shown that mammals can maintain one of these entities despite the absence of usual cues like
light and darkness. For 10 points, name this cycle of about 24 hours that governs organisms' activities and is
often called the "biological clock."
ANSWER: circadian rhythm
It includes outlets like the central and lenticulostriate to the internal capsule and the labyrinthine to
the internal ear. It is joined by the posterior and anterior communicating arteries, and anterior
inferior and superior cerebellar arteries are given off by its anchor. The basilar artery divides into
the posterior cerebrals, which are linked, via the posterior communicating artery, to the internal carotid;
the middle and anterior cerebrals, branching from the internal carotid, surround the optic chiasm, the
pituitary, and the mammillary bodies. For ten points, name this vascular loop also called circulus arteriosus.
ANSWER: circle of Willis (prompt on "circulus arteriosus" before it is mentioned)
It's not emphysema, but people with alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency develop this condition. It causes the
pressure in the portal vein to increase, leading to esophageal bleeding and spleen enlargement. It causes
fibrous tissue bands to appear in its target organ. Jaundice is a common symptom of this disease, which can
be caused by chronic hepatitis infection. For 10 points, name this disease also caused by excessive alcohol
use, in which the liver shrinks and becomes nonfunctional.
ANSWER: cirrhosis
A "cardiac" version of this condition can be caused by backup of the vena cava, and this condition
can be similarly caused by a blood clot in Budd-Chiari syndrome. This condition can cause a swelling
of the belly with clear fluid, called ascites, due to fibrosis of the (*) portal vein. Causes of this condition
include chronic infection with hepatitis C. For 10 points, name this condition caused by excessive alcohol
intake, a scarring of the liver.
ANSWER: cirrhosis [or liver failure until "liver" is read]
These compounds were first isolated from electrolysis reactions in E. coli where they exhibited
bacteriocidal activity in specific geometric isomers of their plus 2 and plus 4 oxidation states. They
can inhibit enzymatic activity in the proximal tubule leading to nephrotoxicity, but their principle
mode of action is to produce 1,2-intrastrand (*) cross-linking of DNA which leads to apoptosis.
Increasing doses can trigger resistance to these complexes in tumor cells. For 10 points, name these
platinum based cancer drugs possessing chlorine and ammonia ligands in a specific orientation.
ANSWER: cisplatin (or cisplatinum, or cis-diamminedichlorido(II)platinum)
In 2008, some of the bacteria in Richard Lenski's ongoing E. coli evolution experiment adapted the
ability to use this compound as a source of carbon. It's not gluconic acid, but the vast majority of
industrial production of this compound involves the use of Aspergillus niger fungi. Along with PEP,
this compound allosterically inhibits PFK-1 activity. Aconitase is an intermediate formed in the
isomerization of this compound, which is formed by an aldol condensation of (*) oxaloacetate with
acetyl-CoA. Because this compound has three carboxyl groups, the "TCA cycle" is another name for its
namesake cycle. For 10 points, name this compound formed in the first step of the Krebs cycle, an acid
abundant in fruits like oranges and lemons.
ANSWER: citric acid [or citrate]
Some defects in the products of this process are caused by insufficient de-methylation of the chromatin
of those products. This process is simpler with plants than with animals due to the prevalence of adult cells
that remain totipotent (TOE-tee-PO-tent). In one approach to this process, an egg cell is enucleated and
injected with a somatic cell nucleus, forming an undifferentiated cell. The use of embryonic stem cells in
this process is controversial. For 10 points, name the process of copying a gene or organism, which created
Dolly the sheep.
ANSWER: cloning
One of the first examples of this process was performed by Robert Briggs and Thomas J. King in
tadpoles. Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell of the University of Edinburgh were the first scientists to
perform this procedure on a mammal, producing the sheep Dolly. For 10 points, identify this process which
uses somatic cell nuclear transfer to produce an exact genetic copy of an animal.
ANSWER: animal cloning [or creating a clone, etc.]
One order in this phylum, Pennatulacea, bioluminesces upon contact, and its members employ a
balancing organ called a statocyst. Contact with some members of this phylum can lead to Irukandji
syndrome, with symptoms including tachycardia and vomiting. The parasitic Myxozoams may belong
to Protozoa or to this phylum, whose organisms secrete a (*) basement membrane that is separated from
the epithelium by mesoglea. Members of this phylum possess venom-containing cells called nematocysts,
used to catch prey or as a defense mechanism. For 10 points, name this phylum of invertebrates like hydras,
coral, sea anemones, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidarians
One group of organisms in this phylum releases venom by polymerizing the contents of a capsule and
causes Irukandji syndrome in humans. That group contains Chironex, the most deadly animal on
earth, and is known as Cubozoa. Organisms in this phylum, many of which can form a planula, are
capable of motion by jet (*) propulsion and tumbling, depending on their body shape. These organisms
have a middle layer of mesoglea and harpoon-like nematocysts. For 10 points, name this phylum which
alternate between medusa and polyp form and includes the Portuguese Man o' War, hydra, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidarians
Organisms in this phylum comprised of many tiny organisms called zooids are known as
siphonophores, one of which is the Portuguese Man o' War. This phylum contains classes such as Cubozoa
and Hydrozoa, and organisms in this phylum often possess venomous cells called nematocytes. Members
of this phylum generally go through medusa and polyp stages. For 10 points, identify this phylum,
members of which include coral, sea anemones, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [accept cnidarians]
One member of this phylum can cause a painful condition known as Irukandji syndrome; that condition is
caused by one class of this phylum known as Cubozoa. These organisms reproduce asexually by dividing
into segments in a process called strobilation and since they lack any real skeletal structure, their bodies are
composed of a substance called mesoglea. They contain a poisonous cell called a nematocyte and their body
shape divides into polyp and medusa forms. The Portuguese Man o' War is part of, for 10 points, this
animal phylum that includes coral, sea anemone, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria
One subclass of this phylum is the siphonophores, one member of which is the Portuguese Man o' War.
Another poisonous member of this phylum is the sea wasp, C. fleckeri. Subphylums of this phylum include
Hydrozoa and Cubozoa, and many members of this phylum have poisonous cells called nematocysts.
Members of this phylum go through a life cycle involving asexual polyps and sexual medusae. For 10
points, identify this phylum, members of which include corals and jellyfish.
ANSWER: cnidarians
One class of this phylum is distinguished by the presence of a pharynx that opens into the gastrovascular
(GAS-tro-VAS-kyoo-lurr) cavity and is known as the actinopharynx (ack-TIN-o-FAIR-inks). One member
of this phylum, Chironex fleckeri (KY-ro-nex FLECK-er-eye), is in the class Cubozoa (CUBE-oh-ZO-uh).
Its class Anthozoa (AN-tho-ZO-uh) contains corals. Organisms in this phylum are characterized by stinging
cells known as nematocytes (nuh-MAT-oh-sites) and grow from a polyp to a medusa. For 10 points, what
marine phylum includes sea anemone, hydra, and jellyfish?
ANSWER: Cnidaria (ni-DARE-ee-uh)
One famously dangerous order in this phylum is Siphonophora. Some members of this phylum have a
larval form called the planula. That stage in the class Anthrozoa of this phylum is able to feed. The
operculum is a lid over this phylum's namesake stinging cells, which are also known as nematocysts. The
two body forms of this phylum are the sessile polyp and the mobile medusa. For 10 points, name this
phylum that includes corals, anemones, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria
One class of this phylum is distinguished by the presence of a pharynx that opens into the gastrovascular
(GAS-tro-VAS-kyoo-lurr) cavity and is known as the actinopharynx (ack-TIN-o-FAIR-inks). One member
of this phylum, Chironex fleckeri (KY-ro-nex FLECK-er-eye), is in the class Cubozoa (CUBE-oh-ZO-uh).
Its class Anthozoa (AN-tho-ZO-uh) contains corals. Organisms in this phylum are characterized by stinging
cells known as nematocytes (nuh-MAT-oh-sites) and grow from a polyp to a medusa. For 10 points, what
marine phylum includes sea anemone, hydra, and jellyfish?
ANSWER: Cnidaria (ni-DARE-ee-uh)
Members of this phylum have two-layered body walls with an inner filling called the mesoglia. A
model organism for the study of bilateral symmetry, the hydra, is a member of this phylum, as is coral.
Most species in this phylum have a life-cycle consisting of an asexual polyp and a sexual medusa stage.
Formerly called coelenterata, for 10 points, identify this phylum named for a type of stinging cell, which
contains such creatures as anemones and jellyfish.
ANSWER: cnidarians [accept coelenterata before read]
These organisms have a jelly-like substance between two layers of epithelial tissue; that substance is called
mesoglea. This phylum lacks a hard skeleton, instead relying on a hydrostatic skeleton. They can reproduce
either sexually or asexually; the mode depends mainly on environmental factors. The name of these
organisms comes from the specials cells that these organisms use for defense and predation. The young
form of this phylum is known as the polyp form, while the adult form is the medusa. Name this phylum that
contains organisms such as hydras and jellyfishes.
ANSWER: cnidaria
During their life cycle, members of this phylum undergo a process known as strobilation. Green
Fluorescent Protein was isolated from one member of this phylum. For self-defense and to ensnare prey,
organisms in this phylum have nematocysts that discharge venom when triggered. This phylum contains a
life cycle that includes a free-living medusa form that detaches from a sessile polyp. Members of this
phylum include Cubozoans, and the Portuguese Man-o-War. For 10 points, name this phylum, which
consists of sea anemones, corals, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [accept Cnidarians]
An extinct order in this phylum has a horn-shaped chamber with a wrinkled wall and was called rugosa.
One of the largest invertebrates in the world, praya dubia, is within this phylum, which contains such
complex colony organisms as siphonophores. Some of its classes include cubozoa, the relatively immobile
anthozoa, and scyphozoa. One organism in this phylum causes Irukandji syndrome in humans and another
similar one has killed over 60 people in Australia. Bodies of organisms in this phylum consist of mesoglea,
and they also possess specialized explosive cells used for prey capture by releasing a toxin. For 10 points,
name this phylum which includes organisms like sea anemones and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [or coelenterata]
Stolonifera is an order of organisms connected by stolons found in this phylum, while the
actinopharynx and mesenteries are unique to a subset of this phylum. Groups in this phylum include
Anthozoa and Cubozoa. All members of this phylum contain structures capped by an operculum, the
poison-laden nematocysts. Life cycles in this phylum consist of an anchored polyp stage and a freefloating
medusa stage. The phylum Coelenterata split into Ctenophora and this phylum. For 10 points,
identify this phylum which contains corals and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [accept Coelenterata before read]
One member of this phylum is model organism N. vectensis, used to study the bilaterally symmetric
body plan. Recent inquiry into the musculature of this phylum has led Seipel and Schmid to classify
them as triploblastic, though they are most commonly thought to have two epithelial layers with
mesoglea in between. One characteristic feature of this phylum contains structures like a "finger" and a
cilium that acts as a trigger; a barbed cell known as a nematocyst used to deliver toxins. Members of this
phylum come in two forms, the sessile polyp and the swimming medusa. For 10 points, name this phylum
that contains anemones, corals, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: cnidaria [or cnidarians]
This phlyum's members can have a larval stage as planulae, and some use velaria for locomotion. This
phylum utilizes a body plan consisting of a gastrodermis surrounded by mesoglea, and it is divided into
classes Scyphozoa, Anthozoa, and Hydrozoa, which contains one of the only freshwater animals in this
phylum, the hydra. Like echinoderms and ctenophores, members of this phylum have nerve nets, and its
members use cells that eject coiled thread weapons called nematocysts. Having a dimorphous life history
divided into medusa and polyp body plans, for 10 points, name this phylum named for the stinging cells of
its members, which include anemones and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidarians
Some members of this phylum have bodies mostly composed of mesoglea (meh-soh-GLEE-uh). Dried
colonies of one class in this phylum, Hydrozoa, are known as "air ferns." The Portuguese Man o' War is a
member of this phylum which may contain a type of sensory cilia used as a triggering device. Many
members of this phylum have nematocysts (neh-MAH-toh-sists) which inject venom into prey, and
members of this phylum have the basic body forms of medusas or of polyps. For 10 points, identify this
marine phylum which includes corals and jellyfish.
ANSWER: cnidarians (nih-DARE-ee-uhns) [or ctenophores or Ctenophora before "Hydrozoa" is read]
The life cycle of organisms in this phylum include the planula stage. The anatomy of one form of these
organisms includes the velum, which is absent in this phylum's class scyphozoa. The action of nectophores
propel some members of this phylum. The mesoglia is thick in members of this phylum, whose mouth and
anus point downwards. The sessile organisms in this phylum are called polyps. Nematocysts in these
organisms contain toxins thta are released when their cnidocil (nye-do-sil) is triggered. Organisms in this
phylum include the Portuguese Man o' War. For 10 points, name this phylum that contains sea anemones,
coral, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: cnidaria [or cnidarians]
One member of this phylum, Chironex fleckeri, is the most dangerous venomous species. Their bodies
consist of mesoglea between two one-cell-thick epithelial layers, and one characteristic feature of this
phylum is divided into three classes, including ptychocysts, which build protective tubes for a type of
anemone. The subphylum anthozoa includes corals, and sea wasps are included in class cubozoa. Their two
body forms are the medusa and polyp. For 10 points, name this phylum named for their stinging cells, which
includes Portuguese men-of-war and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [nih-DAR-ee-uh]
Some members of this phylum have ptychocysts, which help create tubes, and several others possess a tube
called the actinopharynx, leading into the body cavity. Its classes include Anthozoa and Cubozoa, and the
two germ layers of its members are separated by a fluid called mesoglea. Their life cycles often include the
sessile polyp and mobile medusa stages, and structures characteristic of them are nematocytes, or stinging
cells. For 10 points, name this radially-symmetric phylum which includes hydrozoa, anemones, and
jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [the "c" is silent, but be lenient with pronunciation]
Palyotoxin, one of the most dangerous non-protein toxins known, was first isolated from a species in this
phylum. One class in this phylum has statocysts to measure balance, while another has mouths along its
arms, an example of which is the Cassiopeia. A common member of this phylum has eye-like features to
detect light called ocelli, and its largest class includes sea pansies and sea fans and is called Anthozoa.
Features unique to this phylum include the possession of nematocysts, and many embers go through both
polyp and medusa stages. For 10 points, name this phylum which includes anemones, hydras, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidarians
Some members of this phylum, like ctenophores, possess an actinopharynx, and they include
organisms connected by stolons, stolonifera. This phylum also includes Anthozoa and Cubozoa.
Members of the phylum have a layer under their [*] ectoderms filled with mesoglea, and are definted by
their poison filled nematocysts; organisms this phylum begin life as polyps before becoming medusas. For
10 points, name this largely aquatic phylum that includes corals and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [the "c" is often silent]
The deadly species chironex fleckeri (kye-ROW-nex fleh-CARE-ee) can be found in this phylum within
the class Cubazoa. Its class Hydrazoa contains Obelia and air ferns. Sea anemones are included the mostly
sessile class Anthozoa, while Scyphozoa, though they are mobile, lack a velum as a method of propulsion.
Members of this phylum have two forms, the medusa and the polyp, and they are characterized by their
namesake specialized cells for capturing prey, some of which are the stinging nematocysts
(neh-MAH-toe-sists). For 10 points, name this phylum of marine animals that includes corals and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria
This phylum may contain the extinct conulata, which may also belongs to its own phylum. This phylum is
now thought to include Myxoza and Polypodiozoa, a parasite found in sturgeons' eggs. This phylum
contains the class cubazoa, whose members move with a contractile tissue called velarium. Most members
of this phylum have bodies made of mesoglea. Its members, like the sea wasp and sea pen, develop
nematocysts, cells that fire a bulb-shaped projection on the end of a cord and deliver a toxic injection to
prey. They go through polyp and medusa phases. For 10 points, name this phylum that contains stinging
animals like anemone and jellyfish.
ANSWER: cnidarians
One sub-clade of this phylum is genus buddenbrokia, which belongs to actinospore-stage-having class
myxosporea. A now-extinct group in this phylum named its fossils' wrinkled bodies is rugosa. This
phylum's class cubozoa contains the toxic organisms of genus chironex. This phylum's layered bodies
consist of epidermis, mesoglea, and gastrodermis, making them the simplest multi-tissue organisms.
Members of this phylum's class (*) scyphozoa exemplify two characteristics of this phylum: a two-stage
lifecycle, consisting of an often-sessile polyp and a free adult, or medusa and the use of toxic nematocysts.
FTP, name this phylum of radially symmetric organisms like sea anemones, corals and jellyfish.
ANSWER: cnidarians [or coelenterata or coelenterates]
This phylum's class Anthozoa is mostly sessile. Its class Cubozoa includes the deadly sea wasp.
Members of this phylum have a jelly-like layer called the mesoglea. This phylum's polyp body plan is
exhibited by (*) hydras. This phylum's name is derived from the name of its harpoon-like stinging cells. For
10 points, name this radially-symmetric invertebrate phylum that includes corals and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria (accept Cnidarians; prompt on Coelenterata)
Some members of this phylum develop into a ciliated planula. Notable genera of this phylum include Obelia
and Chironex. This phylum and Ctenophora [ti-NOF-er-uh] are the only components of the clade Radiata
[rey-dee-EY-tuh]. Most members of this phylum have a gastrovascular cavity for digestion, and alternate
between the medusa and polyp body forms. Most members of this phylum also have stinging structures
called nematocysts. For 10 points, name this phylum whose members include sea anemones, hydras, and
jellyfishes.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [ni-DAIR-ee-uh]
Acellular mesoglea are gelatin-like layers that separate the gastrodermis that line the gut in this phylum.
This phylum may feature small ciliated swimming larvae called planula that are developed from the zygote
in a class including members such as Oculina patagonica, whose bleaching is caused by Vibrio bacteria.
That is the class Anthozoa. Another class has two body shapes, a polyp one that reproduces asexually and a
medusa one that reproduces sexually. Name this phylum, for 10 points, which exhibits radial symmetry,
possesses specialized stinging cells, and includes sea anemones and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidarians
One group of species in this phylum became hermatypic during the Middle Triassic, and palytoxin was first
isolated from a species in this phylum. The order Rhyzostomea includes organisms with mouths found along
their arms, such as the Cassiopeia. Members of one class possess a tissue called the velarium which aids in
locomotion, and the largest class in this phylum includes sea pansies and sea fans and is called Anthozoa.
Members of this phylum possess a structure called the operculum, within which nematocysts are found, and
members go through both polyp and medusa stages. For 10 points, name this phylum which includes
anemones, hydras, and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidarians
Some of these organisms possess ptychocysts (TIKE-oh-sists), which help to create the tube in which
they live. This phylum is characterized by the presence of nematocysts, which are (*) poison-injecting
organelles. This phylum's body plan includes a jelly-like middle layer called the mesoglea, and its two body
forms are the polyp, like sea anemones, and medusa, like the Portuguese man-of-war. For 10 points, name
this phylum that includes corals and jellyfish, named for its stinging cells.
ANSWER: Cnidaria
Larvae in this phylum are called planula. Along with some types of worms, some organisms in this
phylum can undergo strobilation, an alternative to budding. Ctenophores (TEE-nuh-fours) are former
members of this phylum. Members of this phylum have specialized cells that release a barb, containing
toxins, to trap prey; those cells are nematocysts. Organisms in it have medusa and polyp life cycle stages
and have radial symmetry. For 10 points, name this animal phylum whose members include sea anemones
and jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria [or cnidarians]
In this phylum, animals in the genus Carukia and Carybdea can cause Irukandji syndrome. Anthozoa are
unique among the classes in this phylum because they do not develop into a medusa stage, remaining as
polyps for their entire lives. One member of this phylum commonly forms symbiotic relationships with
clownfish. Radial symmetry and explosive cells known as nematocysts are characteristic of this invertebrate
phylum. For 10 points, name this invertebrate phylum that includes anemones and jellyfish.
ANSWER: cnidaria [prompt on coelenterates or coelenterata]
This process can be inhibited by Protein S and protein C. The drug warfarin inhibits this process,
whose healthy execution requires the oxidation of Vitamin K. In this process, the binding of factor (*)
VIII to the von Willebrand factor is stopped by the action of thrombin, which also converts fibrinogen into
an insoluble fibrin mesh. This process is aided by platelets. For 10 points, name this process impaired in
hemophiliacs, in which blood solidifies over a wound.
ANSWER: coagulation [or blood clotting; or thrombosis]
This process consists of the extrinsic pathway followed by the intrinsic pathway, which produces
kallikrein (kal-ih-KREE-in). Those two pathways are this process's namesake "cascade." Those who
cannot do it may suffer from Christmas disease or a defective von Willebrand factor. It converts fibrinogen,
or Factor 1, to fibrin, which polymerizes (puh-LIM-uh-"rises") to form a thrombus. A defect in Factor 8 of
this process causes hemophilia A, which is the inability of the body to perform this process. It is also called
coagulation. For 10 points, name this process in which platelets form to stop bleeding.
ANSWER: blood clotting [accept word forms; accept thrombosis before "thrombus" is mentioned; accept coagulation before mentioned]
One sub-pathway in this process is activated by Hageman factor and prekallikrein, and one critical protein
in this pathway is Gamma-glutamyl carboxylase, which acts upon Proteins S, C and Z. VKORC recycles
one important molecule in this process, which is why warfarin is often used to inhibit this process.
Disrupted in delta storage pool deficiency and Bernard-Soulier syndrome, important activators of this
process include Tissue Factor and Von Willebrand factor. This process relies on the transformation of
fibrinogen to fibrin by thrombin, and is disrupted in hemophilia. FTP, name this process initiated by
platelets, the hardening and drying of blood in a wound.
ANSWER: Coagulation or Blood Clotting
This process can be reversed in a pathway involving urokinase ("YOUR"-oh-KINE-ase), and it is
downregulated by prostacyclin (PROS-tuh-"SIGH"-klin). Christmas disease results from a lack of Factor IX
involved in this process. During this process, the serine protease (PRO-tee-ase) thrombin (THROM-bin)
converts fibrinogen (fie-BRIN-oh-jen) into fibrin (FIE-brin), which forms a mesh polymer. Platelets have
several important roles in this process. For 10 points, name this process by which by which the blood
congeals after injury, which is impaired in hemophilia (HEE-mo-FILL-ee-uh).
ANSWER: coagulation [or clotting]
Dicumarol, a coumarin derivative, inhibits this process by blocking the VKORC enzyme, thereby
preventing proper carboxylation of proteins involved in it. Warfarins prevent this process in a similar
feedback system, and it involves a certain factor that binds to exposed collagen in endothelial cells. That
von Willebrand factor is deficient in the same-named disease characterized by an abnormality in this
process. One of its initiating factors is thrombin, which converts fibrinogen into fibrin to form a thrombus.
This process is characterized by fibrin polymerization to form a mesh-like framework together with platelets
at the site of a wound. For 10 points, identify this deficiency of hemophiliacs, the process by which blood
clots.
ANSWER: coagulation [or thrombosis; or clotting before mentioned]
The time it takes for this process to occur in a test tube is measured in the aPPT and PT tests. An
early step in this process is the conversion of prekallikrein to kallikrein. The drug warfarin inhibits it
by inhibiting reduction of Vitamin K, thus preventing synthesis of namesake factors such as
prothrombin. One disorder of this process, von Willebrand disease, results from an inability to
aggregate (*) platelets. For 10 points, name this process necessary to stop the loss of blood from an injured
vessel, which is impaired in hemophilia.
ANSWER: blood clotting [or coagulation]
Coumarin derivatives, such as phenprocoumon, can inhibit this process by blocking the enzyme
VKORC, and the aPTT and PT tests can be used to measure the efficiency of proteins involved in this
process. Hageman and von Willebrand name factors involved in this process, and the absence of
another of its factors can cause Christmas disease. Fibrinogen is converted into fibrin during this
process by (*) thrombin, the proteolytical cleavage of which begins this process's namesake "cascade."
Thrombosis refers to when this process occurs inside an uninjured blood vessel, and this process is impaired
in patients with hemophilia. Platelets aggregate during this process, which typically results in a scab. For ten
points, name this process by which blood congeals after an injury.
ANSWER: coagulation or clotting
Several proteins in the pathway responsible for this process have Kringle domains, and overactivation of
this process causes TTP. The extrinsic part of this pathway relies on activation by tissue factor, and a
mutation named for the city of Leiden leads to overactivation of it. Von Willebrand factor is also an
activator of this process, several proteins in which require vitamin K for activation. This process produces a
cross-linked fibrin mesh, and defects in this process result in hemophilia. For 10 points, name this process
that prevents exsanguination after a wound or tear in a blood vessel.
ANSWER: clotting [accept coagulation, accept word forms]
Tests to measure the function of this pathway include the PT and PTT. This process, which can be
triggered by both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways, uses proteins like von Willebrand factor and factor
VIII. This process results in the creation of a cross-linked fibrin mesh, is non-functional in people with
hemophilia, and is assisted by platelets. For 10 points, name this biological process triggers by cuts, which
prevents bleeding.
ANSWER: blood clotting [accept coagulation; do NOT accept "agglutination"]
Members of the phylum Ctenophora (teh-noh-FOR-uh) were once classified under this phylum. One
group of members in this phylum, siphonophores (sih-FAH-noh-fores), are actually colonies of specialized
organisms. Species in this phylum contain a middle section known as the mesoglea (meh-soh-GLEE-uh),
while many contain nematocysts (neh-MAH-toh-sists), which are responsible for stings. They undergo
polyp and medusa life stages. For 10 points, name this phylum that includes sea anemones, coral, and
jellyfish.
ANSWER: Cnidaria (nih-DARE-ee-uh)
In the first step of flavonoid synthesis, one of these is added to 4-coumarate, and one of these is replaced
with an amino acid in the final step of bile salt synthesis. One is removed from another molecule in an
irreversible step in synthesis of cholesterol, the production of mevalonate. One intermediate in its synthesis
is the condensation of cysteine with 4'-PPA, which occurs after the phosphorylation of pantothenic acid, or
vitamin B5. The reactive group of this molecule is a thiol, and in the step of the Krebs cycle that produces
GTP, it is detached from succinate. For 10 points, name this molecule which is used in the transport of fatty
acids and, when combined with an acetyl group, forms an input to the Krebs cycle.
ANSWER: CoA [or Coenzyme A]
This process can be reversed in a pathway involving urokinase ("YOUR"-oh-KINE-ase), and it is
downregulated by prostacyclin (PROS-tuh-"SIGH"-klin). Christmas disease results from a lack of Factor IX
involved in this process. During this process, the serine protease (PRO-tee-ase) thrombin (THROM-bin)
converts fibrinogen (fie-BRIN-oh-jen) into fibrin (FIE-brin), which forms a mesh polymer. Platelets have
several important roles in this process. For 10 points, name this process by which by which the blood
congeals after injury, which is impaired in hemophilia (HEE-mo-FILL-ee-uh).
ANSWER: coagulation [or clotting]
One disorder of this process is caused by mutations in a protein ordinarily stored in Weibel-Palade
bodies. Antiphospholipid antibodies cause the aberrant activation of this process. Several
components of this process contain Kringle domains, and is aberrantly activated in DIC. One method
of assaying this process relies on mixing kaolin or silica with a sample stored in oxalate. Tissue factor
activates one arm of the (*) cascade responsible for this process, most of whose factors are serine
proteases that activate each other. This process, whose pathways include the kallikrein-dependent, intrinsic,
and extrinsic pathways, is responsible for crosslinking a fibrin mesh. This process uses factors like
prothrombin and thrombin. For 10 points, name this process which prevents people from bleeding to death
through wounds.
ANSWER: coagulation [or blood clotting]
This process is inhibited by prostacyclin, and its products can be countered with tPA. Those with Von
Willebrand disease are unable to adequately carry out this process, and a negative feedback loop controlling
this process is regulated by activated protein C. Vitamin K assists as a cofactor to this process, which is
mediated by thirteen namesake factors. Its final steps involve thrombin cleaving fibrinogen, leading to a
fibrin meshwork at the site of injury. Vital to hemostasis, drugs like warfarin, heparin, and aspirin depress
the blood's ability to undergo this process. A bleeding time test is usually used to assess, for ten points,
what ability of the body that hemophiliacs lack?
ANSWER: coagulation (or clotting)
A test for its rate of occurrence uses the International Normalized Ratio, which can be increased
with a deficiency in Vitamin K. Christmas factor and Factor VIII are two of thirteen plasma factors
necessary for this process, another of which is von (*) Willebrand's factor. This process is hindered in
people with Bernard-Soulier syndrome. This process forms a fibrin network upon an accumulation of
thrombocytes, and it is deficient in hemophiliacs. For 10 points, name this process in which platelets
help to seal up damaged blood vessels.
ANSWER: coagulation [or blood clotting]
Because this process uses VKORC to recycle components, it can be inhibited by a coumarin
derivative called warfarin. Tissue factor initiates the extrinsic pathway of this process, and when
endothelial cells are damaged, its von Willebrand factor bonds to collagen. This process is inhibited
by Bernard-Souleir syndrome and by another disorder caused by a lack of [*] factor VIII, disrupting
this process's namesake cascade. In this process, thrombin converts fibrinogen to fibrin strands that assist
the platelet plug in closing the wound. Disrupted in hemophiliacs, for 10 points, name this process by which
blood clots.
ANSWER: coagulation [or thrombosis; accept blood clotting and word forms before mentioned]
The formation of tenase complex is key to this process, and one variant of a disorder in which it does
not occur properly is called Christmas disease. This process is promoted by a protein named for
Hageman, and VKORC is inhibited by the drug warfarin in order to prevent it. This process is
initiated upon the exposure and binding to (*) collagen of von Willebrand factor. Factor II, also known
as thrombin, promotes this process by cleaving fibrinogen to create fibrin, a protein that polymerizes and
enmeshes platelets. For 10 points, name this process by which blood clots.
ANSWER: coagulation [accept blood clotting before mention; accept logical equivalents]
Von Willebrand disease affects this process, while a sex-linked disorder of it prohibits the conversion of
fibrinogen to fibrin strands; that conversion usually occurs in the process's namesake "cascade." This
process is called thrombosis when it occurs inside an uninjured blood vessel, and when it occurs outside the
body it usually results in a scab. For 10 points, name this process hindered by hemophilia in which platelets
bind together to prevent blood loss.
ANSWER: blood clotting [accept coagulation]
This process is inhibited naturally by TFPI or by the drug heparin [HEP-ah-rin]. It takes advantage of the
production by intestinal bacteria of menaquinone [men-uh-KWINown], and it involves the Christmas factor.
Its Fletcher factor is known scientifically as prekallikrein [pre-KAL-ikray-in], and it is activated by
Hageman [HAG-uh-mun] factor. A major step in this process is the conversion of fibrinogen [fie-BRIN-ohjen] to fibrin [FIE-brin] using thrombin. Name this process which ends when the fibrin joins platelets to
cover a wound.
ANSWER: blood coagulation cascade (accept blood clotting cascade, prompt on "cascade", "wound", "scar", or their word forms)
Prekallikrein complexes with a kininogen and Factor XII during the intrinsic pathway for this process. A
serine protease found in this pathway is known as the Christmas factor. A hereditary deficiency in a
multimeric protein leads to abnormalities in this process in Von Willebrand disease. Thrombin proteolyzes
fibrinogen to form a fibrin network at the start of this process, the rate of which is decreased by the drug
warfarin, which reduces Vitamin K. Various hemophilias result from a defect in this pathway, which works
because platelets aggregate and trap other blood cells. For 10 points, name this process by which the body
stops bleeding.
ANSWER: blood coagulation [or blood clotting; or word forms]
One protein in this pathway has a G20210A mutant. This pathway is aberrantly activated by antiphospholipid antibodies, while one pathway to initiate it relies on high-molecular weight kininogen. The
aPTT and PT tests can be used to determine if particular proteins in this pathway are defective; said
proteins include Hageman factor and another whose mutation causes Christmas disease. Most of the
proteins in this pathway are serine proteases that cleave each other, one of which is bound to von
Willebrand factor. For 10 points, name this cascade that includes Factors V, VIII, IX, X, etc, responsible
for stopping the flow of blood at wounds.
ANSWER: blood coagulation cascade [or blood clotting cascade; accept reasonable equivalents]
Both methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase and MTR, an enzyme used in methionine synthesis, require
compounds that contain this metal. A landmark study in coordination chemistry performed by Gibbs and
Genth synthesized thirty-five complexes of ammonia and this element. An experiment involving the beta
decay of one of this element's radioactive isotopes led Chien-Shiung Wu to first develop the idea of chargeparity violation. In addition, it is found in a compound whose deficiency can lead to pernicious anemia and
which, along with folic acid, is used in DNA synthesis. For 10 points, name this transition metal found in
vitamin B12 that is between iron and nickel on the periodic table, with chemical symbol Co.
ANSWER: Cobalt [accept Co before the end]
The Greenwood map concerns this structure. Diseases of this organ include Meniere's
disease, and its scala media is separated from its scala vestibuli by Reissner's membrane. Cells
containing stereocilia are arranged in four rows in this structure; three of those rows are
responsible for producing its namesake "microphonic," and the fourth row is responsible for
converting vibrations into electrical signals. For 10 points, name this snail-shaped organ that
contains both the outer and inner hair cells and is located in the inner ear.
ANSWER: cochlea [prompt on inner ear; prompt on organ of Corti before "scala media"]
This structure generates OAE's, and the stria vascularis is responsible for getting blood to this structure.
Two cavities in this structure* are connected by the helicotrema, and this structure is enervated by the spiral
ganglion. Reissner's membrane demarcates two parts of this structure, and its scala media and scala tympani
are separated by the basilar membrane, which is tonotopically organized and is the resting point for the
Organ of Corti. For 10 points, the malleus, incus, and stapes push fluid in what snail-shaped organ located
in the inner ear?
ANSWER: cochlea [accept Organ of Corti until *]
The stria vascularis, a rare example of vascular epithelial tissue, supplies this organ with a very
high 80 millivolt resting potential. The motor protein prestin is found in cells of this organ. Boettcher,
Hensen, and Claudius name specialized cells in it. The modiolus forms a central axis through this
organ. Perilymph is found in the outer two sections of this organ, while endolymph is found between
its basilar and Reissner membranes. The (*) base of this structure contains the round and oval windows.
The vestibule, the semicircular canals, and this structure form the bony labyrinth. At its apex is the Organ
of Corti, which is covered in both inner and outer hair cells. For 10 points, name this snail-shaped organ
located in the inner ear.
ANSWER: cochlea [prompt on organ of Corti before it is read]
This organ is divided into the scala media, scala tympani, and scala vestibuli (ves-TIB-you-lee). Vibrations
on the basilar membrane in this structure are transduced into electrical stimuli by this organ's inner hair
cells, which are located in the Organ of Corti (CORE-tee). This snail-shaped organ is the primary sense
organ of hearing. For 10 points, name this organ also known as the "inner ear."
ANSWER: cochlea [or inner ear before mentioned]
Although this structure is divided into three parts, two are connected via the helicotrema. These two parts
contain a fluid with a high concentration of sodium, known as paralymph, but the middle structure's fluid
has a high concentration of potassium instead and is known as endolymph. This middle section, known as
the scala media, contains hairs known as stereocilia, as well as the all-important Organ of Corti. The whole
structure wraps around the modiolus, giving it its name which comes from the Latin for "snail." For 10
points, name this spiral-shaped part of the inner ear, responsible for transforming sound waves into
electrical signals for the brain.
ANSWER: Cochlea
Two chambers of this structure are separated by Reissner's membrane. This structure contains a total of
three chambers, two of which are filled with perilymph, and one of which is filled with endolymph. The
three chambers of this structure are the scala vestibuli, scala media, and scala tympani. One structure found
on its basilar membrane contains hair cells and is the site of auditory transduction. Containing the organ of
Corti, this spiral-shaped structure is located in the inner ear. For 10 points, identify this structure that names
an implant that allows deaf people to hear.
ANSWER: cochlea [prompt on "ear" or "inner ear;" do NOT accept "organ of Corti"]
The specificity of these objects was discovered by Marshall Nirenberg. Their name was coined by
Sydney Brenner, who matched two of them to the "amber" and "ochre" mutations. Along with
"opal," those colors have been used to describe the three ones that cause termination. The (*) wobble
effect occurs when the value of the last component of one is changed but the product is unaltered.
Methionine is produced by the "start" one, which is designated by the sequence AUG. For 10 points, name
these triples of base pairs that specify the production of an amino acid.
ANSWER: codons
The proteoglycan decorin often binds to fibrils of one type of this protein, and that type is coded for
by sequences on chromosome 7 and chromosome 17. The partial hydrolysis of this protein generates
gelatin, and reticular fibers are made from type III of this protein, which contains repeats of the
sequence glycine-proline-hydroxyproline. This protein is assembled from three alpha chains in a triple
helix structure. For 10 points, name this protein found in cartilage, ligaments, and tendons, the most
abundant in the human body.
ANSWER: collagen
Synthesis of this protein is inhibited by a lack of the cofactor vitamin C; this inhibition results in scurvy.
This protein contains the amino acids hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine, and glycine and proline appear at
regular intervals along its length. It forms a (*) triple-helical structure and links together to form fibrils.
Gelatin is derived from this protein, and long chains of this protein are found in the extracellular matrix of
animal cells. This tension-bearing protein is found in connective tissue such as tendons, ligaments and bone.
For 10 points, name this protein, the most common in the human body.
ANSWER: collagen
This protein is targeted by the drug Xiaflex, which treats Dupuytren's contracture with Clostridium-isolated
enzymes that hydrolyze this protein. The N-terminal domain of this protein is cleaved by proteins such as
ADAMTS-2 and ADAMTS-3. Ascorbic acid both stimulates production of this protein and regulates
hydroxylation of its lysine and proline residues. This protein contains a repeated Gly-X-Y motif, where X is
often proline and Y is hydroxyproline. This principal component of the extracellular matrix forms a triple
helix structure, which is assembled outside the cell. For 10 points, name this most abundant protein in
mammals, found in hair, skin, and the organic components of bone and cartilage.
ANSWER: collagen
An error in the synthesis of this protein causes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Other than elastin, it is
the only human protein to contain hydroxyproline. Every third amino acid in its main helix is a
glycine. This protein forms a triple helix which then forms a fibrous structure in extra-cellular
spaces.(*) Gelatin is made by hydrolyzing this protein. It is a major component of cartilage. It is the most
abundant protein in the human body. For 10 points, name this protein found in the skin and the tendons.
ANSWER: collagen
One isoform of this protein is targeted by autoantibodies in Goodpasture's syndrome, and one
mutation in this protein causes characteristic blue sclera. ADAMTS2 cleaves its precursors, which is
why ADAMTS2 mutation causes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. This protein is glycosylated with
two-sugar units, and its lysine residues are crosslinked after secretion. Hydroxylysine and
hydroxyproline are unique amino acids found in this molecule, whose synthesis requires (*) vitamin
C. This protein contains glycine at almost every third residue, which allows it to form a compact triple
helix. This protein binds to integrins and fibronectins in the extracellular matrix, and gives tissues its tensile
strength. For 10 points, name this fibrous protein found in gelatin.
ANSWER: collagen
This protein is not affected in Williams syndrome, but lysyl oxidase produces aldehyde groups important to
its function. Integrins serve as cell surface receptors to fibronectin and this protein, and mutations in genes
coding for this protein affect glomorular structure and kidney activity in Alport syndrome. Vitamin C
deficiency causes scurvy because it is required for the synthesis of hyrdoxyproline which, along with proline
and glycine, makes up most of this protein. This protein is made up of a left handed triple helix, and this
protein mineralizes to form bone. or 10 points, name this most abundant protein in the human body, which
makes up most connective tissue.
ANSWER: collagen
Defects in the creation of this protein can cause a combination of kidney failure and hearing loss known as
Alport syndrome or in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Its structure was proprosed by Ramachandran and Kartha,
known as the Madras group, as a triple helix. It is broken down by cortisol, and a lack of this protein leads
to scurvy. It is the most abundant protein in the body, especially in connective tissue, and it is often used in
cosmetic surgery. Name this protein used to create gelatin.
ANSWER: collagen
Clostridium histolyticum secretes an enzyme that breaks down this protein, which is sold as
xiaflex. Mutations in one form of it cause a disease in which there are spaces in glomerular basement
membranes, called Alport syndrome. This protein is rich in hydroxylated proline and lysine, is
reliant on (*) vitamin C for synthesis, and is arranged in a triple helix. It is found in fibril form in
connective tissue. For 10 points, name this protein that is hydrolyzed to form gelatin.
ANSWER: collagen
The degradation of this molecule in the body causes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and osteoblasts synthesize
matrices composed primarily of this compound. Integrins bind fibronectin and the Type IV of this molecule.
Every third amino acid of this protein is glycine, and it requires Vitamin C for its synthesis. This protein
composed of proline and hydroxyproline has a triple helix structure and is mineralized to form bone. For 10
points, identify this most abundant protein in mammals that is the main component of connective tissue.
ANSWER: Collagen
The seventh isoform of this protein is attacked by autoantibodies in epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. This
protein is rich in the glycine-X-Y motif, and vitamin C is required to create its numerous hydroxylated
lysine and proline residues. This protein is secreted by fibroblasts, assembles into a triple helix structure,
and is broken down to form gelatin. For 10 points, name this important structural protein found in
connective tissue, the most abundant protein in humans.
ANSWER: collagen
In one type of this protein, molecules are arranged 67 nanometers away from each other in units
denoted by the letter 'D'. About 35 % of this protein is composed of glycine, and 29 types of it have
been found in the human body. (*) Gelatin is a type of this protein, which is commonly found in muscles,
and Type I of it is found in skin, artery walls, and tendons. For ten points, name this protein predominantly
found in the connective tissues, the most abundant protein in mammals.
ANSWER: Collagen
The angiogenesis inhibitor endostatin is derived from the breakdown of this protein. The
coppercontaining enzyme lysyl oxidase catalyzes the formation of aldehydes from the epsilon-amino
group of lysines, allowing cross-linking of this protein. A form of this protein is defective in a disease
that presents with blue sclera. Defects in it can result in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, osteogenesis
imperfecta, and (*) Alport's syndrome. The pro- form of this protein is assembled in the ER, and
peptidases cleave propetides at the ends of that pro- form after secretion. It contains many glycine-prolineX and glycine-X-hydroxyproline motifs. Ascorbic acid is a cofactor in the synthesis of this protein, which
possesses a triple-helix structure. For 10 points, name this fibrous protein that comprises most of the
extracellular matrix.
ANSWER: collagen
A disease resulting from a defect in this protein manifests in overly-bendy joints and is Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome. Osteogenesis imperfecta is also caused by defects in this protein and manifests as brittle bones.
Kidney basement membranes composed of this protein are misshapen in Alport syndrome. A motif in this
protein features hydroxyproline, which requires Vitamin C for synthesis, explaining the degradation of this
protein in scurvy sufferers. Glycine constitutes about a third of its amino acids. For 10 points, identify this
triple-helical protein found in cartilage and blood vessels.
ANSWER: collagen
A variety of this protein that appears primarily in interstitial tissue is associated with Ulrich
myopathy, and mutation in a gene for its synthesis results in Alport syndrome. It is colored dark blue
or green by Masson's trichrome stain. Peticchiae and gum bleeding in scurvy occur because vitamin
(*) C helps synthesize this protein by hydroxylating certain amino acids. This protein, which is mineralized
in the formation of bone, contains high levels of hydroxyproline and proline in its triple-helical structure.
The most abundant mammalian protein is, for 10 points, what connective protein found in teeth, bone, and skin?
ANSWER: collagen
One type of this compound is found in osteoid trabeculae, and a derivative of this compound found in
porifera is called spongin. Deficient synthesis of Type IV of this compound can cause Alport syndrome, and
absence of types I and III can lead to Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Rich in proline and hydroxyproline, every
third amino acid in this protein is glycine, and it's typically found in a coiled-coil triple-helix configuration.
One cofactor in its synthesis is vitamin C, and transparent versions of its "fibers" make up the cornea. For
10 points, identify this most abundant protein in mammals, found in tendons and cartilage.
ANSWER: collagen
One disease resulting from mutations in this protein causes destruction of small blood vessels in the
kidneys and is called Alport Syndrome. It possesses repeating Glycine-X-Y motifs with the glycine
facing the inside. Mutations in one type of this substance cause osteogenesis imperfecta, and its
synthesis is inhibited by a low intake of Vitamin C, leading to scurvy. This fibrous glycoprotein forms a
triple helix and is characterized by high tensile strength, and their mineralized form makes up bone matrix.
For 10 points, name this most abundant protein in mammals, which makes up connective tissue.
ANSWER: collagen
In one condition involving this molecule, kidneys are unable to filter waste products from the blood due to a
failure of the basement membranes. An improper synthesis of types 1 and 3 of this molecule results in
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Although it is not elastin, glycene and prolene are extensively prevalent in this
protein, which is converted to amino acids by cortisol. This protein has a triple-helix structure, and it is the
most common protein in humans. Malformation of this protein can cause hyperelasticity of joints. For 10
points, name this dominant component of connective tissue.
ANSWER: Collagen
Cross linking in this protein occurs when two oxidized derivatives of lysine link up; the amount of cross
linking that occurs in this protein increases with age. This protein contains three left handed helices which
combine to form a triple helix. About one third of this protein is amino acid is glycine; this protein also
consists of hydroxyproline. A lack of ascorbic acid causes an inability to synthesize hydroxyproline,
causing a breakdown of this protein in the gums in a disease called scurvy. For 10 points, name this elastic
protein found in connective tissue, skin and cartilage.
ANSWER: collagen
Autoantibodies attack the alpha-3 chains of one type of this protein in Goodpasture's Syndrome.
Substitution of serine for cysteine at position 1564 of the alpha-5 chain of that type of this protein leads to a
severe form of Alport Syndrome. Along with laminins, type IV of this protein forms a two-dimensional
mesh in the basal lamina. This protein primarily consists of a triple helix of Gly-X-Y repeats, where X and
Y are typically proline and hydroxyproline. Type I of this protein is secreted by chondrocytes and
osteoblasts, and is mineralized to form bone matrix. For 10 points, name this most abundant protein in the
human body, whose high tensile strength makes it ideal in tendons and skin.
ANSWER: collagen
This protein is stained blue by Masson's trichrome, and its cleaved ends can act as a marker to estimate the
rate of its synthesis. Deficiency of it results in osteogenesis imperfecta, or brittle bone disease. Patients
with scurvy cannot properly perform its synthesis, which requires a cofactor, vitamin C. About one sixth of
it consists of proline and one third consists of glycine, which helps it form a stable triple helix. It can be
processed to form gelatin. For 10 points, name this most abundant protein in mammals, a major component
of tendons, cartilage, bones, and skin.
ANSWER: collagen
A self-limiting disease associated with one of this protein's genes leads to irritability, swelling and
abnormal bone changes in infants; that hyperostosis is sometimes known as Caffey disease. This
protein is partially synthesized via reactions that are catalyzed by prolyl-4 and lysyl hydroxylases.
The degradation of this protein into amino acids is partially regulated by cortisol. Blood in urine is
one common symptom of a nephritis caused by mutations in this protein's genes, known as Alport
syndrome. This protein's fibrillar variety is characterized by its D-periods. Defects in this protein's
namesake peptidases that prevent them from creating this protein's tropo- precursor is known as EhlersDanlos syndrome. This protein is produced by fibroblasts, and the "Madras" model predicts it has a triple
helix. For 10 points, what is this protein, the most abundant in mammals?
ANSWER: collagen
A defect in this protein causes brittle bone disease, and this protein is composed of three chains
wound in a tight triple helix. It is composed of the repeating amino acid sequence glycine-prolinehydroxyproline and organized in tropo units. This protein usually works in conjunction with elastin
and keratin to allow muscles to function without tearing. For 10 points, identify this most abundant protein
in mammals which is the main component of connective tissue.
ANSWER: collagen
In the extracellular matrix, this substance is always surrounded by proteoglycans, and vitamin C deficiency
leads to defects in this substance, causing scurvy. It is rich in hydroxyproline and this scleroprotein has a
triple helix structure. Type eighteen of this substance is used to form endostatin, while a deficiency of type
one causes Osteogenesis imperfecta, which is commonly called brittle bone disease. It yields gelatin when
denatured, and is the most abundant protein in animals. Name this fibrous protein that gives skin its
elasticity and forms the tendons, ligaments, and other connective tissues of the body.
ANSWER: collagen
Mutations in the sixth type of this molecule causes Bethlem myopathy and Ullrich myopathy. Mutations in
another version of this molecule causes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, while another mutation in this molecule
causes Alports's syndrome. This molecule is stained by Masson's Trichrome, and it is modified by prolyl
hydroxylase in the ER during synthesis, which requires vitamin C as a cofactor. Every third residue in this
protein is glycine, which allows it to stabilize into a characteristic triple helix. FTP, name this fibrous
connective tissue protein found in tendons, bones, teeth, and skin, the most abundant protein in mammals.
ANSWER: Collagen
A disease caused by a mutation in one gene coding for this protein involves symptoms like "basketweave" kidneys and kidney scarring and is called Alport syndrome. Integrin is key in binding it to
cell membranes, and cortisol stimulates the degradation of this protein. The lens of the (*) eye
contains its crystalline form, and vitamin C is a cofactor in this protein's synthesis. The amino acid
sequence glycine, proline, and hydroxyproline is abundant in its triple-helical structure, and this protein's
Type I is mineralized to form bone. For 10 points, name this protein that gives teeth, skin, and bones their
tensile strength, the most abundant protein in the human body.
ANSWER: collagen
Gardner's syndrome and the FAP condition are characterized by formations on the epithelium of this organ.
DCC and APC are the most common oncogenes in cancers of this structure, which can be examined through
sigmoidoscopy. Sacculation forms haustra in this organ, which is divided into four sections including the
"ascending" and "descending" types. In this organ, many species form mutualistic relations with
microorganisms, some of which provide nutrients such as biotin and Vitamin K. For ten points, name this
digestive organ that is the longest section of the large intestine and is located in between the cecum and
rectum.
ANSWER: colon (prompt on "large intestine" until mentioned)
This phenomenon is also known as fall dwindle disease, and it may be caused by the Varroa mite. A team
from UC-San Francisco identified a mutation in the nocerna ceranae fungus that could be responsible for a
jump from Asian to Western populations, and a 2007 Columbia University study found a strong correlation
between affected populations and the presence of the Israeli Acute Paralysis Virus. Less likely explanations
that have been suggested include genetically modified crops, nicotine-based pesticides, and the use of cell
phones. For 10 points, name this phenomenon which has severely decreased the number of pollinating bee
colonies throughout North America.
ANSWER: Colony Collapse Disorder [or CCD]
The Farnsworth Lantern Test was used on sailors to diagnose this condition. It is more commonly
diagnosed with the Ishihara test, which shows numbers within fields of dots. It is caused by a lack of
cone cells in the (*) retina, and is caused by genes on the X chromosome, making it more common in men.
For 10 points, name this condition that comes in a red-green type, and causes sufferers to confuse pigments.
ANSWER: color blindness (accept word forms; do not prompt on "blindness")
This property can be used for "warning" in a process called aposematism, which is seen in poison dart
frogs. A difference in this property in moths was observed near factors in a phenomenon dubbed "industrial
melanism." Along with patterns, this property is mimicked in processes named for Bates and Muller that
are exemplified by Monarch and Viceory butterflies. For 10 points, name this property of animals, whereby
they reflect different frequencies of the visible spectrum to gain evolutionary advantages.
ANSWER: coloration
Tritanopia is a rare form of this disorder linked to chromosome 7. This disorder is diagnosed by the
Farnsworth-Munsell and Ishihara tests. The most common form is X-linked, but can develop from injury or
macular degeneration. Cone cells are either missing or malfunctioning in this disorder. For 10 points, name
this disorder in which individuals have difficulty distinguishing between hues, especially red and green.
ANSWER: colorblindness [or blue-yellow colorblindness or red-green colorblindness]
Sessile organisms use allelopathy (ah-LELL-oh-path-ee) in this process. Ecological release is a result of
this process that is intense between sympatric congeneric species. Volterra developed a coefficient for this
process that Gause determined had an exclusion principle. Resource partitioning avoids this
density-dependent process that is either exploitation or interference. Courtship rituals and niche dispersion
are examples of this process. For 10 points, name this process of organisms fighting for limited resources.
ANSWER: competition
One model of this phenomenon uses consumption vectors and zero net-growth isoclines to
determine if this phenomenon permits coexistence. That model was created by David Tilman as an
extension of his R-star model of this phenomenon. Joseph Connell removed different species of
barnacles to demonstrate the importance of this phenomenon in an intertidal zone. It comes in
exploitative, interference, and apparent forms. Georgy Gause showed that this phenomenon on (*)
two species with similar niches may cause exclusion of one species, and it can also result in character
displacement. For 10 points, name this phenomenon appearing in intraspecific and interspecific forms,
often caused by individuals vying for limited resources.
ANSWER: competition [or word forms]
The aberrant activation of this pathway causes paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Cleavage of a
thioester bond causes basal activation of this pathway, a phenomenon termed tickover. People with
deficiencies in this pathway are susceptible to repeated meningococcus infections. This pathway can be
activated by mannan-binding lectins or antigen-antibody complexes. In this pathway, the membrane attack
complex is assembled by C5 through C9 after the formation of C3 and C5 convertase, and this pathway is
responsible for destroying bacteria independent of cell-mediated immunity. For 10 points, name this
cascade, a part of the innate immune system named for the fact that it adds to the defense provided by the
adaptive immune system.
ANSWER: complement system [or complement cascade; or complement pathway]
The functional limits of these cells are defined by tristimulus values, and, on average, the outer nuclear
layer contains a sixfold-greater density of these cells in birds than in mammals. Daltonism is one of several
deficiency disorders affecting these cells, which transmit information to nerve fibers via midget bipolar
cells. S, M, and L are the three varieties of this cell, classified according to the type of photopsin it contains,
though they are more commonly called blue, green, and red. Name these cells found in the retina of the eye
which mediate color vision, unlike their counterparts the rods.
ANSWER: cone cells
The nonuniformity of their response is known as the Stiles-Crawford effect, while Young and Helmholtz
developed a theory accounting for their existence. George Wald provided proof of Ragnar Granit's theory of
the different types of these entities, which generally make connections to horizontal cells. They may have
principal and accessory members when occurring as two contiguous cells in birds, and there are S, M, and L
types of them. The subject of the opponent-process theory, each type contains different photopsins, but all
of them are attached to the outer membrane and are concentrated in the fovea. FTP, name these
photoreceptor cells in the retina which allow for color perception and are often paired with rods.
ANSWER: cones
This process involves binding to the product of the ompA gene and it is initiated by an object synthesized in
the presence of the rlrA islet by the tra and trb loci. The interrupted variety of this process can occur with
Hfr cells, and this process involves a nick made at the oriT by relaxase. Study of bacteria of genus Shigella
led to the discovery of R factors in this process, and it is initiated by the strain containing the F plasmid. For
10 points, name this process which transfers genetic material between bacteria.
ANSWER: Conjugation
One process by this name occurring in ciliates results in the creation of a new macronucleus by
karyogamy of the micronucleus. This process is inhibited by the FinOP antisense RNA system, which
regulate the expression of the Tra operon. This process is initiated by the relaxosome creating a nick.
Genome mapping experiments can be performed by interrupting this process using a blender.
Rhizobia are able to undergo this process with plant (*) cells in order to exchange the Ti and Ri
plasmids. When the plasmid that grants the ability to do this integrates into the genome, an Hfr strain is
formed. This process occurs in organisms containing an F plasmid. For 10 points, name this process in
which bacteria use a sex pilus to transfer genetic information to each other.
ANSWER: conjugation
Crown gall disease arises when this action, enabled by the vir codon, causes affected cells to produce
opines. A strain of one organism called FC40 is said to require this process due to its dependence on
the genes called recA, B, and C, while Lederberg and Tatum first observed this process in another
strain called K-12. This process takes place in (*) paramecium only under poor nutrient conditions. Its
initiation in one typical case requires TraI, a relaxase, as well as the integrated host factor; generally, it
requires an appendage called a pilus. A process beginning at the oriV and known as vegetative replication
often follows this process, one canonical example of which, studied in E. coli, involves an episome called
the F-factor. Contrasted with transduction and transformation, for 10 points, identify this process by which
bacteria transfer genetic material through direct contact.
ANSWER: conjugation
The evidence of this process is called homoplasy, and Stephen Jay Gould argued that many common
examples of it are actually the result of parallelism. The spurges of Africa and cacti of North America are
best explained by this concept, which also accounts for the distant ancestry of birds of prey like owls and
eagles. The camera-like eye of cephalopods and vertebrates is an example of this concept, as are the mice,
moles, anteaters, and wolves found among both placental and marsupial mammals. Explaining the close
body shapes of sharks, dolphins, and icthyosaurs [IHKthee-oh-"sores"], name this mode of evolution in
which unrelated species show similar adaptations due to similar environments and ecological niches.
ANSWER: convergent evolution [accept convergence; prompt on evolution; accept word forms and variations that include (forms of) both words]
A defect in the ATP7A gene causes Menkes disease, which is an inability to metabolize this element.
Though it is not cobalt, this element is being used in the SarAr technology for PET imaging, as its 64
isotope has a long half life, and Kayser-Fleischer rings occur around the cornea of the patients suffering
from an inability to release this element into bile, also known as Wilson's Disease. It is also contained in
Hemocyanin, which change color when oxygen binds to this element, and substitutes iron in the blood of the
horseshoe crab. For 10 points, identify this element which is present biologically in both its +1 and +2
oxidation states and is symbolized Cu.
ANSWER: copper (prompt on early: "Cu" buzz)
One species of these found in the Caribbean is critically endangered and is commonly known as elkhorn.
Those in family Scleractinia are called "stony" and have skeletal cups are made from calcium carbonate.
Like some sea anemones, they exist in symbiosis with zooxanthellae (ZO-uh-zan-THEL-ee), which are
algae. These are cnidarians, and individual ones are called polyps. Many of these organisms form an
important habitat off the coast of Australia. For 10 points, name these small animals that build reefs.
ANSWER: corals
These organisms are divided into brooders and broadcasters, based on how they spawn planulae.
Some of these organisms that produce gorgonin are being researched for use as bone implants, in
part due to their trabecular structure. In recent years, frequent Acanthaster outbreaks have caused
sharp declines in their populations. These organisms form symbiotic associations with zooxanthellae.
When they are stressed, they eject those (*) algae, leading to bleaching. Growth rings in the aragonite
skeletons of Scleractinia, one order of these animals, provided the first examples of the biological effects of
ocean acidification. They are classified based on whether their symmetry is 6-fold or 8-fold, and they lack a
medusa stage. For 10 points, name these cnidarians that build reefs.
ANSWER: corals [prompt on "Anthozoa" or "sea anemones" because sea anemones aren't welldistinguished from corals; prompt on "Cnidaria"]
The primary member of these ecosystems are preyed upon by Acanthaster planci, whose surface
resembles a crown of thorns. The so-called "cement" of these ecosystems is a crustose, pink member
of Rodophyta. The evolution of the structure of these ecosystems was the subject of the first
monograph of Charles Darwin. Their primary members are in a mutualistic relationship with
zooxanthellae. Of their three main types, the "fringing" type occupies a shallow zone of water while
an (*) atoll is a lagoon surrounded by one. These ecosystems are threatened by widespread "bleaching".
For 10 points, name these ecosystems primarily constituted of calcium carbonate secreted by corals, which
form a giant "barrier" near Queensland, Australia.
ANSWER: coral reefs [prompt on corals; prompt on oceans]
The most common type of this ecosystem is connected to a shore without a lagoon, and is classified as
fringing. This ecosystem is the home of trunkfish and hawkfish, and fish in this ecosystem generally are
flatter and more colorful than other fish. This location grows due to the actions of certain anthozoans,
a type of cnidarians [ny-DAIR-ee-unz], allowing it to remain in place when the land from which this
system grew out recedes. When these structures are not attached to land, they are classified as atolls.
Name these calcium carbonate systems such as the Great Barrier near Queensland, Australia.
ANSWER: coral reefs [prompt on reefs; prompt on atolls]
Purpling of tissue and exposure of bare skeleton are symptoms of infection of these organisms by
Aspergillus sydowii, while stress induced decline of zooxanthellae density in these structures causes a
decrease in their productivity and makes them turn colorless, a process which is called bleaching. Darwin
proposed that these organisms may accumulate into "fringing" or atoll like structures. They are composed
of calcium carbonate secreting anthozoa which form polyps. For 10 points, identify these organisms that
sometimes form underwater structures such as the Great Barrier one off the coast of Australia.
ANSWER: Coral reefs [accept either]
Israeli activist Benjamin Kahn promotes the conservation of these geographical features around the Red
Sea. A city named after these features is called the "Brazilian Venice," and is the capital of Pernambuco.
One of these features includes the "Great Blue Hole," and is the top tourist destination in Belize. The loss of
zooxanthellae in these formations, causing a rise in temperature, leads to their "bleaching." Another of these
features is threatened by the Crown-of-Thorns starfish and is located to the east of Mackay, a city in
Queensland. For 10 points, name these living geographical features found on coasts, the largest of which is
the "Great Barrier" one.
ANSWER: coral reefs [or barrier reefs]
This biome is the subject of a hypothesis confirmed by Harry Ladd. That hypothesis, by Charles Darwin,
states that this biome increases to keep up with the sinking of the Earth's crust. Organisms that contribute to
this biome's matrix are known as framework builders; those organisms produce calcium carbonate and
silica. This biome comprises the inner and outer parts of an atoll. For 10 points, name this marine biome
produced mostly by its namesake animal, an example of which is the Great Barrier one off the coast of
Australia.
ANSWER: coral reef
This organism is the subject of the Illinois Long Term Selection Experiment, which has been running
since 1896. One phenotype of this organism lead to the discovery of the Knotted1 homeobox gene. The
evolution of the Tb1 gene is believed to have lead to many of this organism's distinguishing features.
Observations of this organism's chromosomes lead to the discovery of breakage-fusion-bridge cycles. One
phenotype in these organisms is explained by the presence of Ds and Ac units. This organism is derived
from teosinte. The "Controlling Units" of this organism were the first discovered transposons. For 10
points, name this grain studied by Barbara McClintock.
ANSWER: corn [or maize; or Zea mays; prompt on teosinte before mentioned]
These organisms produce a prolamin storage protein called zein which is used to synthesize vicara fibers.
Experiments by DeVries and Correns explained the "xenia" effect observed in this organism by invoking
double fertilization. These organisms, which have distinctive male inflorescence are closely related to the
"teosinte" grasses. Experiments on the triploid aleurone layers of its endosperm led to the discovery of the
Ac/Ds system which confers varying colour patters in this organism; that experiment led to a Nobel Prize
for Barbara McClintock's discovery of transposons. For 10 points, identify this crop which provides the
ingredients for tortillas.
ANSWER: maize [or corn; or Zea mays; or Z. mays]
Some people eat a fungus that infests this lifeform called huitlacoche as a delicacy in itself. According
to a Sauk legend, a beautiful woman gave this plant to the Sauk Indians after being presented with a
piece of roasted venison. The Fischer-Tropsch process can be used in an attempt to make diesel out of
biogas made from this plant, which is the most widely used source of biogas in Germany. Originally
developed by selective breeding of the teosinte plant in Mexico, this crop spread from Mexico to Europe
during the Colombian exchange. For 10 points, name this crop most productively grown in the United
States in Illinois and Iowa, which can be used to produce ethanol.
ANSWER: corn or maize
This organ's stroma, which is bounded by Descemet's membrane and Bowman's layer, contains
a lattice of Type I collagen fibers. Keratitis occurs when this organ is infected by the herpes simplex
virus. This organ is cut in the PFK procedure, which has been more recently replaced by (*) LASIK.
This organ provides the majority of the refractive power of its associated organ, along with the lens. For 10
points, name this clear covering over the eye.
ANSWER: cornea
This structure contains a layer composed of collagen known as Bowman's layer that lies between the
epithelium and the stroma; below the stroma is Descement's membrane. The prefix "kerat" describes
this structure, such as a disease affecting it called keratitis. This structure lies in front of a chamber
containing aqueous humor and is surrounded by the conjunctiva, which is responsible for protecting
the sclera. This structure, responsible for refracting the majority of the light that enters the eye,
malfunctions in sufferers of astigmatism and is in front of the pupil and the iris. For 10 points, name this
outermost layer of the eye.
ANSWER: cornea
The most serious complication of Kawasaki's disease is an abnormal dilation of one of these
structures. The function of these entities can be determined via a common 64-slice scan or by using
thallium. One of these structures has several diagonal or obtuse marginal branches. The
"handedness" or dominance of these structures is determined by the ones of these structures that
feed into the posterior descending one. They include the right circumflex, (*) left circumflex, and left
anterior descending, and blockage of one of these structures is treated using catheterization and stenting.
For 10 points, name these structures which branch off of the aorta and whose blockage causes myocardial
infarction, the vessels supplying the heart.
ANSWER: coronary vessels [accept coronary arteries or coronary veins]
An alcohol-induced disorder, Marchiafava-Bignami disease, affects this structure. After this structure, the
anterior commissure is the largest and most useful structure for performing the appointed task. Agenesis of
this structure can result in vision impairment, difficulty in problem solving, and difficulty in recognizing
emotions. In order to reduce severe epilepsy, this structure may be cut, leading patients to experience a
"split brain." It consists of over 200 million nerve fibers, and is the largest white matter structure in the
brain. For 10 points, identify this brain structure, a bundle of axons that connects and facilitates
communication across the left and right hemispheres of the brain.
ANSWER: corpus callosum
The namesake gyrus of this structure contains the striae of Lancisi. The partial absence of this structure
co-occurs with paroxysmal hypothermia in Shapiro syndrome and may cause Aicardi syndrome in sufferers
of Klinefelter's syndrome. Abnormal collections of cells called Probst bundles can result from the agenesis
of this structure. Roger Sperry's Nobel lecture concerned this structure. Damage to it can cause a person to
develop alien hand syndrome. It is not found in monotremes or marsupials, and it is the largest white matter
structure in the brain. To treat the grand mal seizures associated with severe epilepsy, this structure can be
severed. For 10 points, name this flat bundle of nerves that links the brain's hemispheres.
ANSWER: corpus callosum
A rare genetic disorder where this structure is partially or completely absent triggers the formation of Probst
bundles. The middle line of this body is bounded by the nerves of Lancisi, and its underside forms the roof
of the lateral ventricles. An indicator of multiple sclerosis is the appearance of lesions known as "Dawson's
fingers," which run perpendicular to this structure. Found in placental mammals, the removal of this
structure has been associated with "Dr. Strangelove syndrome," in which the afflicted person's hand
develops a mind of its own. The largest white matter body in the brain, it can be surgically severed in the
treatment of otherwise intractable complex or grand mal seizures. In its absence, interhemispheric
communication occurs through the anterior and posterior commissures. For 10 points, name this thick, flat
structure that connects the left and right hemispheres of the brain.
ANSWER: corpus callosum [Accept colossal commissure]
Agenesis of this structure leads to formation of Probst Bundles. According to a formula developed by
Jancke and Steinmetz, the cross-sectional area of this structure is proportional to the two-thirds power of the
volume of a larger structure containing it. This structure is divided into the rostrum, genu, body, isthmus,
and splenium. Current controversy exists over the contention that this structure is larger in females than in
males, which if true might explain the superior development of verbal abilities in females. "Split-Brain"
patients have had it surgically severed, in order to treat epilepsy by preventing the spread of seizures across
the brain. For 10 points, name this wide, flat bundle of nerves which connects the hemispheres of the brain.
ANSWER: corpus callosum [do not accept or prompt on "brain"]
Chronic necrosis of this structure occurs in Marchiafava-Bignami disease. Gliomas which reach
this structure have a butterfly-like appearance. People without this structure often develop Probst
bundles. A disease of this structure causes one hand to act of its own accord, and it is also damaged in
alexia without agraphia. The anterior commissure carries the same transverse fibers carried by this
structure. This structure contains a rostrum, genu, body, and splenium. This structure is often (*) cut
in a last-ditch attempt to prevent tonic-clonic seizures from spreading all over the brain. For 10 points,
name this bundle of fibers that connects the two hemispheres of the brain together.
ANSWER: corpus callosum
A condition which includes motor and sensory neuropathy and an absence of this structure is linked
to mutations in SLC12A6. A lesion of the posterior part of this structure is responsible for a
condition in which people are unable to distinguish their fingers, known as Gerstmann's syndrome.
Hypoplasia of this structure is one of the elements of CRASH syndrome, and Probst bundles are a
sign of its absence. Ralph Holloway found that this structure is larger in women than men. This
structure contains a body, genu, and splenium, and it contains a large collection of commissural
fibers. Alien hand syndrome can result from lesions in it, and cutting it is a last-ditch treatment for
epilepsy. For 10 points, name this bundle of neural fibers which connects the two hemispheres of the brain
together.
ANSWER: Corpus Callosum
This hormone is inactivated by the enzyme 11-beta-HSD2, and its synthesis relies on 11-beta
hydroxylase (high-DROX-ih-lase) acting on a derivative of cholesterol. This hormone and derivatives of it
are used to suppress the immune system, and it is released in response to ACTH release from the pituitary
gland. This hormone, along with androgens and aldosterone (al-DAH-steh-rone), is released from the
adrenal cortex. For 10 points, name this hormone which like adrenaline is released in response to stress.
ANSWER: cortisol
Underproduction of this substance in concert with thyroiditis is called Schmidt syndrome. This
substance inhibits IgA and IgM and inhibits IL-2 response to suppress T-cell proliferation. It raises
blood pressure by increasing vessel response to epinephrine. Symptoms of an overabundance of this
hormone include (*) weight gain in the torso and face, while symptoms of its deficiency include
hyperpigmentation; those diseases are called Addison's and Cushing's disease, respectively. For 10 points,
name this steroid hormone released by the adrenal gland in response to stress.
ANSWER: cortisol [or hydrocortisone; do not accept or prompt on "cortisone"]
This hormone is produced and deactivated by the two different isoforms of 11-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase. Taking high levels of prednisone can eventually suppress the ability to produce this
hormone, resulting in an Addisonian crisis. Like aldosterone, the production of this hormone relies on
21-hydroxylase acting on a cholesterol backbone. This hormone, whose release is triggered by ACTH from
the anterior pituitary, is overproduced in Cushing's syndrome. For 10 points, name this stress hormone that
is secreted by the adrenal cortex.
ANSWER: cortisol
The vestibular Schwannoma is a tumor that affects one of these entities. The abducens one is responsible for
abduction of the eye, whose internal rotation is facilitated by the trochlear one. The hypoglossal provides
motor function to the tongue, while dysphagia results from damage to the vagus one, leading to swallowing
problems. Two entities under this classification meet at a chiasm near the hypothalamus, and another
controlling senses is the olfactory one. For 10 points, identify these 12 sensory organs found in the head,
including the auditory and optic ones.
ANSWER: cranial nerves [prompt on partial answer]
Germany's Maastricht Formation contains fossils from this geologic period, which saw the split of Africa
and South America. It is geologically significant both for the large amounts of chalk formed during this
period and for a layer of iridium known as the K-T boundary, which is believed to have been deposited by
an asteroid. This period also saw diversification of dinosaur species, including the spawning of
Tyrannosaurus rex. For 10 points, name this final period of the Mesozoic Era, whose end saw the mass
extinction of the dinosaurs.
ANSWER: Cretaceous Period
The eruption of the Deccan traps may have contributed to the end of this geologic period,
during which rudists were the most important reef-builders in the Tethys Ocean. The Laramide
orogeny [aw-RAH-jeh-nee] began lifting the Rocky Mountains in this period that also saw the evolution
of the first mammals and flowering plants. The White Cliffs of Dover formed during this period,
whose characteristic chalk deposits give it its name, and the Chicxulub [CHIK-shoo-loob] crater in
Mexico records the impact event that likely ended this period. It followed the Jurassic period and is
noted for diverse dinosaur species. Name this final period of the Mesozoic era.
ANSWER: Cretaceous period
The Dakota sandstone Pierre Shale are two formations dating from this period, during which the Tethys
Ocean became a shallow sea. Chalk deposits left by the Western Interior Seaway during this period formed
the Smoky Hills Chalk in America, and the Dover Cliffs chalk in Europe was also formed at the same time.
This period closed with the eruption of the Deccan Traps in India, which may be related to an impact that
resulted in a thin layer of iridium forming between this period and the one that follows it. The Alvarezes
posited that the KT boundary marks the stratigraphic border between this period and the Tertiary. For 10
points, name this period in which the T. Rex lived, the last period of the Mesozoic era that probably ended
with a big meteor impact at Chixtulub.
ANSWER: Cretaceous period
Coccoliths formed the chalk beds that name this period of time. The Alvarez hypothesis uses shocked
quartz and iridium concentration to explain how this period of time ended. Bees aided the spread of
(*) flowering plants which first appeared in this period, whose geologic strata ends at the K-T boundary.
Placental species coexisted with dinosaurs during, for 10 points, what last period of the Mesozoic era whose
dinosaur species included T-rex?
ANSWER: Cretaceous Period
The Yixian formation and the Cedar mountain formation dates from this period. This period, whose
ages include Aptian and Maastrichtian saw Minmi paravertebra emerged in its early part, as did the
anthophyta. The oldest known ants, grasshoppers and butterflies are dated to this period, which also
saw the adaptive radiation of angiosperms. Discoveries from it are helped by a namesake soil
composition notably seen in England and Normandy, and its end is marked by a geologic signature of
iridium likely caused by the debris of a rock from outer space at the K-T boundary. For ten points, name
this period from 142- to 65-million years ago, ending with the dinosaur extinction.
ANSWER: Cretaceous [or K before K-T Boundary] Period
A less popular theory explaining this event used evidence found at the Deccan Traps. Occurring at the end
of the Maastrichtian stage, other theories point to change in sea level and sea temperature. It saw a shift
from angiosperms to ferns in land plants and saw little impact on organisms relying on detritus. Higher than
normal levels of Iridium, first discovered in Gubbio, Italy, have helped explain this event. However, the
most popular theory explaining this event was proposed by Walter and Luis Alvarez and was based on
evidence found by Glen Penfield near the town of Chicxulub. FTP, a crater in Yucatan, Mexico is often
used as evidence for what event that occurred 65 million years ago?
ANSWER: Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction event (Accept K-T extinction event or Cretaceous-Paleogene Extinction Event, also accept extinction of dinosaurs or anything about the dinosaurs going extinct 65 million years ago because of an asteroid, just be very lenient...)
This period was precede by a period that saw the formation of the Chalk Group in northwestern
Europe, and it was succeeded by a period that saw the completion of the breakup of Gondwana and
the collision of the Indian Plate with Asia. Though the Signor-Lipps effect, exemplified by the
disappearance of the cephalapod Ammonite, makes the duration of this period difficult to determine,
evidence for this event was provided by Walter and Luis (*) Alvarez in the form of an extremely high
level of iridium at this event's namesake sedimentary boundary. The Chicxulub Crater is seen as the most
likely remnant of the cause of, FTP, what extinction event of 65 million years ago that killed the dinosaurs?
ANSWER: Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction event (accept K-T extinction or K-Pg extinction; accept Paleogene or Tertiary before "breakup")
This scientist postulated the existence of "adaptor molecules" later discovered to be transfer RNA, and he
also advanced the theory of panspermia. This man first stated the principle which claims that the transfer of
information flows between DNA and RNA to protein, known as the central dogma. This man's partner saw
Photo 51, an X-ray diffraction image taken by Rosalind Franklin of a certain molecule. For 10 points,
identify this man who elucidated the double helix structure of DNA with James Watson.
ANSWER: Francis Crick
One suspected causative agent of this disease is Mycobacterium avium paratuberculosis, which
causes a similar disease in livestock. The autophagy-controlling gene ATG16L1 is linked to this
disease. This disease is strongly linked to mutations in a protein that recognizes muramyl dipeptide
moieties and contains two caspase recruitment domains, known as NOD2. The TNF-alpha inhibitor
infliximab was originally approved to treat it, and it is associated with a Th17 response. Its
complications include a seronegative spondylarthropathies, fissures, and fistulae. Unlike ulcerative
colitis this disease shows discontinuous, or "skip" lesions, which are usually seen on colonoscopy. Caused
by an inflammation of the GI tract, most often the small intestine, for 10 points, name this disease
characterized by bloody diarrhea and weight loss, named for an American.
ANSWER: Crohn's Disease
In bacteria, the RuvABC complex facilitates this process. It involves the formation of DSBs by Spo11
(ess pee oh eleven), a member of the MRN complex, in eukaryotes. The coefficient of coincidence
measures the probability that this phenomenon occurs twice. This process can be extended via a branch
migration. A tetrahedral structure called a Holliday junction forms during this process. The distance over
which the probability of this phenomenon occurring equals one percent is called a centimorgan. During this
process, a synaptonemal complex is formed at the chiasmus. It occurs during the pachytene stage of
prophase I. For 10 points, name this method of genetic recombination in which chromosomes exchange
genetic material.
ANSWER: chromosomal crossover [or crossing over; accept word forms; prompt on "genetic recombination"]
In Drosophilia oocytes, the frequency of this event has been positively correlated with the number of
dense spherical bodies bridging the central region of the synaptonemal complex. In 1931, using
maize, Creighton and McClintock showed that in linked genes, this process was accompanied by a
visible (*) exchange of markers thus elucidating its physical basis. It is commonly preceded by the
formation of the chiasmata and is a source for genetic variability. Occurring during prophase, this is, for 10
points, what process whereby alleles on one chromosome may be exchanged with their alternative alleles on
a homologous chromosome.
ANSWER: crossing over
The Meselson-Radding heteroduplex model was formulated to account for aberrant 4:4 tetrads in this
process. In eukaryotes, it is catalyzed by the proteins Spo11, Mre11, and Rad50. The recombinases Dmc1
and Rad51 form nucleoprotein filaments and catalyze the formation of a cross bridge. DNA synthesis is
initiated by the 3' [3-prime] end of the invading DNA strand, displacing the complementary strand. The
strand then forms a Holliday junction with the other end of the initial double stranded break, which will
eventually become a chiasma. FTP, identify this process in which two nonsister chromatids break at
corresponding places and rejoin at the other's DNA which occurs during prophase I of meiosis.
ANSWER: Crossing over
In eukaryotes, this specific process requires both Rad51 and Dmc1, which are necessary for the
formation of Holliday junctions. One step in this process is branch migration. The mule's sterility results
from its inability to correctly perform this process, which begins with a small break in the double-stranded
DNA at the same point in both chromosomes. For 10 points, name this exchange of base pairs between two
similar DNA sequences, a mechanism of genetic variation that occurs at the beginning of meiosis.
ANSWER: homologous recombination [or crossing-over; prompt on meiosis until "break"]
The coefficient of coincidence measures the level of interference in this process. In humans, this
process is initiated by Spo11 and catalyzed by Dmc1, and its substrates are brought together by the
synaptonemal complex. It results in the formation of a Holliday junction, and it occurs in the
pachytene stage immediately after synapsis. Map distance is based on the (*) frequency of this process
between two sites. If unequal, it can result in deletions and duplications, and chiasmata are microscopic
evidence of this process occurring. This process occurs in tetrads between homologous regions of maternal
and paternal chromosomes during prophase I. For 10 points, name this type of recombination that occurs
during meiosis.
ANSWER: crossing over [or crossover; accept meiotic recombination before "meiosis"; prompt on "recombination"]
Phycobilisomes are a type of light-harvesting structures found in these organisms, and NtcA
transcription factors regulate the expression of nitrogen metabolism genes in them. The KaiC
phosphorylation cycle maintains circadian rhythms in these organisms. The evolutionary history of
their rubisco protein is used to classify them into alpha and beta types, and the evolution of these
organisms resulted in an oxygen rich atmosphere. Endosymbiosis of these organisms with eukaryotic cells is
thought to have resulted in chloroplasts, though they are often named as a type of algae. For 10 points, name
these organisms named for their blue-green appearance.
ANSWER: cyanobacteria [accept rhodophyta or red-green algae until "nitrogen"]
Some species of this phylum form filamentous hormogonia during reproduction. During
dormancy, they create thick structures called akinetes. Stromatoliths are primarily composed of
these organisms, which form heterocysts in order to perform nitrogen fixation. The evolution of these
organisms triggered the Great Oxygenation Event, in which the Earth's atmosphere became
oxidizing and oxygen-intolerant organisms went extinct. These organisms express the dye (*)
phycocyanin, and they are one of the most evolutionarily ancient organisms to contain photosystems I and
II. These organisms are thought to be the precursors of modern chloroplasts in the endosymbiotic
hypothesis. For 10 points, name this type of bacteria named for its blue-green appearance.
ANSWER: cyanobacteria [or cyanophyta; accept blue-green algae or blue-green bacteria before "blue-green", prompt after; prompt on "algae" or "bacteria"]
2-methyl-hopanoids are biomarkers for this phylum. Seven genera in this phylum produce
anatoxin-a. The phylum's order Nostocales contains motile, filamentous structures called
hormogonia. Anabaena and other members of this phylum have heterocysts, but all members of this
taxon have carboxysomes to limit photorespiration. Most stromatolites are formed through the
accumulation of (*) mats of organisms in this phylum. They made the Earth's atmosphere oxidizing during
the Great Oxygenation Event. Lynn Margulis advanced the theory that plastids originated from these
organisms due to endosymbiosis. For 10 points, name this phylum of photosynthetic bacteria also called
blue-green algae.
ANSWER: cyanobacteria [or Cyanophyta; or blue-green algae until it is read; do not accept or prompt on "algae"]
These organisms express the kaiABC gene cluster in a circadian fashion, and these organisms are
responsible for producing aplysiatoxin, anatoxin, and cylindrospermopsin. During reproduction, these
organisms form long filaments called hormogonia and can also exist in a dormant akinete state. These
organisms contain heterocysts, which carry out nitrogen fixation, and they are the only organism that can
reduce carbon in aerobic conditions. Accounting for over half the photosynthesis in the ocean, for 10 points,
name this organism, which may be the precursor of the chloroplast, a simple photosynthetic bacteria also
known as blue-green algae.
ANSWER: Cyanobacteria
These organisms, which produce the acetylcholine-like compound anatoxin-a, cycle through a dormant
akinete cell stage. Some members of the family Nostocaceae of these organisms are motile due to
filamentous hormogonia, while heterocysts enable nitrogen fixation by members of this phylum. Phycobilins
are associated with their pigmentation, and their evolution has resulted in an oxidizing atmosphere.
Endosymbiosis of these organisms is thought to be the source of chloroplasts, and these organisms account
for the majority of photosynthesis in the ocean. Appearing in green algal blooms, for 10 points, identify this
phylum of photosynthetic bacteria, also known as blue-green algae.
ANSWER: cyanobacteria [or cyanophyta; or blue-green algae early]
One analogue of this molecule is synthesized after nitric oxide oxidation, relaxes smooth muscle, and
regulates apoptosis and glycogenolysis. This molecule works by dissociating the two regulatory from
the two catalytic subunits of its target class of proteins, a transformation itself effected by the cholera
toxin and caffeine, which deregulates the phosphodiesterase that breaks this molecule down. This
protein's namesake pathway, also known as the adenylyl cyclase pathway, is triggered by a G-protein
coupled receptor and is used in cell communication. For 10 points, name this ATP derivative used in signal
transduction as a second messenger.
ANSWER: cyclic AMP [or 3'-5'- cyclic adenosine monophosphate]
Enzymes that degrade this molecule can be inhibited by cilomilast and piclamilast. This molecule activates
the Rap guanine nucleotide exchange factors, which fall under the Epac family of proteins. Levels of this
compound are increased by forskolin. This molecule binds to an enzyme that phosphorylates CREB, which
then binds to this molecule's namesake "response element." This compound is degraded by
phosphodiesterase 4. In E. coli, this molecule binds to its namesake receptor protein to regulate the lac
operon. In signal transduction pathways, this molecule activates protein kinase A after the production of this
molecule is catalyzed by adenylyl cyclase. For 10 points, name this "second messenger" derived from ATP.
ANSWER: cyclic AMP [or cyclic adenosine monophosphate; or cAMP]
Signals of this molecule result in activation of proteins that bind to the sequence TGACGTCA. This
molecule binds to the catabolite activator protein that controls the expression of the lac operon in E. coli.
Four molecules of it facilitate the activation of a protein by separating its R and C subunits. It was
discovered by Sutherland and it activates protein kinase A. The production of this molecule is usually
inhibited when glucose molecules enter the cell, and this compound is degraded by phosphodiesterase. For
10 points, name this molecule that is synthesized from ATP by adenylate cyclase, which acts as a second
messenger molecule in cells.
ANSWER: cAMP [Accept cyclic adenosine monophosphate or cyclic AMP]
IMBX and theophylline are inhibitors of the enzymes that degrade this molecule, IMBX and
theophylline . EPACs are guanidine nucleotide exchange factors that depend on this molecule, and
the expression of the genes in the lac operon when a complex of this molecule and the catabolite
activator protein binds to its promoting element. Another protein that binds to this has two catalytic and
two regulatory subunits, PKA. This molecule is formed from an annulation reaction on ATP, with which
this molecule shares a nitrogenous base component. Discovered by Earl Sutherland, for 10 points, name this
molecule that widely functions as a second messenger.
ANSWER: cAMP [cyclic adenosine monophosphate; or cyclic AMP]
Bucladesine is used as an analog of this compound, and theophylline inhibits the enzyme that breaks it
down. In the temporal lobe, this compound activates HNC channels, and it leads to the activation of the
RAPGEF3 protein. Cholera toxin increases the levels of this compound by ribosylating G-proteins, and in
the lac operon, this compound binds to the Catabolite Activator Protein, which enhances RNA polymerase
binding to the promoter. Another protein that binds to it contains two catalytic and two regulatory subunits,
Protein Kinase A. Usually destroyed by phosphodiesterase and created by adenylate cyclase, FTP, name
this second messenger, a cyclic nucleotide often created from ATP.
ANSWER: cyclic AMP or cAMP or cyclic adenosine monophosphate
Epac's are exchange factors activated by this compound. HCN channels are activated by the
binding of this substance. This substance is used as a chemoattractant by Dictyostelium during
aggregate formation. In higher eukaryotes, most functions of this compound are mediated by its
attachment to the two regulatory subunits of protein kinase A. This substance binds to the Catabolite
Activator Protein in order to suppress the (*) lac operon in the presence of glucose, and this substance is
broken down by phosphodiesterase. This substance is produced after G-proteins activate adenylate cyclase,
which synthesizes this substance from ATP. For 10 points, name this second messenger which is a
nucleotide containing an extra ring.
ANSWER: cyclic AMP [or cAMP or cyclic adenosine monophosphate]
In Dictyostelium, RegA controls the concentration of this molecule, and oscillations in environmental
concentrations of this molecule direct Dictyostelium aggregation. Forskolin triggers increased
concentrations of this molecule. This molecule directly activates proteins called EPACs, which are guanine
nucleotide exchange factors. Bordetella pertussis interferes with the immune system by causing the immune
cells to increase production of this molecule. When glucose levels are low, it binds to the Catabolite
Activator Protein in the lac operon, helping RNA polymerase bind to promoter sites during lac operon
transcription. This molecule binds to and activates Protein Kinase A. It is cleaved by phosphodiesterase,
and it is synthesized by adenylate cyclase. For 10 points, name this cyclic second messenger that is derived
from ATP.
ANSWER: cAMP [or cyclic AMP; or cyclic adenosine monophosphate]
A protein associated with this molecule is compartmentalized by AKAP. This molecule names the
regulatory sequence TGACGTCA. In olfactory sensory neurons, this molecule causes a depolarizing flux of
sodium and calcium ions by activating CNG channels. Most of the effects of this molecule are mediated by
a certain kinase to whose two regulatory units it binds, releasing its two catalytic subunits; that kinase is
protein kinase A. In the liver and muscle, its formation stimulated by epinephrine, which enhances
glycogenolysis. Like a related molecule that contains guanosine, it is cleaved by phosphodiesterases. It was
discovered by Earl Sutherland. For 10 points, name this secondary messenger that is synthesized from ATP
by adenylyl cyclase.
ANSWER: cAMP [or cyclic adenosine monophosphate]
One of these proteins is ubiquitinated by Fbx4-SCF, whose mutation causes overexpression in
endometrial cancer. The activated Bmi1/PRC1 complex is responsible for the activation of a complex
of two of these proteins, which in turn represses the Rb protein. One protein activated by them is
inhibited by Dacapo. A complex containing these proteins is inhibited by Sic1. The HIV Tat protein
binds to the T-type of these proteins, most of which contain an N- and C-terminal namesake (*) allalpha fold. One of them forms the regulatory subunit of a complex responsible for phosphorylating lamins
and condensins, known as the maturation promoting factor. Coming in A, B, D1, D2, and E subtypes, they
bind to their namesake "-dependent kinases" in order to advance the cell cycle. For 10 points, name these
proteins that control checkpoints in mitosis.
ANSWER: Cyclins
It's not serine, but histidine activates this amino acid in the catalytic centers of interleukin-1-betaconverting enzyme and papain. In E. coli, this amino acid is synthesized using the enzymes serine
acetyltransferase and O-acetylserine lyase. Two residues of this amino acid and two histidine residues
coordinate a zinc atom in the most common type of zinc finger. Human (*) keratin's structural rigidity
comes from the fact that it contains this amino acid in over 10% abundance. Along with methionine, there is
an alternate version of this amino acid that replaces its most notable atom with a selenium atom. PDI
catalyzes the formation of bonds between two residues of this amino acid inside the endoplasmic reticulum.
For 10 points, name this amino acid whose thiol group allows it to form disulfide bridges.
ANSWER: cysteine [prompt on "Cys" or "C"]
An N-acetyl derivative of this amino acid is used in over-the-counter expectorants, and TGF-beta has a
characteristic group of nine of these residues, eight of which form a namesake knot. The catalytic site of
caspases contains histidine and this amino acid, and along with histidine, it coordinates with zinc ions in
zinc finger motifs. This amino acid is present in high concentrations in keratin and thus in human hair. For
10 points, name this amino acid that can form disulfide bonds, unlike methionine, and is symbolized C.
ANSWER: cysteine
Palmitoylation most often occurs on this amino acid in proteins. Proteases that act on this residue
include papain and a group of aspartate-directed enzymes that force the proteolytic cascade during
apoptosis. PDI oxidizes this amino acid. Zinc fingers are especially rich in histidine and this other
amino acid. In Anfinsen's experiment, beta-mercaptoethanol reduced this amino acid, causing
proteins to unfold reversibly. This compound can be synthesized from (*) methionine and is nearly
equivalent to serine, except its side chain is a thiol, not an alcohol. Tertiary structure of proteins relies on
covalent bonds between these amino acids, called disulfide bonds. For 10 points, name this amino acid
symbolized by a C.
ANSWER: cysteine [or Cys; or C before it is read]
Its N-acetyl variety is the common treatment for acetaminophen overdose. Protein prenylation involves
transfer of a farnesyl group to this amino acid, whose use in dietary supplements has raised questions of
cannibalism since it is commonly purified from keratin in hair, of which it constitutes 25%. With glycine
and glutamate, it forms glutathione, and an enzyme utilizing this amino acid is crucial to apoptosis, necrosis,
and inflammation. In addition to its role in caspases, it forms a new amino acid when it dimerizes, creating
certain bridges characteristic of protein tertiary structure. For 10 points, name this amino acid, two of which
form disulfide bridges and which, like methionine, has a sulfur-containing side chain.
ANSWER: cysteine [prompt on C or Cys]
The severity of this disease is correlated with mutations in the neutrophil-associated gene IFRD1.
Mutations that cause it include abolishing a splice donor in the MSD1 domain of the affected protein,
though more commonly the NBD1 domain is affected. An immunoreactive trypsinogen assay is used
to diagnose it, and patients often develop blockage of the vas deferens and clubbing in extremities.
Most commonly caused by the delta-F508 mutation in a namesake chloride channel, it is diagnosed using a
sweat test and is managed by percussing the chest and back of patients daily. For 10 points, name this
autosomal recessive disease that causes buildup of mucus in the airway.
ANSWER: Cystic fibrosis
This disease commonly co-occurs with congenital absence of the vas deferens, and babies with this
condition often have meconium ileus, a form of intestinal blockage. The carboxy terminus of protein central
to this disease is anchored by a PDZ domain. This disease is most often caused by the delta-F-508 mutation
of its namesake transmembrane conductance regulator. That protein mutated in this disease is responsible
for conducting thiocyanate and chloride ions. For 10 points, name this genetic disease common in
Europeans, in which mucus builds up in the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [or CF]
Many people with this also have the bacteria P. aeruginosa. Low oxygen levels in the tissues of patients
of this can lead to clubbing of the fingers. Newborn screening for this checks for heightened concentrations
of immunoreactive trypsinogen. This is most often caused by the delta-F508 mutation, which interferes
with chloride transport across epithelial cells. Chest percussion is used to treat it, and a sweat test is a
common method of diagnosis. For 10 points, name this autosomal recessive disease that causes mucus in
the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis
A form of this disease particularly prevalent in the United Kingdom is caused by the G551D mutation
and can be treated with Ivacaftor. Male sufferers of this disease are typically infertile because this disease
results in the congenital absence of the vas deferens. In patients with this disease, a missing
phenylalanine molecule caused by a deletion at the 508th residue results in a misfolded CFTR protein,
which fails to conduct chloride ions across the cell membrane. This disease causes a blockage of ducts in
the pancreas and patients suffering from this disease have salty sweat. For 10 points, name this disease
in which an accumulation of thick mucus causes frequent lung infections.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [or CF; or mucoviscidosis]
Patients with this disease often have chronic Burkholderia cepacia infections. The protein central
to this disease contains an ATP-binding cassette motif and a PDZ domain. Its earliest symptom is
neonatal intestinal blockage. It is associated with male infertility due to agenesis of the vas deferens.
Sufferers are unable to secrete pancreatic enzymes, leading to those enzymes damaging the pancreas
itself. The sweat test was used to diagnose this condition before (*) genetic testing, and it results in the
inability to pass chloride ions through cell membranes. Percussive vests are a common treatment, and it is
the most common autosomal recessive disease among Europeans. For 10 points, name this genetic disease
in which mucus builds up in the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [or CF]
Acrophialophora fusispora infections are almost exclusively found in patients with this disease.
Schwachmann-Diamond syndrome is often misdiagnosed as this disease, which is made worse if patients
have mutations in mannan-binding lectin or NBD1. Children with this disease often have chronic vitamin K
malabsorption and chronic Burkholderia and Pseudomonas infections. Immunoreactive trypsinogen is the
most common screen for this disease, whose patients also display pancreatic insufficiency. Another test
used to diagnose this disease involves applying pilocarpine to the skin and using iontophoresis, called the
sweat test. This disease is caused by mutation of a namesake chloride channel, and treatments involve use of
a nebulizer or a percussive vest. For 10 points, name this common genetic disease among Caucasians, in
which mucus builds up in the airway.
ANSWER: Cystic Fibrosis or CF
This disease causes cleavage of chemokine receptor CXCR1 on neutrophils, which disables their
antibacterial activity. A common test for this disease in newborns screens for elevated rates of
immunoreactive trypsinogen. The mutation causing this disease confers a heterozygote advantage on
its carriers in the form of increased resistance to tuberculosis and increased survival of cholera and
typhoid. The most common mutation that causes this disease is (*) delta-F508, which is a deletion of
phenylalanine on a certain transmembrane conductance regulator. That protein is a chloride channel, which
is why a common symptom of this disorder is salty sweat. For 10 points, name this disorder characterized
by thick mucus buildup in the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis (or CF)
The orphan drug Dornase Alfa is a DNase that can be used to treat this disease, and N-acetylcistine is
sometimes used to treat this condition. Patients of this disorder can develop ABPA due to infection by fungi
of genus Aspergillus, and this disease is caused by the deletion of a single phenylalanine codon. This
autosomal recessive disorder is caused due to a mutation in a gene on chromosome 7 which codes for its
namesake transmembrane conductance regulator, which serves as a chloride ion channel. Individuals with
this disorder have abnormally high salt concentrations in their sweat. For 10 points, name this disorder
characterized by excessive mucus buildup in lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [accept CF]
This disease can be treated by drugs that target the nonsense G542X mutation,
which substitutes a stop codon for glycine. A heterozygous allele for this disease
confers resistance to cholera and other diarrhea. One symptom of this disease is the
congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens, and one test for it involves pilocarpine
iontophoresis. The delta F508 mutation results in a phenylalanine mutation which
affects(*) chloride ion transport in this disease, which can be diagnosed with the sweat test. For
ten points, name this chronic genetic disease that causes buildups of sticky mucus in the digestive
tract and lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis
Some heterozygotes of this disease are resistant to Salmonella typhi bacteria. In addition, it affords carriers
some protection against cholera. This disease is associated with an abnormality in its namesake
transmembrane conductance regulator that is expressed in the mucus membrane lining of the intestines and
lungs. This autosomal recessive disease is characterized by the disruption of chloride ion transfer across cell
membranes. For 10 points, name this disease that is sometimes referred to as CF.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [accept CF before mentioned]
One early sign of this disease is blockage of an infant's small intestine with stool, known as meconium
ileus. The mutation which causes this disease results in the deletion of three nucleotides which code for
phenylalanine, and also results in resistance to cholera and Typhoid fever. That mutation, delta-F-508,
results in the degradation of a transmembrane chloride channel. This disease, named for scarring and
abnormal growths in the pancreas, is diagnosed using a sweat test and can lead to sinus and lung infections.
For 10 points, name this autosomal recessive disorder, characterized by the accumulation of thick mucus in
the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis
Sufferers of this disease are extremely susceptible to Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Aspergillus fumigatus,
and this disease often manifests in newborns as failure to pass meconium. Most commonly caused by a
phenylalanine-508 deletion, it often leads to absence of the vas deferens in male sufferers. This illness can
cause hypoproteinemia and malnutrition if the pancreatic ducts become clogged with thick secretions. It is
caused by a mutation in a protein that transports ions across epithelial tissues, leading to the common
diagnostic symptom of salty sweat. For 10 points, name this disease in which viscous mucus builds up in the
respiratory tract.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis
An early indication of this disease is meconium ileus, the obstruction of an infant's ileum caused by
thickened stools. Symptoms include malnutrition and, in males, sterility due to a congenital absence of the
vas deferens. Its prevalence is due to a heterozygote advantage against cholera and tuberculosis. Because its
causative mutation disrupts normal chloride transport, it is diagnosed by measuring the concentration of
excreted chloride and sodium in the sweat test. Patients with this disease take antibiotics for chronic
respiratory infections, and mechanical devices to clear the airway. For 10 points, name this genetic disease
which, among other things, causes a buildup of mucus.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis or mucovoidosis or mucoviscidosis
The protein mutated in this disease is anchored to the cytoskeleton via a C-terminal PDZ-interacting
domain, and also contains a pair of transmembrane domains with six helices each. One of said proteins
nucleotide-binding domains is connected to a regulatory domain, which is unusual for its class. Mutations in
neutrophils are correlated with the severity of this disease. Patients may have bile ducts blocked by
eosinophilic material while most adult men with this disorder have congenital absence of the vas deferens.
The delta-F-508 mutation is the most common one associated with this disease, in which a phenyalalanine
residue in a protein that controls transport of chlorine and sodium ions across epithelial cell membranes is
deleted. Traditional treatment involves chest percussion and it is diagnosed by stimulation with pilocarpine
in the "sweat test". Name this autosomal recessive disorder that, for 10 points, is most serious when the
abnormally viscous mucus cannot be removed by the lung's bronchial cilia.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis
This disorder's most dangerous symptoms can be alleviated by medications like dornase and
albuterol. Common secondary infections that result from this genetic disease include Pseudomonas
and Aspergillus infection. It can lead to diabetes and clubbing of the fingers, and most men with it are
infertile because of congenital absence of the (*) vas deferens. This disease is caused by an autosomal
recessive mutation in a protein that deletes a codon for phenylalanine, causing the rapid degradation of a
protein that forms chlorine ion channels. For 10 points, name this disease diagnosed by a sweat test that
causes mucus buildup in epithelial tissues, including those of the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis
The protein defective in this condition is generally anchored by a PDZ domain. This condition is
detected in a test that involves application of pilocarpine. Clubbed fingertips and toes are common in
patients of this condition, and the protein defective in this condition functions as a thiocyanate (*)
transported. This protein is most often caused by delta F-508 mutations, in which a phenylalanine residue is
absent from a protein which transports sodium and chlorine across membranes. Patients of this disease have
dangerously high lung mucus levels. For 10 points, name this disease whose patients have very high sweat
chloride concentrations, which is abbreviated CF.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [accept CF until mentioned]
Recombinant deoxyribonuclease (dee-AHK-see-rai-boh-NOO-klee-ays) is one treatment for this disorder,
whose gene gives carriers some resistance to cholera (KAH-lur-ah) and codes for a protein missing one
phenylalanine (fen-l-AL-uh-neen). Males with this disorder may be sterile due to congenital absence of the
vas deferens, and Pseudomonas is the most common cause of infection in adults with it. The name of this
disease comes from the scarring observed in the pancreas, and the inability of chloride ions to cross cell
membranes results in abnormally high salt excretion, which allows this disease to be diagnosed by a sweat
test. Requiring continuous intake of antibiotics to prevent respiratory infections, name this autosomal
recessive disorder in which mucus buildup blocks the digestive tract and clogs the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [or CF]
Newborns with this disorder have abnormally high levels of immunoreactive trypsin in their serum and this
disorder is associated with recurrent meconium ileus. This disorder disrupts the function of cyclic AMP and
results from a mutation on chromosome 7. This disorder which may confer a heterozygote advantage
against cholera results in infertility, particularly in males where it causes congenital bilateral absence of the
vas deferens, and also disrupts pancreatic function. For 10 points, name this autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by a buildup of mucus.
ANSWER: Cystic Fibrosis [accept mucoviscidosis]
Along with rural agenesis (ay-JEN-uh-sis), this disease accounts for a majority of the occurrences of
congenital absence of the vas deferens (VOSS DEF-er-enz). This disease is most commonly caused by a
deletion of three nucleotides, starting with the phenylalanine (fen-il-AL-uh-neen) at position 508, of a
namesake chloride channel. This disease is diagnosed in early childhood via the noninvasive sweat test. It
was first described by Dorothy Andersen, who described its characteristic pancreatic scarring. For 10
points, name this autosomal recessive genetic disease that causes a buildup of mucus in the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [or mucoviscidosis; prompt on "CF"]
Sufferers of this disease are unable to produce hypothiocyanate, and eighty percent of patients with this
disease eventually harbor P. aeruginosa by age 18. Sufferers also have congenital absence of the vas
deferens, and screening for this disease involves measuring an elevated level of immunoreactive
trypsinogen followed by a sweat test. The gene mutated in this disease produces an functional protein that
does not fold perfectly due to a delta-508 deletion; that gene is a chloride channel. For 10 points, name this
genetic disease which results in the buildup of thick mucus in the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [or CF]
Among the drugs used to treat this disease are the anti-bacterial TOBI and VX-770, currently in FDA Phase
2 testing. People with this disease also often suffer from "Clubbing", and the ductus deferens fails to
develop in affected males. It is typically caused by a loss of a phenylalanine in its namesake transmembrane
conductance regulator protein, leading to increased sodium absorption. This disease is linked with a gene
on chromosome 7. Pilocarpine is applied to the skin in the sweat-chloride test for this disease. For 10
points, name this disease characterized by an abnormal buildup of mucus in the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis or CF
This disease is associated with male infertility caused by congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens. It
usually occurs as a result of a mutation that deletes the codon for phenylalanine from the transmembrane
conductance regulator protein. Diagnosed using a sweat test, this disorder causes the inability to move
chloride ions through cell membranes, leading to the characteristic overproduction of a certain fluid. For 10
points, name this autosomal recessive disorder in which the lungs produce dangerously viscous mucus.
ANSWER: Cystic Fibrosis [accept CF]
A common cause of this disease is the malfunction of a diacidic sorting signal due to the deletion of
phenylalanine residue 508 in a critical protein. This disease often results in over-expression of the ENaC
channel protein, due to a defect in an ABC-class transporter for thiocyanate and other anions. The structure
that normally connects the epididymis to the urethra, the vas deferens, is often absent in males who suffer
from this disease. This autosomal recessive disorder is often diagnosed with a sweat test, measuring the
concentration of chloride in the fluid. For 10 points, name this disease which causes the buildup of thick
mucus in the lungs.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis [or CF]
Rieske proteins are associated with a cycle in which this protein's reduction is linked to the oxidation
of Coenzyme Q. A variant of this protein located in the endoplasmic reticulum acts as a
monooxygenase enzyme by adding a terminal hydroxyl group to fatty acids and is designated (*) P450. Like hemoglobin, the b variant of this protein contains an iron protoporphyrin IX heme prosthetic
group and the cleavage of DEVD specific caspases is triggered by its c variant. For 10 points-name this
class of proteins found within the electron transport chain of the inner mitochondrial membrane.
ANSWER: cytochrome
This molecule accepts electrons from an enzyme that contains an iron-sulfur subunit known as a
Rieske protein. This molecule acts as an electron donor to the P960 chlorophyll pair in some forms of
bacterial photosynthesis, and interactions with it and its peroxidase play a prominent role in peroxide
scavenging. A protein with a similar role to this one is the Diablo homolog, also known as SMAC.
This molecule is released when proteins such as BID and Bax open up an oligomeric pore in the
membrane of a certain organelle. (*) Cyanide poisoning functions by preventing this molecule's oxidase
from reducing oxygen to water. In apoptosis, this protein combines with Apaf-1 to form the apoptosome
heptamer. For ten points, name this iron-containing protein that passes electrons between complex III and
complex IV in the electron transport chain.
ANSWER: cytochrome c
This process begins with the recruitment of Ect2, which is moderated by Polo-like Kinase 1. Citron kinase
is required for this process in human cells and Drosophila, while its later parts require aniline. It can be
blocked in the Lymphocyte Micronucleus Assay using cytochalasin-B, and one structure in this process
requires profilin and formin to hydrolyze ATP. That actin-myosin contractile ring accompanies this process
in animals, while it involves a cell plate in plants. For 10 points, name this process which begins with a
cleavage furrow in animals, the separation of daughter cells following telophase.
ANSWER: cytokinesis
In 1997, M. A. Holland proposed, by Occam's Razor, a hypothesis that these hormones were
produced only by microbial symbionts such as the endophytic Methylobacterium. The most common
naturally-found version of these hormones can either be produced as a recycled product of the tRNA
pathway or through a pathway involving AMP. Activating the tmr gene to produce enzymes that
degrade this hormone results in (*) crown galls that are root-like. These hormones were first obtained
from herring sperm DNA and their effects were first discovered using coconut milk. In the cambium,
expression of the receptor genes for these hormones peaks in the cells that are actively dividing. Corn
kernels were where one of these called zeatin was discovered. Auxins act in conjunction with, for 10 points,
what hormones named after the cell cycle step following mitosis?
ANSWER: cytokinins
These compounds' receptors include AHK2 and AHK4. These compounds often contain a
hydroxylated isopent-en-yl side chain, which is added by IPT. By binding to a namesake 70 k-d-a
receptor, they are partly responsible for transforming etioplasts into chloroplasts. They can be
created from the prenylation of recycled tRNAs, though most of the time they are synthesized by
using dimethylallyl diphosphate to add groups to (*) adenine. These compounds were first isolated from
the milky endosperm of the coconut, and examples of these hormones include kinetin and zeatin. For 10
points, name these plant hormones that stimulates cell division and which often opposes auxin in controlling
apical dominance.
ANSWER: cytokinin
These compounds are in excess when a plant develops a shoot-like crown gall, and one type of this
compound is known as TDZ and is classified as a phenyl-urea type one. First discovered by Folke
Skoog in herring sperm and coconut milk, this class of hormones is derived from adenine and
includes kinetin and zeatin. The ratio of the amount of this hormone to the amount of (*) auxin
determines cell growth and differentiation, and this class of hormones promotes cell division. For ten points,
name this class of plant hormones that is named for the last part of mitosis that it promotes.
ANSWER: Cytokinins
iPMP is an important intermediary in these compounds' synthesis. These compounds can bind to the AHK3
receptor. Aromatic examples of these substances include topolin and benzyladenine. Higher concentration
of these hormones relative to that of another class promotes the production of shoots as opposed to roots in
addition to promoting branching. Similar in structure to adenine, other examples of this hormone include
kinetin and zeatin, and this hormone is generally synthesized in the roots. For 10 points identify these
hormones often opposed by auxin that stimulates cell division.
ANSWER: cytokinins
Kappa organisms live in an environment of this substance, and the mysterious vault complexes found within
it have been linked to chemotherapy resistance. Volutin granules store phosphate in this substance, while
IP3 and cyclic AMP act as secondary messengers across it. Microtubles and actin filaments form a skeleton
throughout this substance in eukaryotes (yoo-kair-ee-ohts), while in bacteria it contains the nucleoid.
Extended by amoebas in the form of pseudopods, name this semifluid region of the cell located between the
nucleus and cell membrane.
ANSWER: cytoplasm
It must be protonated to participate in Hoogsteen pairing. In somatic hypermutation, it is targeted
by AID. It but not an important modification of it is modified by bisulfite. Its nucleotide triphosphate
form is used in the biosynthesis of some phospholipids. De-amination of this base results in (*) uracil.
In imprinting, a methyl group is added to this base. This pyrimidine is normally involved in three hydrogen
bonds in DNA. For 10 points, name this nitrogenous base that normally pairs with guanine in DNA.
ANSWER: cytosine [or C]
This man spent eight years studying barnacles to establish himself as an expert on taxonomy, and he also
obtained information for his theories by studying pigeon fanciers. He wrote a book on the effects of
earthworms on the soil, as well as The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. Thomas Huxley
argued for his most famous theory, which was prompted in part by Gould's classification of finches found
on this man's voyage on the Beagle. FTP, name this English naturalist, who wrote On the Origin of Species.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin
This scientist excavated at Stonehenge and kept stones of coal on his land near Down House in order to
study earthworms. The Linnaean Society presented this man's work at the same time as that of Alfred
Russell Wallace. John Stevens Henslow was responsible for this scientist becoming part of an expedition
with Robert Fitzroy. For ten points, name this English scientist whose time on the Beagle led him to develop
a theory of natural selection in his On the Origin of Species.
ANSWER: Charles Robert Darwin
One work that tries to explain this man's thought posits a "library of Mendel" that is navigated via cranes
and not skyhooks. Dobzhansky wrote a different work outlining why nothing makes sense except in the
context of this man's major idea. A book about this thinker claims his major idea is a "universal acid" and
was written by Daniel Dennett. With Bishop Wilberforce, Thomas Huxley debated the major ideas of this
man in a famed 1860 debate. His major theory was furthered explained in such books as The Descent of
Man, which stressed the power of sexual reproduction. For 10 points, identify this author of On the Origin
of Species, who proposed a theory of natural selection.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin [accept Daniel Dennett on the first sentence]
This man discussed the digestive mechanisms of such species as sundews and Venus Flytraps in his work
Insectivorous Plants, and studies this man performed on the Keeling Islands led him to publish The
Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs. This thinker expounded his idea of sexual selection in The
Descent of Man, which was the follow up to a work that was partly inspired by his study of mockingbirds
and finches at the Galapagos Islands and on board the Beagle. That work introduced his theory of natural
selection. For 10 points, name this early proponent of evolution who authored The Origin of Species.
ANSWER: Charles Robert Darwin
Many of this man's ideas were popularized in America through the writings of Chauncey Wright,
who linked them with the principles of utilitarianism. A theory originally formulated by this man is
the subject of an equation by R.A. Fisher that links a rate of change of a certain property to its
variance at that point in time; that theory is also the subject of Price's Equation. He split one of his
ideas into unconscious and methodical types depending on whether it was purposeful. One book
about this man argues that his opponents tried to refute him with (*) skyhooks and that his theories
were so revolutionary that they acted as a universal acid. He concluded that members of different races
were all human in The Descent of Man. For 10 points, name this formulator of the "dangerous idea" of
natural selection.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin [accept natural selection during the first few sentences]
Galton used this man's ideas on human civilization to organize the study of eugenics. His work The
Descent of Man discusses human sexual behavior. Captain FitzRoy supported this person during
their trip on the HMS (*) Beagle, where he discovered that the beaks of finches on the Galapagos were
adapted to different food sources. The author of On the Origin of Species, for 10 points, name this English
naturalist who pioneered evolution theory and natural selection.
ANSWER: Charles Robert Darwin
This man made a joint scientific presentation in 1858 with Alfred Russel Wallace. He wrote the book
The Descent of Man. This man observed numerous species of finches at the Galapagos Islands and did
much of his research on the ship Beagle. For 10 points, name this author of On the Origin of Species, who
pioneered the theory of evolution.
ANSWER: Charles Robert Darwin
This man was influenced by the geological work of his friend Charles Lyell; he collected data for Lyell
while traveling with Robert FitzRoy. Thomas Huxley debated the work of this man with Samuel
Wilberforce, leading Huxley to be called this man's "bulldog". This author wrote about sexual selection in
The Descent of Man, while another work is based in part on the differences in beaks found in various
Galapagos finches. For 10 points, name this author of On the Origin of Species.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin
This man used the metaphor of the "tangled bank" in his most famous theory and later wrote about The
Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms. His ideas were later debated between
Wilberforce and Huxley, who was known as this man's "bulldog." This author of The Descent of Man
noticed variation in the beaks of Galapagos Finches while traveling on the HMS Beagle. For 10 points,
name
this British naturalist who described his theory of natural selection in On the Origin of Species
ANSWER: Charles Robert Darwin
This man published his Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs but was not considering publishing his
most famous finding until urged by Charles Lyell. Most of his evidence for his most famous theory had
been accumulated on a voyage on the HMS Beagle to the Galapagos Islands, where he studied finches. For
10 points, name this author of The Descent of Man and On the Origin of Species, the originator of the
theory or natural selection.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin
This man's early work included a monograph on Cirripedia. This man's advisor, a
geologist who rose to prominence after his work on uniformitarianism, was Charles
Lyell. This man was urged by Lyell to publish his work when Alfred Russel Wallace
developed an identical theory while working in Sarawak. This man coined the term
(*) "descent with modification". For ten points, name this naturalist whose travels on the
H.M.S. Beagle led to his theory of natural selection, espoused in his On the Origin of Species.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin
This scientist wrote Insectivorous Plants and The Power of Movement in Plants. he was encouraged by
Charles Lyell to publish his most famous theory. He discussed secondary sex characteristics in The Descent
of Man. He accumulated significant amounts of data during his voyage on the HMS Beagle to the
Galapagos Islands, where he extensively studied finches. For 10 points, name this British scientist who
wrote of natural selection in The Origin of Species.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin
This man was awarded the Copely Medal for his monographs on barnacles and his theory about the
formation of coral reefs. His ideas were defended by Thomas Huxley. One of this man's theories was
partially inspired by the differing beak sizes on a series of finches. For 10 points, name this scientist who
wrote On the Origin of Species after visiting the Galapagos Islands.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin
This scientist studied phototropism in a work entitled The Power of Movement in Plants. This scientist
studied carnivorous plants in a work entitled Insectivorous Plants. This scientist also studied the interaction
between the environment and earthworms in a work entitled The Formation of Vegetable Mould Through
the Action of Worms. This scientist also studied barnacles in a work entitled The Structure and Distribution
of Coral Reefs. He discussed the differences between sexes in one work while another work discussed
natural selection. For 10 points, name this English biologist who wrote The Descent of Man and On the
Origin of Species.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin
This scientist's most significant theory was first put forth jointly with Alfred Russel Wallace after
receiving a letter from Wallace proposing the same theory. That work took place on his expedition with the
HMS Beagle. That expedition saw him propose a theory to explain the different functionality of his
namesake finches' beaks. For 10 points, name this English naturalist who proposed the process of natural
selection in his book On the Origin of Species after visiting the Galapagos Islands.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin
This founder of memetics engaged in an debate with Stephen Jay Gould over whether the gene is the
central unit of evolution. He wrote The Greatest Show on Earth, a catalog of evidence for evolution, and
The God Delusion, in which he argued that religion is false. For 10 points, name this British biologist who
writes books promoting atheism.
ANSWER: Richard Dawkins
One book by this developer of the "weasel" program opens with an excerpt from William Paley's Natural
Theology, and this author defended the thesis of that book by using data he collected from a computer
program which generated many generations of so called "biomorphs." He is not W.D. Hamilton, but this
scientist developed the "Green-beard effect" in a work which soundly dismantled the group selection
theory. This Oxford biologist developed the concept of a meme in a book which also popularized the gene
centered view of evolution. For 10 points, name this author of The Selfish Gene and The Blind Watchmaker
who defended his militant atheism in The God Delusion.
ANSWER: Richard Dawkins
In addition to kidney problems, people with Alport syndrome notably suffer from this condition, while
presbycusis is a form that occurs with age. The Weber and Rinne tests are used to diagnose it and
distinguish between the conductive and sensorineural forms of it. It can be acquired from damage to the
eighth cranial nerve. Cochlear injury can also cause it. For 10 points, name this condition in which one
cannot hear.
ANSWER: deafness [accept hearing loss or hearing impairment before "hear"]
The condition's appearance depends on Virchow's triad, a group of three factors known to affect clot
formation. Paget-Schrotter disease can result when blood vessels in the arm are involved instead of those in
the region of the body it usually targets. Low molecular weight Heparin is administered on a regular basis
via intramuscular injection, often into the thigh, to bedridden patients and those who have recently had
surgery to reduce the risk of this condition. If left untreated, it can lead to a fatal pulmonary embolus if the
clots involved affecting circulation in the leg or pelvis become dislodged. Passengers on airplanes are more
likely to experience, FTP, what condition colloquially known as economy class syndrome?
ANSWER: Deep vein thrombosis (accept DVT)
Two general equations for this process were developed by Tanford and Pace, and the Tanford beta value is
a measure of the relative degree of exposure of the transition state which occurs during this process. The mvalue is proportional to the surface area exposed by it; Privalov composed the definitive work on the cold
version of this process, which is thought to be attributable to a weakening of the hydrophobic effect. The
experiments of Christian Anfinsen demonstrated that it may be reversible. It can be caused by agents like
guanidinium hydrochloride, dimethylsulfoxide, and urea, and may result in the loss of beta-pleated sheets,
alpha-helices, and other repeating structural patterns. FTP, name this process by which the bonds holding a
protein in three-dimensional form are disrupted.
ANSWER: denaturation
A weaker form of this condition is known as dysthymia, and the atypical form of this disease has
reverse vegetative symptoms like overeating and over-sleeping. SIG E CAPS and the Beck Inventory
are screening tools used to detect this disease, which is usually treated with selective (*) serotonin
reuptake inhibitors. Symptoms of this disease include decreased appetite, lack of energy, and suicidal
thoughts. For 10 points, name this psychiatric disorder which is characterized by long periods of
overwhelming sadness.
ANSWER: depression
Dysthymia is a long-term, mild form of this state. People diagnosed with seasonal affective
disorder develop symptoms of this state in the winter. Sufferers of bipolar disorder (*) alternate being
in this state and mania. This disorder is commonly treated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors such
as Celexa, Zoloft, and Prozac. For 10 points, name this mood disorder whose sufferers lose pleasure in
formerly enjoyable activities and generally experience sadness.
ANSWER: clinical depression [or major depressive disorder]
The living fossil plant Welwitschia [wel-WIT-shee-uh] is native to this biome, whose preserved packrat
nests are an important record of biodiversity. This biome is home to many xerophytes [ZEER-oh-fyts] that
use the CAM pathway of photosynthesis as well as several mammal species with very large ears. Nearly all
small animals in this biome are burrowers and nocturnal, and among its North America species are the
creosote bush, roadrunner, and gila monster. Defined by having little vegetation as a result of low
precipitation, name this biome that supports the camel and the cactus.
ANSWER: desert
Kimberella was notably not a member of this group when it existed about 555 million years ago, which
means that this lineage and its relative split about 558 million years ago. The early cell divisions of animals
under this classification have indeterminate cleavage. All animals which fall under this classification have
pharyngeal gill slits, a hollow nerve cord, and a segmented body. The phyla Chordata and Echinodermata
are under this classification. Name this classification of animals in which the blastopore develops the anus
before the mouth, a classification commonly contrasted with protostomes.
ANSWER: deuterostomes [accept deuterostomata]
This era saw the emergence of species such as Cladoselache, Prototaxite, and the Placoderm
Dunkleosteus , which at up to three meters in length was one of the largest organisms in existence at
the time. A notable Lagerstatten for this period is the Rhynie Chert in Scotland, discovered in 1912
by Dr. William Mackie. During this period the continents of Laurentia and Baltica collided, and the
supercontinent Gondwanaland migrated north. Global cooling at the (*) Frasnian-Famennian boundary
late in this period led to the extinction of seventy percent of marine vertebrates, particularly reef builders,
which would not fully recover until the Mesozoic. For 10 points, name this geologic time period preceding
the Carboniferous, and which was named for a county in southwestern England.
ANSWER: Devonian
ERK5 signalling is impeded in patients with this disease, causing an acceleration of atherosclerosis in a
process caused by advanced glycation end products. It causes a complication wherein the body burns fatty
acids, producing a buildup of acidic ketone bodies. It can be diagnosed via an HbA1c test, and can lead to
retinal damage. Common symptoms include increased thirst and frequent urination. Sometimes occurring in
pregnant women, it has been linked to genetics and obesity. Type 2 of this disease is caused by a resistance
to insulin. For 10 points, name this disease marked by high blood sugar levels.
ANSWER: diabetes mellitus [accept type 1 diabetes until "pregnant" is read; do not accept "diabetes insipidus"]
The severity of this disease is monitored by the HbA1c test, and drugs used to treat it include
sulfonylureas and metformin. Its more severe cases can lead to retinopathy and neuropathy, and its onset
can be prevented with a high-fiber diet. Frequent urination and thirst are symptoms of this disease, which
has type I and type II forms. For 10 points, name this disease leading to high blood glucose levels, which
involves an inability to produce and use insulin.
ANSWER: diabetes mellitus
A form of this condition caused by mutations of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4-alpha is called MODY1, and it
is one component of Wolfram syndrome. This condition can be induced by infection by Coxsackie B4 virus.
Metformin therapy is a common treatment for one form of this condition., Diet-induced increased sensitivity
to a hormone produced by the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas can cause its second type. For ten points,
name this disease of blood sugar regulation whose first type involves diminished insulin production.
ANSWER: diabetes mellitus
In patients with this disease, levels of hemoglobin A1C are often monitored. A sizable proportion
of patients with this disease develop ulcers in their feet, and other complications include retinopathy
and nephropathy. An autoimmune attack causes unpredictable bouts of hypo- and hyper-(*)glycemia
in one form of this disease, which results in the destruction of the beta cells in the islets of Langerhans,
stopping the production of insulin. For 10 points, name this disease whose type I and type II forms both
involve an elevated level of blood sugar.
ANSWER: diabetes mellitus
Like anorexia, one type of this disease can lead to Kussmaul (KOOSS-mall) breathing indicative of severe
ketoacidosis (KEE-tow-ASS-id-OH-siss). Other symptoms of this disease include fatigue, thirst, hunger,
and
frequent urination. Type 2 of this disease often results from obesity in adults, while Type 1 occurs in
juveniles and is a result of the body attacking beta cells in the islets of Langerhans. For 10 points, name this
illness in which the pancreas does not produce enough insulin or in which cells become insulin resistant.
ANSWER: diabetes mellitus
This disease's original meaning as "siphon" refers to the increased frequency of urination among patients.
One form of this condition is characterized by the complete failure of the beta cells in the Islets of
Langerhans (LANE-gur-"hans"). Obesity may cause the "adult-onset" form of this disease. This disease
requires patients to constantly monitor their blood glucose level. For 10 points, name this medical condition
in which the body does not get enough insulin.
ANSWER: diabetes mellitus
The White classification is used to distinguish "gestational" sufferers of this disease from those
who had it prior to pregnancy. One class of drugs for this disease consists of sulfonylureas.
Commonly treated by metformin, this disease is prevalent among Pacific Islanders, Hispanic, and
Asian populations. The onset can be delayed by (*) daily exercise and a high-fiber diet, preventing the
obesity often seen alongside this disease. Present in Type I and Type II forms, for 10 points, identify this
disease associated with high blood glucose and insulin deficiency.
ANSWER: diabetes mellitus [accept type 2 diabetes]
A common complication of this disease results from high acetoacetate levels in the blood and can
lead to dangerously low blood pH. One major early indicator of this disease is polydipsia. The secretion
of adipokines can contribute to one variety of this disease, and vasopressin deficiency causes the
"insipidus" variety. Its adult-onset variety is often caused by obesity, and treatment of the juvenileonset
type requires regular injections of insulin. For 10 points, name this disease in which the body is
unable to regulate blood glucose levels.
ANSWER: diabetes [accept diabetes mellitus until "vasopression"]
A recently-developed class of drugs used to treat this disease was extracted from gila monster saliva
and is structurally similar to GLP-1. DPP-4 is inhibited by another drug used to treat this disease,
which is treated with a first-line drug containing a biguanide moiety that activates AMP Kinase. Yet
another drug used activates P-P-A-R-gamma to alter transcription of GLUT4. Besides taking
exenatide, glyptins, TZDs, and metformin, those suffering from this disease should keep their
hemoglobin A1C below 6.5. Sulfonylureas and other (*) secretagogues are helpful in combating this
disease, whose sufferers are at increased risk of nephropathy and retinopathy. It usually occurs in mature,
obese adults and is distinct from a related disease that sees the destruction of the Islets of Langerhans. For
10 points, name this insulin-resistant form of diabetes.
ANSWER: Type II diabetes [or Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus; or Adult-Onset Diabetes; prompt on "diabetes;" do not accept "Type I diabetes"]
Thomas Graham is considered the inventor of this procedure. In injured patients, the indications for this
procedure are summarized with the handy mnemonic AEIOU, and more chronic indications include a low
GFR. A variant of this procedure is run through the peritoneal cavity. In general, this procedure uses a
solution rich in bicarbonate, potassium, and calcium and removes creatinine and urea in the blood through a
semipermeable membrane. For 10 points, name this procedure in which a large machine is used to replace
the function of a kidney.
ANSWER: dialysis [or word forms]
Improper formation of this organ's posterolateral foramina can lead to a Bochdalek hernia, while a rarer
disorder consists of a hernia through this organ's foramina of Morgagni. This organ is connected to the
inferior parietal pleura, and the size of its zone of apposition can be changed through abdominal pressure.
This organ is innervated by the phrenic nerve, whose irritation may cause involuntary spasms known as
hiccups. This muscle increases the volume of the thoracic cavity to lower alveolar pressure. For 10 points,
name this sheet of skeletal muscle at the bottom of the rib cage, whose contraction draws air into the lungs.
ANSWER: thoracic diaphragm
A reduced EA ratio during this period is diagnostic for damage, and mitral stenosis is a common cause of
murmurs during this phase. Seven-eighths of the time, the atria are in this phase, while the closing of the
semilunar valves begins this phase in the ventricles. This is the phase of the cardiac cycle when the heart
chambers relax and fill with blood. Associated with the lower reading of a person's blood pressure, identify
this phase usually contrasted with systole (SISS-toh-lee).
ANSWER: diastole [or diastolic]
This group's U2AF35 homologs include atU2AF35a and b, and gmU2AF35b. One of the most commonly
used examples of this group of plants contains remarkably high levels of ricin in its seeds, and another is
notable for the patterns in its spirals of florets. Members of a "higher" order of this group are classified by
the presence of triporate pollen. Their vascular bundles are arranged in a ring, and they are also
characterized by netlike vein patterns, as well as particularly broad leaves. FTP, name this major division
of flowering plant whose embryos have two seed leaves.
ANSWER: dicotyledons or Dicotyledonae [accept plants that have two cotyledons or equivalents]
A commonly accepted hypothesis regarding this event is the Alvarez hypothesis. Another hypothesis is
that it was caused by the formation of the Deccan Traps. Evidence of this event is found at the K-T
boundary, and this event marks the end of the Mesozoic Era. For 10 points, name this event which occurred
around 65 million years ago and is thought to have been caused by an asteroid impact.
ANSWER: extinction of the dinosaurs [or Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction event; or K-T extinction event]
In 1981, Dewey McLean proposed that the Deccan Traps were responsible for this event. The most
scientifically-accepted principle for this event is the Alvarez Hypothesis, which is supported by the
presence of (+) shocked quartz and a thin layer of iridium in clay. That explanation for this event
points to the creation of the (*) Chicxulub Crater on the Yucatan Peninsula. This event occurred at the
boundary between the Paleogene and Cretaceous Periods, about sixty-five million years ago. For 10 points,
name this event now blamed on an asteroid impact, which caused the death of species like plesiosaur and
tyrannosaurus.
ANSWER: extinction of the dinosaurs [accept same-knowledge equivalents; accept Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction or K-T extinction before mention; prompt on "impact event" or "asteroid impact"]
One explanation for this event is supported by the Deccan Traps. Evidence from Hell Creek, Montana
appears to support both prevalent hypotheses. The most widely-known explanation for this event was first
hypothesized after the discovery of an unusually iridium-rich layer in the Earth's crust, and was further
supported with the discovery of the Chicxulub ("CHICK-shu-loob") crater off the coast of the Yucatan
Peninsula. For 10 points, a sudden increase in volcanic eruptions or impact with an asteroid are the two
currently competing theories that explain what event that happened about sixty-five million years ago?
ANSWER: extinction of the dinosaurs [or K-T extinction; or equivalents]
One of these objects was discovered by Barnum Brown in Montana's Hell Creek. The earliest-discovered
examples of them were found in a limestone quarry in Sussex by either Mary Ann or Gideon Mantell. A
feud between Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Marsh led to the discovery of hundreds of these items. For
10 points, name these remnants of Apatosaurus or Tyrannosaurus rex.
ANSWER: dinosaur fossils [or dinosaur bones; prompt on fossils; prompt on bones]
This disease inhibits Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor and is caused by a species of
Corynebacterium. Bela Schick developed a test that was once used to determine susceptibility to this, and
one type of this leads to skin ulcers covered by a gray membrane. The common form of this disease is
characterized by the creation of a pseudomembrane that makes swallowing and breathing difficult,
especially with the addition of swollen neck glands. Fortunately, this disease has become very rare in most
countries due to vaccination. Name this disease whose vaccine is usually combined with pertussis and
tetanus.
ANSWER: diphtheria
HtaA and HtaB are proteins implicated in foreign hemin binding in the causative agent of this disease,
which releases a toxin that ADP ribosylates a modified histidine residue in EF2, thus inhibiting translation.
Bela Schlick developed a test for susceptibility to this disease, while Emil Behring and Emile Roux
developed a serum therapy to counteract this disease. Caused by a Corynebacterium, it is most commonly
associated with a gray or black coating at the back of the throat which causes difficulty in breathing and
swallowing. For 10 points, identify this disease, whose name is denoted by D in the DPT vaccine.
ANSWER: Diphtheria [accept Corynebacterium diphtheria until "agent" in the first clue]
This substance was found to be Griffith's "transformation agent" in rats by MacLeod, McCarty, and Avery.
Hershey and Chase carried out an experiment employing bacteriophages that determined that this molecule
contained phosphorus. Chargaff's rules govern the proportions of this molecule's bases. The MeselsonStahl experiment proved the semiconservative nature of its replication, a process that forms Okazaki
fragments. For 10 points, name this molecule made up of thymine, adenine, cytosine, and guanine, which
carries the genetic code of all organisms.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
When this molecule is relaxed, its linking number is divisible by 10.5. G-quadruplexes can be found on
the end of this molecule. This molecule, which comes in A, B, and Z forms, winds around proteins called
histones. Linear instances of this molecule are capped by telomeres. It is made up of the bases adenine,
guanine, cytosine, and thymine. For 10 points, name this material that carries the genetic information of all
living organisms.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
Friedrich Miescher was the first man to isolate this substance. "Photo 51" depicted this substance, which
was first imaged by a woman who later died of cancer, Rosalind Franklin, using X-ray crystallography. A
correspondence with Edwin Chargaff helped the completion of a paper in the journal Nature describing its
structure correctly in 1953. For 10 points, name this substance discovered by Watson and Crick to be a
double helix containing the genetic code.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
Recognition helices of the zinc finger bind to the major groove of this molecule. Orange fluorescence
indicates that ethidium bromide has intercalated to this molecule, whose composition follows Chargaff's
Rules. Two or three hydrogen bonds form between purines and pyrimidines in this molecule, which
contains adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine. For 10 points, name this nucleic acid whose double helix
structure was elucidated by Franklin, Watson, and Crick.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
In one experiment, this molecule was used to show that type II-R pneumococci could become virulent; that
experiment was conducted by Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty. This molecule's semiconservative replication
was discovered in the Meselson-Stahl experiment. The strands of this molecule are generally known as the
"sense" and "antisense" strands, and the Hershey-Chase experiment confirmed this molecule's purpose. For
10 points, name this molecule that contains the information of the genetic code.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
The function of this material was confirmed in the Avery-MacLeod-McCarty and Hershey-Chase
experiments. Enzymes acting on this material travel in the five-prime to three-prime direction. Okazaki
fragments are formed on this material's lagging strand during its replication. This substance is made of
linking pyrimidines and purines, and two strands of it are held together by hydrogen bonds. For 10 points,
name this substance that is tightly coiled in chromosomes, the genetic material of all living cells.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
The Ac, Ds, and P elements are all made up of this material. In fluorescent in situ hybridization, the
target section of it shows up as yellow while the rest of it is red. "Backward slippage" is thought to be
the origin of the "microsatellite" variety, and sticky ends may be produced when it is cleaved by
restriction enzymes. It is duplicated in the polymerase chain reaction. For 10 points, name this nucleic
acid, which typically forms a double helix structure and contains the genetic code for all higher
lifeforms.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
Metabolism of this molecule is disturbed by defects in WRN protein. This molecule is the subject of a
signal amplification technique using its "branched" form. Bloom syndrome protein is an ATP-dependent
enzyme that acts primarily on this molecule. A phenomenon exhibited by this molecule is described by
quantities called "writhe" and "twist." This molecule's structures include its Z form and A form, but its
standard structure is its B form. The amount of this molecule in a cell determines the C-value. This
molecule exhibits supercoiling, and it is wound around octamers of proteins called histones. For 10 points,
name this molecule packaged in the nucleus whose double helix structure was discovered by Watson and
Crick.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
One method of determining certain modifications of this substance involves treating it with bisulfite, and a
type of bonding named for Hoogsteen is sometimes observed in this substance. The binding of proteins to
this substance can be studied via footprinting assays, and proteins which bind to this substance usually
contain structures such as zinc-finger domains and leucine zippers. Chargaff's observations helped interpret
the bonding of its constituent parts. For 10 points, identify this substance composed of thymine, adenine,
cytosine, and guanine, which is located in the nucleus and which can be transcribed to give RNA.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
Maxam and Gilbert developed wandering-spot analysis to sequence this substance, though that method was
soon replaced by Sanger. Methylation can result in the Z form of this molecule, and it is operated on by
enzymes like topoisomerase and telomerase. Its semiconservative replication was established by the
Meselson-Stahl experiment. The sugar unit in this polymer lacks a 2' ["two prime"] hydroxyl group and
connects both to the phosphate backbone and the bases A, G, T, and C. For ten points, name this polymer,
whose sequence is inherited to convey genetic information.
ANSWER: DNA
When heated and measured at 260 nanometers, this molecule undergoes a hyperchromic shift. The H and
Quadruplex forms use Hoogsteen pairing and other forms include Z, A, and B. This polymer can be
artificially made through chain termination, and it differs from its counterpart by the lack of a 2 prime
hydroxyl. Its sequence is usually presented five prime to three prime, and it uses the bases adenine,
cytosine,
guanine, and thymine. For ten points, name this molecule that stores the genetic information of a cell.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
Phosphorus-32 was used on this molecule in experiments about its nature by Hershey and Chase. Erwin
Chargaff developed namesake rules for this molecuel. The X-ray diffraction research conducted on this
molecule by Rosalind Franklin was used to elucidate its structure by James Watson and Francis Crick. For
10 points, name this genetic material that assumes a double helix.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
Xeroderma pigmentosum is a disorder in which UV-induced dimers of one component of this substance
cannot be repaired. The "Z" form of this substance is more often found when it undergoes negative
supercoiling, and also when it undergoes a process which begins at its TATA box. In its more common "B"
form, its 22-angstrom major grooves can be accessed by transcription factors. This polymer is composed of
a phosphate, a pentose sugar, and a purine or pyrimidine nitrogenous base such as thymine. For 10 points,
name this nucleic acid which encodes the genetic information of all eukaryotes.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid; accept Z-DNA; accept B-DNA; do not accept "RNA" or "ribonucleic acid"]
Unlike its counterpart, this substance's monomers do NOT have 2-prime hydroxyl groups. This
substance was revealed by Avery to be the "transformative agent" in Griffith's experiments, and it was
labeled with 32-P in an experiment that used a blender to show that bacteriophages transfer it to E. coli. It
was labeled with nitrogen-15 in the Meselson-Stahl experiment to show that its replication was
semiconservative, and this substance is wrapped around histones and usually found in the nucleus. For 10
points, name this genetic material.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
This molecule can be introduced into cells after electroporation. Fragments of this molecule can be
detected by a Southern blot. It is introduced into cells via transfection. The P element consists of this
molecule, which can be sequenced via the Sanger chain-termination method. This molecule can be
duplicated by Taq polymerase in the polymerase chain reaction. For 10 points, name this molecule, a
complementary version of which can be made from mRNA by reverse transcriptase.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
Linus Pauling made an incorrect model about this material in which it had a neutral charge. One
discovery about this material was performed in the lab of Maurice Wilkins and was made using Rosalind
Franklin's X-ray diffraction data. Unlike its counterpart generated via transcription, this material does not
contain uracil. This material's structure was described by Watson and Crick as a double helix. For 10
points, name this material containing an organism's genetic code.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
This material was tagged with phosphorus in an experiment using a T2 bacteriophage, and it was
studied in the Meselson-Stahl experiment. One discovery about this material central to the Hershey-Chase
experiment was made using Rosalind Franklin's X-ray diffraction data. Unlike its counterpart generated
via transcription, this material does not contain uracil. This material's structure was described by Watson
and Crick as a double helix. For ten points, name this material containing an organism's genetic code.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
At larger length scales, it can be accurately modeled with the Kratky-Porod worm-like chain, although
below the persistence length the bending force becomes constant, making sharp kinks not uncommon. This
bending is anisotropic, a property first discovered using molecules from the kinetoplasts of
trypanosomatids. Under sufficient stresses, it can change conformation to the P-form, named for the
scientist who proposed a structure for this molecule. Because the linking number must remain constant, its
writhe must always compensate for changes in twist, and vice-versa. Topoisomerase relieves supercoiling
in, FTP, what polymer held together by Watson-Crick hydrogen bonds?
ANSWER: DNA or deoxyribonucleic acid
The Hoecht stain binds to the minor groove of this molecule, forming G-quadruplexes. The ratio of nitrogen
isotopes in this molecule, which exists in A, B, and Z forms, was measured in the Meselson-Stahl
experiment to give evidence for its semiconservative replication. It winds around proteins called histones,
and Okazaki fragments are formed when its namesake enzyme travels from the 5-prime to 3-prime direction
of this molecule adding nucleotides. For 10 points, name this molecule that carries the genetic information
of living organisms.
ANSWER: DNA [accept Deoxyribonucleic acid]
This molecule can exist in its A-form when in a solution devoid of water, but its B-form is the most stable.
Avery identified this molecule as the transforming factor in Griffith's experiment. A radioactive form of this
molecule was used in the Hershey-Chase experiment. The composition of this molecule follows Chargaff's
rules, and it contains both a major and minor groove. Rosalind Franklin used x-ray diffraction to analyze
this nucleic acid. For 10 points, name this component of chromosomes that carries hereditary information,
and is shaped like a double helix.
ANSWER: DNA [or deoxyribonucleic acid]
This enzyme is used to add a dimer to a probe in Applied Biosystems' SOLID sequencing
technology, and eukaryotic examples of these proteins have a catalytic site with an NTase and
OB-fold domains. One of these enzymes extracted from the T4 phage is often used for cloning. The
XLF and XRCC4 proteins complex with one of these enzymes to catalyze a repair pathway, which
joins (*) non-homologous ends. These enzymes often require NAD+ to function. After RNAse H removes
primers on the lagging strand, this protein is responsible for joining Okazaki fragments. These enzymes
catalyze the formation of phosphodiester bonds. For 10 points, name these proteins that seal breaks in
DNA.
ANSWER: DNA ligase
Prokaryotic versions of this enzyme contain an OB fold and an adenylation domain. In Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, this enzyme is encoded by the cdc9 gene. One form of this enzyme works with XRCC1 in the
final step of short BER. Unlike other next generation sequencing technologies, SOLiD uses this enzyme to
identify base pairs. The T4 version of this enzyme requires NAD+ to work and is commonly used in
molecular biology. This enzyme takes a five prime phosphate and a three prime hydroxyl and creates a
phosphodiester bond between them. This enzyme is used to combine Okazaki fragments. For 10 points,
name this enzyme that links DNA fragments together.
ANSWER: DNA ligase
In plants, an RNA-directed form of this process is catalyzed by CMT3, and the Infinium platform is
Illumina's method for studying this process. This process can be studied via the HELP assay. This
change occurs on 15q, and loss of that region leads to a pair of syndromes that have wildly divergent
phenotypes depending on which (*) parent the mutant chromosome is inherited from. Commonly
occurring at transposons and repeat elements, it occurs at CpG islands and is the basis for imprinting. Along
with the histone code, this is a primary mechanism of epigenetic inheritance. For 10 points, name this
transformation in which a small chemical group is attached to cytosine residues of DNA, often used to
silence genes.
ANSWER: DNA methylation
This process can be studied by RLGS and by using Bisulfite Conversion based assays. HDACs
preferentially bind to areas that have been subjected to this process, and Enzymes that catalyze this
process are classified as "de novo" or "maintenance" types. Bacterial DNA mismatch repair systems
distinguish between parent and daughter (*) strand on the basis of this process, which occurs at high
levels in Barr bodies. This processes most often occurs at CpG ("c-p-g") islands, and regions of the genome
subjected to high levels of this process become heterochromatin. For 10 points, name this process in which
cytosine or adenine residues of DNA are modified by the attachment of a CH3 group.
ANSWER: DNA methylation [prompt on partial answer; accept "methylation" by itself after "DNA" is read]
This process is inhibited by decitabine and by azacitidine at low doses, and it is detected by
bisulfite treatment. It occurs heavily in Alu, LINE, and satellite repeat elements. This modification is
used to distinguish the template in mismatch repair. This modification occurs at CpG islands. Its
occurrence on the long arm of chromosome 15 is a classic instance of genomic imprinting, and
deletion of that region results in Prader-Willi or Angelman syndrome. It occurs extensively in Barr
bodies, and along with histone (*) modification it is a primary mechanism of epigenetic inheritance. It
usually occurs at cytosine residues to silence genes. For 10 points, name this chemical modification of
DNA that involves adding a CH3 group.
ANSWER: DNA methylation [do NOT accept "histone methylation" or "protein methylation"]
One of these enzymes associates with a donut-shaped dimer known as the sliding clamp, made up of
two beta subunits of its holoenzyme. Another of these enzymes, when cleaved by subtilisin, produces a
C-terminal fragment known as the Klenow fragment. Arthur Kornberg discovered the first of these
enzymes used in Sanger sequencing. The synthesis of two "bypass" ones is induced by the SOS response,
and one of those forms a namesake mutasome that incorrectly adds guanine opposite a thymine residue
about half as often as it correctly adds adenine. For 10 points, name this family of enzymes that aids in
DNA replication by pairing the template strand's nucleotides to free nucleotides, one of which from
Thermus aquaticus is used in PCR.
ANSWER: DNA polymerase [or Pol; prompt on polymerase]
Enzymes of this type with Rev3 catalytic subunits partake in translesion synthesis. Xeroderma
pigmentosum is caused by a mutation in the eta member of this enzyme family. PCNA is an example
of a sliding clamp protein, which holds these enzymes in place to prevent them from falling off of
their substrate. Subtilisin's cleavage of them yields the Klenow fragment, and they are used to
incorporate chain-terminating ddNTPs in Sanger sequencing. They possess (*) proofreading
capabilities and 3-prime to 5-prime exonuclease activity. Pfu and Taq are examples of them used in a
common laboratory procedure. For 10 points, name these enzymes that add nucleotides to the 5-prime end
of a growing DNA strand in replication, which can be used to amplify DNA in a namesake "chain reaction."
ANSWER: DNA polymerases [prompt on "polymerases" until "DNA" is read and accept afterwards; d NOT accept "RNA polymerase" or other wrong answers]
Type b of these proteins contains palm and thumb subdomains, and types 2, 4, and 5 are involved in SOS
response. In E. Coli, type 3 consists of a doughnut shaped beta-dimer, which has a clamping function to
prevent this enzyme from "falling off" its substrate. First discovered by Arthur Kornberg, their
characteristic function is followed by the work of ligase on the lagging strand. Unable to function without
the presence of primers and catalyzing the addition of nucleotides to the 3' end of a new strand, for 10
points, identify this enzyme which produces a complimentary DNA strand from a template strand.
ANSWER: DNA polymerases [accept polymerases after "DNA"]
One type of this process was hypothesized by John Tainer to involve a "pinch-push-pull" mechanism. One
enzyme involved in another kind of this process is an alkyltransferase that acts on the C-terminal segment of
the Ada protein. A third type of this process requires the heterodimer Ku and includes a step performed by
the Mre11 complex. Xeroderma pigmentosum results from the inability of skin cells to perform this process
after exposure to ultraviolet light. Types of this process include the mismatch and excision types, in addition
to the SOS response. This process is often undergone after exposure to mutagens. For 10 points, name this
process that puts back together damaged DNA.
ANSWER: DNA repair [accept synonyms]
Defects in pathways that perform this action lead to ataxia telangactasia and Nijmegen breakage
syndrome, and mutations in ERCC8 and ERCC6, which are involved in the transcription-coupled
pathway of this, cause Cocakyne syndrome. Defects in one pathway that performs this action cause
HNPCC or Lynch syndrome and lead to microsatellite instability; that pathway uses the MutL-MutS
complex to recruit MutH and is dependent upon hemimethylation. One pathway that performs this
action is defective in patients with Xeroderma pigmentosum, who are unable to remove a certain
dimer created by UV light. If pathways that perform this process fail, Ku proteins and other sensors can
trigger cell cycle arrest or apoptosis, mainly through p53. For 10 points, name this process, which comes in
mismatch, nucleotide excision, and base excision types, all of which reverse damage done to the genome.
ANSWER: DNA repair pathways (equivalents ok, more specific answers like mismatch repair, base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, and non-homologous end joining are just fine)
The enzyme gyrase (JY-rase) is used to relieve strain in the beginning of this process. In the cell cycle,
this process occurs in the S phase between the two G phases. Nitrogen-15 was used in the Meselson-Stahl
experiment, which showed that this process was semi-conservative. Okazaki (oh-kah-ZAKH-kee)
fragments, which are connected by ligase (LIE-gase), are formed on the lagging strand during this. Helicase
(HEE-lih-case) unwinds a certain structure at the beginning of this process. For 10 points, name this
process in which a certain double stranded structure is duplicated.
ANSWER: DNA replication [or equivalent answers]
This process depends on the action of a hexameric protein with a primase domain, and the presence of
Cdk2/Cyclin E is required before it can proceed. Topoisomerase breaks phosphodiester bonds in order to
allow this process to occur, and Okazaki fragments are formed in the course of this process. The MeselsonStahl experiment revealed an important fact about this process, which occurs in the S phase of the cell cycle
and is called semiconservative because it results in two two-stranded molecules, each containing one old
and one new strand of genetic material. For 10 points, name this process in which chromosomal material is
duplicated.
ANSWER: DNA replication [accept word equivalents]
In E. coli, this process begins with cooperative binding of DnaA to a 9 basepair repeat, recruiting
DnaB and its loader to bind and melt adjacent AT rich repeats. Binding and action of DnaG to both
strands creates the necessary 3'-hydroxyl for this process, though DnaG will continually act on the
"lagging strand." Theta and rolling circle are both types of, For ten points, what process of copying the
genome of an organism?
ANSWER: DNA replication
Geminin inhibits this process, while enzymes involved in it include the Flap endonuclease and
topoisomerase. A similar process that occurs in plasmids is called "rolling circle," and this process
occurs in two opposite directions in prokaryotes. This process sees the creation of a (*) leading strand
and a lagging strand, the latter of which is made of Okazaki fragments, which are joined by a ligase. A
primer is necessary for this process, which occurs during the S phase of the cell cycle and whose main
action is carried out by the namesake polymerase. For 10 points, identify this cell process in which genes
are copied.
ANSWER: DNA replication
One protein involved in this process is helped by sliding clamps, and several proteins involved in
this process are transcribed in response to E2F activation. It is initiated by cdc6 binding to the ORC
complex. The formation of secondary structures during this procedure is prevented by SSBs. An
experiment to characterize this process used a cesium chloride gradient to centrifuge E. coli that had
been grown in a nitrogen-15 medium. (*) Okazaki fragments are used to cover the lagging strand in this
procedure, which is initiated by helicase prying the strands apart to create a fork. Meselson and Stahl
showed that this process is semiconservative. For 10 points, name this process catalyzed by DNA
polymerase before the start of mitosis, the copying of the genome.
ANSWER: DNA replication [or S phase]
Geminin sequesters a protein responsible for initiating this process. SSB proteins are responsible for
holding the substrate in this process, which in prokaryotes is terminated by Tus proteins binding to Ter
sites. In Eukaryotes it's initated by the recruitment of MCM proteins following the recruitment and
phosphorylation of cdc6, which in turn leads to the ORC complex falling apart. The Klenow fragment is a
cleaved version of an enzyme used by E. Coli to undergo this process, which in Eukaryotes uses Pol alpha,
delta, and epsilon. The nature of this process was determined in an experiment that grew E. Coli on N-15
media, and in eukaryotes it requires the formation of Okazaki fragments on the lagging strand. For 10
points, name this process that creates a namesake fork, in which an organisms genome is copied.
ANSWER: DNA Replication
A concatemer is produced in bacteria and some eukaryotic viruses during the rolling circle variety of this
process. Nitrogen-14 and nitrogen-15 were used to determine that this process is semi-conservative in the
Meselson-Stahl experiment. During this process, Okazaki fragments develop on a lagging strand, which is
unwound by topoisomerase proteins. Helicase creates a namesake fork during this process, which makes use
of RNA primase. Mediated by a polymerase enzyme, this process causes a certain molecule to grow from
the 3-prime to 5-prime direction. For 10 points, name this process that duplicates a double helix and occurs
during the S phase of the cell cycle.
ANSWER: replication of deoxyribonucleic acid [accept equivalents]
Some viruses use the "rolling circle" version of this process. The Meselson-Stahl experiment
confirmed that this process is (*) semiconservative. Its namesake "fork" consists of a leading strand and a
lagging strand, the latter of which features Okazaki fragments. Enzymes involved in this process include
ligase [LIE-gaze], helicase [HEE-luh-caze], and polymerase [puh-LIM-er-aze]. For 10 points, name this
process by which genetic material gets copied.
ANSWER: DNA replication [accept RNA replication for the first sentence only]
This process cannot begin until after the CDK2/Cyclin E complex forms. An experiment on this process
used a medium rich in nitrogen-15 to grow bacteria containing a certain molecule with abnormally high
density. In one part of this process, a primer is generated, and in another, torsional strain arising from
supercoiling is reduced by gyrase, an example of a topoisomerase. The mechanism of this process was
shown to be semiconservative by the Meselson-Stahl experiment. The last step of this process sees a ligase
join together Okazaki fragments. For 10 points, name this process in which the genetic material of the cell
generates a copy of itself.
ANSWER: DNA replication [accept equivalent answers describing DNA making a copy of itself, prompt on just replication]
One variant of this biological process employed by humans is the D-loop form. Some viruses use the
rolling circle type. The ori site is a crucial component of this for plasmids. The Meselson-Stahl experiment
confirmed that this process is semi-conservative. During this process, Okazaki fragments will be created
and dealt with. This occurs during S-phase, and the enzyme central to this process is DNA polymerase
(puh-LIM-er-aze). For 10 points, name this process where the genetic material of a cell is duplicated.
ANSWER: DNA replication
Arthur Kornberg discovered one enzyme involved in this process, though it was not the primary one as
was originally thought. Errors created by this process are removed by nuclease, and the staggered ends it
produces lead to degradation of telomeres. The lagging strand in this process is built from Okazaki
fragments, which are connected by ligase. The material undergoing this process is cut by topoisomerase
and unwound by helicase. For 10 points, name this process in which an organism's genetic material is
copied.
ANSWER: DNA replication
The tus protein results in the termination of this process. James Wang discovered a protein group involved
in this process called topoisomerase. An experiment done using nitrogen-14 and nitrogen-15 proved this
process to be semi-conservative. The Hayick limit is caused by shortening of molecules added after this
process which are called telomeres. The enzyme ligase joins (*) Okazaki fragments, which are preceded by
primers and compose the lagging strand. It can be artificially recreated using PCR and its main enzyme is
the namesake polymerase. For ten points, name this process of duplicating a cell's genetic material.
ANSWER: DNA replication (accept equivalents)
One enzyme adds its namesake TTAGGG ["T-T-A-G-G-G"] structure towards the end of this process, and
the enzyme topoisomerase plays a role in preventing super-coiling of the central molecule of this process.
The Messelson-Stahl experiment confirmed the nature of this process to be semi-conservative and this
process occurs in the 3' ["3 prime"] to 5' ["5 prime"] direction in the leading strand. For 10 points, involves
proteins such as the central molecule's namesake polymerase and helicase, which "unzips" its double helical
structure.
ANSWER: DNA replication [accept DNA synthesis; accept answers with synonyms for replication lik DNA multiplication]
A trimer of PCNA is assembled during this process, which is inhibited by recruitment of the 9-1-1
complex. Prior to this process, the Pre-RC is assembled. SSB proteins are used during this process,
during which the sliding clamp is loaded onto the central structure. This process occurs in a "rolling
circle" mechanism during F-/F+ ("f minus, f plus") mating. In bacteria, this highly processive process
begins at the (*) ori regions. The holoenzyme that conducts this process has an exonuclease site which
assures a high level of fidelity. The enzyme Primase initiates this process, which synthesizes a structure that
grows from the 5' ("five prime") to the 3' end. For 10 points, name this process that results in the
generation of a new copy of the genome.
ANSWER: DNA replication [accept equivalents]
This process is stopped by the 911 complex, and it is prevented from repeating itself via binding of
geminin. CAF1 and ASF1 are chaperone proteins key to coordinating nucleosome deposition during
this process. One key enzyme in this process is assisted by a trimer of PCNA proteins, which forms a
sliding clamp. Sites in which this process will initiate bind to a hexamer of MCM proteins, and are
known as origins. Flap endonucleases remove the primers used in this process, whose strict directionality
requires the formation of Okazaki fragments on the lagging strand. This process is initiated by the action of
helicase, which forms a bubble in which polymerase synthesizes a new strand from 5-prime to 3-prime. For
10 points, name this semiconservative process in which a cell's genome is copied.
ANSWER: DNA replication [prompt on S phase, prompt on the cell cycle]
This process is sped up by the fusion of its namesake "bubbles" that end in its namesake y-shaped
"forks." It sees the production of small Okazaki fragments. The semiconservative model of this process
was supported by the Meselsohn-Stahl experiment. The enzyme topisomerase (toh-poh-iy-SAH-mer-ase) is
employed to cut and reseal the phosphate backbone during this process, which also employs helicase
(HEEL-ih-case) to unwind the double helix. For 10 points, name this process that creates a second copy of
a cell's genetic information.
ANSWER: DNA Replication [accept equivalents; prompt on replication]
A clamp-shaped protein complex increases the processivity of this event by preventing one enzyme
from dissociating. In bacteria, this process is started at an ori site by a primer. The Meselson-Stahl
experiment showed that this process was semiconservative. Because this process only occurs in the
5' ["five prime"]-to-3' ["three prime"] direction, the lagging strand in this process is handled in small
bits as unwinding occurs, producing Okazaki fragments. This process occurs during the S phase
of the cell cycle, and involves the action of DNA polymerase. Name this process that produces an
additional copy of the genome.
ANSWER: DNA replication [accept answers mentioning DNA and the notion of synthesizing or copying or equivalents; prompt on replication or answers meeting the alternate description but not including "DNA"]
The first method of performing this action involved treatment with dimethyl sulfide and hydrazine and
was developed by Maxam and Gilbert. An automated method of performing this action was developed by
Leroy Hood, which combined capillary electrophoresis with the chain termination method of Frederick
Sanger. The "shotgun" method of performing this action was developed by Celera, a company founded by
Craig Venter. For ten points, name this biological technique, which was used extensively in the Human
Genome Project.
ANSWER: sequencing DNA
One method of this procedure uses paired-end tags to link contigs into scaffolds. Early methods for doing
this were the "plus and minus" method, as well as one discovered by Maxam and Gilbert. A more common
method of this procedure used chain-terminating ddNTPs. In the shotgun method for this procedure, reads
are overlaid to find repeating patterns. That approach was pioneered by Craig Venter. Frederick Sanger's
method was used by the NIH when it announced in 2000 that it had done this to the human genome. For 10
points, name this procedure of determining the order of nucleotides of a genetic code.
ANSWER: DNA sequencing [or word forms; or descriptions of mapping the human genome, or finding the order of base pairs before mention, or other same-knowledge equivalents]
One device that performs this task uses an ISFET sensor to monitor the release of hydrogen
ions, while another method uses a zero-mode waveguide for fluorescent detection. An
experimental method for doing this that fits in a USB drive threads the substrates through a
nanopore. Another method of performing this task couples luciferase activity to pyrophosphate
release. Besides the IonTorrent, 454, and Illumina versions of this technology, a more common
method of doing this uses capillary electrophoresis to read fluorescently-terminated chains; that
method is named for Sanger. The data from this technique can be overlapped to form contigs in
the Shotgun method, which was used by the Craig-Venter-owned Celera corporation. For 10
points, name this method for determining the order of nucleotides in an organism's genome.
ANSWER: DNA sequencing [or nucleic acid sequencing or RNA sequencing; do not accept "protein sequencing"]
One method of doing this relies on coated aqueous beads suspended in oil and is known as the polony
method. One method of doing this uses dimethyl sulfate, hydrazine, and a series of other chemical additions
and is named for Maxim and Gilbert, while Fologea developed a method of doing this via a nanopore.
Another method that relies on ligation is called SOLiD, while Leroy Hood automated one method of doing
this originally developed by Sanger, the dye termination method. Another approach uses a combination of
primer walking and alignment, the Shotgun method. FTP, name this action done on a large scale by the
Human Genome project, the elucidation of the order of bases in DNA.
ANSWER: DNA sequencing (accept "Genome sequencing" or "gene sequencing", but not "protein sequencing" or "peptide sequencing")
The most common method for doing this relies on ddNTP molecules which are fluorescent at four
different wavelengths. Craig Venter developed another method for accomplishing this process, called the
"shotgun method," which uses restriction enzymes to cut the parent material. Frederick Sanger invented the
chain-termination method for this process. In 2000, the HGP announced that this process had been
accomplished for human cells. For 10 points, name this process which involves finding the order of
nucleotides in the genetic material.
ANSWER: DNA sequencing [or deoxyribonucleic acid sequencing; or same-knowledge equivalents]
A modern technique for performing this action uses luciferase, ATP sulfurylase, and released
pyrophosphate. That technique does not require an autoradiograph or monomers with missing three
prime hydroxyls. A better known method uses (*) chain terminators, known as dideoxynucleotides
(DIE-de-ox-ee-NEW-clee-oh-tides), with attached dyes in four columns. That method is named for
Frederick Sanger. For 10 points, name this problem of determining the order of A,T,C, and Gs in a
particular set of DNA.
ANSWER: DNA sequencing
Some methods for performing this task use quality trimming to improve accuracy. One method for
accomplishing this task is based on the detection of pyrophosphate release. There are several
methods for performing this task in parallel, which are known as "next-generation" methods and
which include the "ion semiconductor" method and the "Polony" method. One method for
accomplishing this uses molecules which lack a (*) 3'-hydroxyl group, preventing the formation of
phosphodiester bonds; that method, the chain-termination method, replaced the Maxam-Gilbert method and
was developed by Sanger. Since the Sanger method can only be used for short molecules, the "shotgun"
method for this task is used with long molecules. For 10 points, name this task which involves determining
the order of nucleotides in a certain molecule.
ANSWER: DNA sequencing [prompt on partial answers]
A later inquiry proved that this experiment did not cause the lung cancer Jaegsiekte. This experiment
was successful due to the quiescence brought about by nutrient deprivation. The same year that this
experiment occurred, the scientific team behind it induced human factor IX expression in a major
triumph for "pharming." In true biological fashion, this experiment was named after a (*) busty
celebrity because it involved a mammary gland cell undergoing somatic cell nuclear transfer by being
shocked to stimulate division and then implanted in a surrogate mother. This experiment was carried out at
the Roslin Institute by Keith Campbell and Ian Wilmut. For 10 points, name this 1997 experiment in which
a domestic sheep was cloned from an adult cell.
ANSWER: the cloning of Dolly [accept anything along the lines of "Wilmut and Campbell's Dolly experiment at the Roslin Institute"; prompt on Ian Wilmut; prompt on Keith Campbell; prompt on Roslin Institute; accept 6LL3]
In a hypothesis, the progenote is the predecessor of all components of this level formulated in 1990.
Its central definition is based on the differences by genome, therefore 2 of constituents of this level
are filled with microscopic, primitive, prokaryotic organisms, and the third includes amoeba, slime
molds, paramecia and all other macroscopic forms of life. Eukarya is the most populous member of for ten
points, what level below empire, but above kingdom that also includes Eubacteria and Archaea.
ANSWER: Domain
When followed by the word negative, this term describes gain-of-function changes that often involve
competitive inhibition. Carl Collens discovered the incomplete form of this concept, which can be seen in
the Merle modifier in dogs and in the color of carnations. When preceded by the prefix co-, it can describe
the roan color of horses and the ABO blood group system. The most common type, called complete or
simple, was studied by Gregor Mendel in his pea plants. For 10 points, name this genetic concept, often
contrasted with recessive traits.
ANSWER: dominance [accept word forms]
Gain-of-function mutations in proto-oncogenes usually have this property. The malaria-resistant aspect
of the sickle-cell trait has this property, which explains that trait's heterozygote (HET-ero-ZAI-goat)
advantage. The ABO blood type system is an example of the "co-" form of this property. Pink snapdragons
are an example of its incomplete form. An allele with this property is usually denoted with a capital letter.
For 10 points, name this property of an allele that is expressed over a recessive allele.
ANSWER: dominance [accept word forms like dominant allele]
This neurotransmitter partially acts via the tuberoinfundibular pathway in the arcuate nucleus,
and acts on the ventral tegmentum via the mesolimbic and mesocortical pathways. It is broken down
by monoamine oxidase and is the immediate precursor to (*) norepinephrine. One hypothesis states that
its antagonists may be used to treat schizophrenia, while its deficiency may lead to Parkinson's disease. For
10 points, identify this neurotransmitter associated with pleasure, and whose precursor is L-dopa.
ANSWER: dopamine
One major pathway involving this compound is the tuberoinfundibular one that transfers it from the
hypothalamus to the pituitary gland. This compound is involved in voluntary motor control via its
nigriostriatal pathway, and it binds with lactotrophs in order to inhibit the secretion of prolactin, which is a
major antagonist of it. It is the immediate precursor of norepinephrine in the epinephrine synthesis pathway.
Antagonists of this neurotransmitter are used to treat schizophrenia, and deficiency of this neurotransmitter
can lead to Parkinson's disease. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter associated with the brain's
pleasure center whose precursor is L-dopa.
ANSWER: dopamine
Phenothiazine (fee-noh-THIGH-uh-zeen) blocks this compound's receptors, and low doses of it are
used to increase blood flow to the kidneys. This neurotransmitter inhibits the release of prolactin
(pro-LACK-tin), and like epinephrine (eh-pih-NEH-frin) and norepinephrine (NOR-eh-pih-neh-frin)
it is a derivative of tyrosine (TIE-roh-seen). This (*) neurotransmitter is secreted from the substantia
(sub-STAN-she-uh) nigra, which is why a derivative of it is used to treat Parkinson's disease. For 10
points, name this neurotransmitter involved in reward and pleasure pathways.
ANSWER: dopamine
Metoclopramide inhibits this compound in order to stimulate lactation in the body, and monoamine
oxidase is the main enzyme that breaks it down. This substance is known as "prolactostatin" for its
ability to inhibit the secretion of the hormone prolactin in the pituitary gland. Elevated levels of this
compound in the mesolimbic pathway can cause (*) schizophrenia, while the loss of neurons that secrete
it in the substantia nigra can impair movement and cause shaking. Parkinson's disease is caused by a
reduction of, for ten points, which neurotransmitter, responsible for reward-driven learning in the brain?
ANSWER: dopamine
Phenothiazines such as chlorpromazine work by blocking receptors for this molecule, which is transported
to its primary location in the tuberoinfundibular pathway. Monoamine oxidase and catechol-o-methyl
transferase break down this chemical, a process enhanced by the drug reserpine. A catecholamine produced
in the substantia nigra and released from the hypothalamus, this compound inhibits the release of prolactin
in the pituitary gland, among other functions. Derived from tyrosine and a precursor to adrenaline, disorders
that result from a deficiency in this molecule include ADHD and Parkinson's disease. For 10 points, name
this inhibitory neurotransmitter implicated in arousal and addiction and supposedly central to pleasure and
reward.
ANSWER: Dopamine [or 4-(2-aminoethyl)benzene-1,2-diol, prompt on "DA"]
An antagonist of this compound, metoclopromide, is used to treat nausea. Bromocriptine is an agonist for
one of its receptors, which inhibits prolactin release. The release of this compound from the ventral
tegmental area is important in the reward pathway. This molecule is released from the pars compacta of the
substantia nigra, whose degeneration causes a disease characterized by rigidity in Parkinson's disease. For
10 points, name this neurotransmitter formed by the decarboxylation of L-DOPA.
ANSWER: dopamine
This compound inhibits prolactin secretion when it is released from the tubero-infun-dibular
pathway. The enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase plays a key role in this neurotransmitter's synthesis. The
mesolimbic and mesocortical pathways of the brain both use this neurotransmitter. Depletion of this
neurotransmitter in the (*) substantia nigra (NYE-gruh) leads to a disease characterized by shaking and
other issues with movement. For 10 points, identify this neurotransmitter whose deficiency is a cause of
Parkinson's disease.
ANSWER: dopamine
A polymorphism in one receptor of this compound has been positively associated with noveltyseeking behaviors and ADHD. This compound acts on the ventral tegmentum via the mesolimbic and
mesocortical pathways. It is broken down by monoamine oxidase, and its synthesis begins with the
hydroxylation of (*) tyrosine. This compound, antagonists to which can treat schizophrenia, is the
precursor of norepinephrine, and a disease caused by abnormally low amounts of this compound can be
treated by its precursor L-dopa. For 10 points, identify this catecholamine neurotransmitter, whose
deficiency can lead to Parkinson's disease.
ANSWER: dopamine
This substance can be broken down by COMT in the prefrontal cortex, which it connects to the
ventral tegmental area via the mesocortical pathwayl. It can also operate via the tuberoinfundibular
pathway, and it inhibits the secretion of prolactin. This precursor of norepinephrine is primarily
produced in the (*) substantia nigra. Deficiency of this catecholamine can cause a degenerative disease
whose most visible symptom is persistent tremors, since this neurotransmitter helps carry out voluntary
movement. It is also associated with reward-seeking and pleasure behaviors. For 10 points, name this
neurotransmitter whose deficiency leads to Parkinson's disease and whose precursor is L-dopa.
ANSWER: dopamine
The Nurr1 gene is important for the development of cells that primarily produce this molecule.
Cabergoline and bromocriptine activate this molecule's receptors, while haloperidol is an inverse
agonist to those receptors. This molecule is transported to the nucleus accumbens from the ventral
tegmental area by the mesolimbic pathway. This molecule is produced by the hydroxylation then
subsequent decarboxylation of (*) tyrosine. This catecholamine inhibits the secretion of prolactin, and it
is primarily produced in a section of the basal ganglia known as the substantia nigra. For 10 points, name
this primary neurotransmitter involved in the reward pathway, which is under-produced in Parkinson's
disease.
ANSWER: dopamine
This compound is involved in the mesocortical pathway, one of the four pathways for this compound in the
brain, that may be involved in motivation and emotional response, and, as a hormone, it inhibits the release
of prolactin. It is the precursor of norepinephrin, and overabundance of this neurotransmitter has been seen
in schizophrenia. It is used to treat Parkinson's disease. For 10 points, identify this neurotransmitter
associated with reinforcement and pleasure whose precursor is the L-DOPA.
ANSWER: dopamine or DA
This compound is metabolized by COMT into 3-methoxytyramine. Haloperidol and clozapine are
antagonists for this compound's receptor. The islands of Calleja are stimulated by this compound,
which is also released by the nucleus accumbens upon activation by the VTA in the mesolimbic
pathway. This compound is synthesized by decarboxylating aromatic amino acids. Low levels of this
compound can cause excessively high (*) prolactin levels. Ritalin acts by increasing the rate of uptake of
this neurotransmitter and norepinephrine, one of its derivatives. This compound is mostly produced in the
substantia nigra, so defects in its synthesis cause tremors in patients with Parkinson's Disease. For 10
points, name this neurotransmitter that gives a sense of pleasure.
ANSWER: dopamine
Though it's not glutamate, DARPP-32 is expressed in medium spiny neurons with this molecule's receptors
and is phosphorylated by those receptors, thus becoming an inhibitor of protein phosphotase 1. Bupropion
blocks reuptake of this and another molecule by binding to this molecule's transporter. That transporter is
important in all four of this molecule's major pathways, which include the mesolimbic and the mesocortical.
Tuberoinfundibular neurons secrete this neurotransmitter to inhibit Prolactin, which counteracts one of its
effects. It is a precursor to other catecholamines like epinephrine and is mainly produced in the substantia
nigra. One theory of schizophrenia is that it is related to hyperactive receptors of this compound. For 10
points, name this neurotransmitter which is used to treat Parkinson's disease.
ANSWER: dopamine
Quinones and melanins derived from this neurotransmitter contribute to browning of bruised or cut fruits
and vegetables. Synthesis of it occurs in the medulla of the adrenal glands, and it is released from the
hypothalamus as a neurohormone. One drug derived from this neurotransmitter can induce loss of sodium
and dilation of the blood vessels in low doses. Higher doses of that drug, called Intropin, leads to
vasoconstriction and greatly reduced kidney function. Reuptake of this neurotransmitter is inhibited by
cocaine and amphetamines, and deficiencies can lead to attention deficit disorder when the concentration is
reduced in the prefrontal cortex, as well as Parkinson's disease. Abnormally high levels of this
neurotransmitter contribute to psychosis and schizophrenia. For 10 points name this monoamine
neurotransmitter associated with pleasure and reward.
ANSWER: Dopamine
This compound is transmitted in the tubero-infundibular pathway from the hypothalamus to the
pituitary gland. This compound is produced by cells in the ventral tegmental area and this compound
downregulates latrotropic cells. Prolactin acts as an antagonist to this hormone after sexual
gratification. Triple Reuptake Inhibitors like (*) cocaine inhibit reuptake of norepinephrine, serotonin
and this compound, which is produced by the melanin-containing cells of the substantia nigra. This
neurotransmitter is a direct precursor to norepinephrine and epinephrine. This compound is deficient in
patients with Parkinson's disease. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter implicated in reward-based
learning, whose precursor is L-Dopa.
ANSWER: dopamine
This molecule is degraded into D-O-P-A-C before conversion to homovanillic acid. Utilized mostly by
neurons localized to the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain,
and the substantia nigra, it is also produced in the medulla of the adrenal glands. This catecholamine, which
is often associated with the pleasure and reward systems of the brain, is a precursor to norepinephrine, and
it can be converted from l-tyrosine via intermediary formation of l-dihydroxyphenylalanine. FTP, name this
neurotransmitter whose precursor compound L-DOPA has found use in the treatment of Parkinson's
disease.
ANSWER: dopamine
This disorder is indicated when high levels of Inhibin A are found on a Quad Screen, or when AFP
and UE3 are low but hCG is high on a triple screen. Symptoms of this disease include focal areas of
stromal hyperplasia in the eyes known as Brushfield spots, and having a single (*) palmar crease.
Patients with this disease develop an Alzheimer-like syndrome by the age of 40 because they have an extra
copy of the amyloid precursor protein, and one variant of this disease that runs in families is caused by a
Robertsonian translocation, though most instances are caused by nondisjunction. For 10 points, name this
cause of mental retardation, which is caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down's syndrome [or Trisomy 21 before "21" is mentioned; prompt on DS]
This disease can be detected in utero with a combination of testing for the protein PAPP-A and a
Nuchal scan. Patients suffering from this condition display white spots on the iris, known as
Brushfield spots, and may also display a single crease across their palms. Epicanthic folds in
sufferers of this condition yield (*) almond-shaped eyes, and many adults suffering from this condition
ultimately display Alzheimer's symptoms. For 10 points, name this common genetic disorder which results
in mental retardation, caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down's syndrome [or trisomy 21 until "chromosome 21" is read]
Brushfield spots are more common in sufferers of this disease, many of whom also suffer from
duodenal atresia. About 20% of people with it also suffer from transient leukemia, and they have a higher
incidence of ALL and AML. The mechanism of this disease may partially be due to overexpression of
miR-155 and miR-802 resulting in decreased MeCP2 expression and dysregulation of NFAT. The
increased development of Alzheimer's in people with this disease is due to overexpression of APP and
SOD1. This condition can result from a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosome 14, and
sufferers have a small chin, large tongue, an extra fold in the eyelid, and an IQ in the 50s. For 10 points,
name this genetic condition characterized by an extra chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down syndrome [or Trisomy 21 before "21" is read]
People with this condition may display small light-colored dots on the iris, known as Brushfield spots. Heart
defects and poor muscle tone are apparent in infants, and most adults with this disorder display symptoms
of Alzheimer's disease by age 50. Rare mosaic and translocation varieties of it exist, though this disease is
usually caused by nondisjunction in meiotic gamete production. Epicanthic folds and a single transverse
crease on the palm are common, and it can be detected by karyotyping. This disease can cause hearing loss
and is more likely with increased maternal age. For 10 points, name this chromosomal disorder often
resulting in developmental delays, also known as trisomy 21.
ANSWER: Down's syndrome [accept trisomy 21 before it's mentioned]
This condition may result from abnormalities in the transcription factor NFAT. Nuchal scans are prenatal
screens used to detect this condition. Caucasian children with this condition display Brushfield spots more
often than Asian children. At one in every approximately seven hundred births, it is the world's most
common birth defect. The risk of this condition increases with increasing age of the mother. For 10 points,
name this condition caused by a third copy of chromosome twenty-one.
ANSWER: Down syndrome [or trisomy 21 before "third"]
Up to an 18 fold increase in the risk of acute-myeloid leukemia has been observed in patients with this
disease, who may also experience Alzheimer's disease-like dementia in their 40s and 50s. Jerome Lejeune
identified the root cause of this disease, which may be observed via amniocentesis or karyotyping. Mental
retardation is observed in all suffers of this disease. For 10 points, name this disease associated with
trisomy of chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down's syndrome [accept trisomy 21 prior to mention of "trisomy"]
William Robertson names a malfunction that results in this disease, whose cause was first identified
by Jerome Lejeune. Infants with this condition exhibit small, grey spots on the iris known as
Brushfield spots, and variants of this condition include the Mosaic type. Signs of this disease include
an (*) epicanthic fold and a transverse crease on the palm of the hand. People afflicted with this disease
also exhibit almond shaped eyes and mental retardation, and it was once called mongolism. Also known as
trisomy 21, for 10 points, name this disease caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down's syndrome [accept trisomy 21 before mention; prompt on mongolism before mention]
Infants and some adults with this disorder exhibit light-colored clumps of connective tissue on the
outside of the iris called Brushfield spots. Some studies have shown that increased expression of
certain tumor suppressor genes in people with this disorder leads to resistance to most kinds of
cancer. Sufferers of this disorder often have a single crease across the palm, defects in the septum
between the heart ventricles, (*) almond-shaped eyes due to epicanthic folds, and moderate to severe
mental retardation. For 10 points, name this disorder caused by a trisomy of chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down syndrome [or trisomy 21 until mention]
This condition involves overexpression of DSCAM. Hypothyroidism used to be considered a cause of
this condition, which is sometimes caused by a Robertsonian translocation on chromosome fourteen.
This condition is associated with dysfunctional NFAT signalling pathways. One symptom of this
condition is white spots on the (*) eye, called Brushfield spots, while half of children born with this
condition suffer from heart defects. Other symptons include upward slanting eyes, flattened nose, and
excess skin at the nape of the neck. For 10 points, name this genetic disorder caused by the trisomy of
chromosome twenty one.
ANSWER: Down Syndrome [prompt on trisomy 21 until mentioned]
Excessive connective tissue due to this disease leads to white Brushfield spots on the iris. Because the
chromosome responsible for it is acrocentric, this condition may be caused by a Robertsonian
translocation. (*) Heart disease and hearing impairment are common features of this disorder, which is
caused by a nondisjunction event at meiosis. Physical signs of this condition include a single palm crease,
epicanthic eyelid folds, and a protruding tongue. It increases in prevalence with maternal age. For 10 points,
name this genetic disorder leading to cognitive and physical impairment, caused by the presence of an extra
copy of chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down's Syndrome [accept trisomy 21 before "21"]
Infants with this disease often have three fontanelles instead of two. About half of individuals with this
disease have one crease across their palm instead of two. Other characteristics of it include white spots on
the iris called Brushfield spots. Due to the epicanthal folds of affected individuals, this disorder was
referred to as mongolism by its English namesake. For 10 points, name this syndrome that results in mental
retardation and is caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down syndrome [or trisomy 21]
TS65Dn mice are used as a model for this disease. Like a condition that this disease can lead to, this disease
has increased expression of its CR1 also known as RCAN1, which can inhibit calcineurin mediated VGEF
signaling. One method to check for this disease is looking for low PAPP-A levels. The sufferers of this
disease have oblique palpebral fissures is best and are likely to have Brushfield spots. Since sufferers of this
disease have increased production of a certain precursor protein, this disease causes early-in-life
Alzheimer's-like accumulation of Amyloid protein in neurons. Like other diseases of its type, it can be
caused by a Robertsonian translocation. Symptoms of this disease include flat facial features and mental
retardation. For 10 points, name this disease caused by having three copies of chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down's Syndrome [prompt on trisomy 21]
Among the phenotypes of this disease include a high incidence of endocardial cushion defects,
strabismus of the eyes, and duodenal atresia at birth. People with this disease have Brushfield spots on their
irises. This disease, called mongolism by its discoverer, is characterized by features such as a single crease
on palms and a small chin. For 10 points, name this disease, which is caused by a trisomy in chromosome
21 and is associated with mental retardation.
ANSWER: Down syndrome
Sufferers of this disease often have white spots on their eyes known as Brushfield spots. Jerome
Lejeune first discovered the biological cause of this disease. Sufferers of this were referred to by this
disease's namesake discoverer as (*) mongoloids. Other physical characteristics of this disease include
hands with only one crease and upward-slanting eyes. It is far more common in babies born to mothers over
40. The most common cause of mental retardation is, for 10 points, what genetic disorder caused by an
extra copy of chromosome 21?
ANSWER: Down syndrome [prompt on mongolism before "mongoloids"]
This disease is associated with an increased risk for Hirschsprung's disease. People with this
condition often have marks on their iris called Brushfield spots. Sufferers of it sometimes only have
one crease across their palm. Its occurrence in (*) newborns is correlated with higher maternal age, and
symptoms of this disease include an abnormally small chin, short stature, and limitations in mental
capacity. For 10 points, name this condition resulting from an extra chromosome 21.
ANSWER: Down syndrome [or Down's syndrome, or trisomy 21 until its mention]
During the development of this organism, the decapentaplegic gene is needed for patterning the
imaginal disks. In this organism, pumilio, vasa, staufen, and tudor are responsible for controlling the
position and expression of nanos, which controls posterior pattern formation. Gradients of hunchback,
caudal, and bicoid maternal effect genes in this organism are responsible for the activation of segment
polarity, gap, and pair-rule genes. Hox gene mutations in this organism include ultrabithorax, one in which
antennae are replaced by legs, and another in which compound eyes appear on the end of the legs. For 10
points, identify this model organism commonly used to study development, commonly known as the fruit
fly.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [prompt on fruit fly]
The lack of externally visible genitalia in this organism led to the naming of its Ken and Barbie genes, and
maternal effect genes involved in directing its anterior-posterior axis include bicoid and hunchback.
Mutations in the Antennapedia gene result in the growth of legs from the eyes in this organism and bithorax
is another possible mutation. Hybrid dysgenesis works through the P element common in wild type
individuals, while phenotypes Include cinnabar, sepia, and white eyes. For 10 points, name this model
organism that earned Thomas Hunt Morgan the Nobel Prize for his studies of inheritance, with scientific
name Drosophila melanogaster.
ANSWER: fruit fly [Accept Drosophila melanogaster before mention.]
In this organism, the MSL complex localizes to the X chromosome. During its development, the
anterior is specified by hunchback and bicoid and the posterior by nanos and caudal. Gap genes
activate pair-rule genes in their larvae, and lines of them carrying some recessive lethal mutations
are maintained using the TM3 balancer. This organism's salivary glands are a source of polytene
chromsomes, and a common transposon in these organisms is the P-element. Mutants of this
organism include ones with forked (*) bristles, bar-shaped eyes, and white eyes. This organism was used
to create the first linkage maps by Alfred Surtevant, a student Thomas Hunt Morgan. For 10 points, identify
this common model organism, an insect more commonly known as the fruit fly.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [or D melanogaster; accept fruit fly before mention; prompt on "fly", prompt on "melanogaster"]
The humorously named sonic hedgehog gene was first discovered in this organism's embryos, in which the
bicoid and hunchback genes facilitate its development from a syncytial blastoderm. The forelegs of its
males have bristles, or 'sex combs'. A mutation on the smallest of its four chromosomes eliminates its
ommatidia, leaving it eyeless, and Thomas Hunt Morgan studied gene linkage using its white-eyed mutant
form. For 10 points, identify this model organism in which one mutation switches legs with antennae, a
winged insect.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [accept fruit fly]
The first man credited with breeding these organisms was Charles W. Woodworth. Many of them were
found at a namesake room at Columbia University where they were raised inside milk bottles. One scientist
noted a white-eyed mutant male among all red-eyed types, leading to the use of these animals to study
heredity by Thomas Hunt Morgan. Their average development time is about 8 days. For 10 points, give the
family, species, or common name of this popular model organism, an insect noted for breeding quickly and
laying many eggs at a time.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [or Drosophilidae; or common fruit fly; or vinegar fly]
Some members of this genus, whose name derives from the Greek for "dew loving," include bifurca,
immigrans, and simulans. Bifurca is well known for having the longest sperm cells of any organism, while
the genes aubergine, cheap date, I'm not dead yet, and Antennapedia are affiliated with the more common
melanogaster variety. Thomas Hunt Morgan used this model organism to study epistasis and sex-linked
inheritance. FTP, name this genus that is commonly used for genetics research because of its high
reproduction rate and easy care.
ANSWER: Drosophila or fruit fly
Sex determination in this organism is controlled by the ratios of Sex-lethal and Deadpan genes,
which in turn are proportional to the ratio of X chromosomes to autosomes [AW-toh-sohmz]. Gap
and pair-rule genes were discovered in this organism; those genes are responsible for segmentation of
their bodies. The salivary glands of this organism contain oversized chromosomes, and this organism
contains transposons called P elements. The concept of sex-linked traits was proposed by Thomas
Hunt Morgan while researching white-eyed mutants of this organism. Name this model organism, an
insect in genus Drosophila.
ANSWER: fruit fly/ies [accept Drosophila melanogaster before "Drosophila"]
Enhancer traps are often used in combination with P-element induced mutagenesis in this organism.
Kruppel negatively regulates the pair-rule enhancer eve stripe 2 in this organism, which also contains
the morphogenic maternal effect gene bicoid discovered by Nusslein-Volhard and Wieschaus. In this
organism, serrate and delta ligands function in the Notch signaling pathway, which when mutated
produces abnormal macrochaetae. Particularly useful for the large polytene chromosomes found in its
salivary glands, its famous mutants include clock, shaker, ultrabithorax, and white-eyed. For 10 points,
name this model organism with four pairs of chromosomes that was studied by Thomas Hunt Morgan, a
genus of insect.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [or Drosophila melanogaster; or common fruit flies; or vinegar flies; prompt on flies]
The gene "mothers against decapentaplegic" (DECK-uh-PEN-tuh-PLEE-jick) was discovered in this
model organism. Genes such as bicoid (BI-coyd), oscar, and hunchback are important for its early
development, which takes place in a syncytium. One mutant of it is eyeless. Polytene (PAHL-ee-teen)
chromosomes can be found in this organism, as can P elements. Features of this organism includes bristles,
ommatidia (OM-muh-TID-ee-uh), and wings. Thomas Hunt Morgan did his primary genetic research on this
organism. For 10 points, name this insect model organism.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [or fruit fly]
This organism's salivary glands contain polytene chromosomes. Mismatched body parts in this
organism led to the discovery of hox genes. Hermann Joseph Muller won a Nobel Prize for using this
organism to demonstrate that X-rays can cause mutations. The first sex-linked mutation in this
organism was discovered by Thomas Hunt Morgan and involves the organism having (*) white eyes
instead of red eyes. Another mutation in this organism causes it to grow legs in place of antennae. For 10
points, name this model insect commonly known as the fruit fly.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [or D. melanogaster; or fruit fly until it is read]
Wild female genders of this organism exhibit an inhibitor to a transposon called the P element, which
leads to hybrid dysgenesis. They can have a gene called Sevenless which helps develop one of their
organs. Their Hox proteins code for their (*) thoracic segments, while Thomas Hunt Morgan studied
their possible phenotypes, which include ebony bodies, white eyes, and vestigial wings. For 10 points, name
this model organism, an insect under the genus Drosophila.
ANSWER: fruit fly [accept Drosophila melanogaster before mentioned] [
The genomes of many species in this genus, such as simulans and yakuba, have been completely
sequenced by Berkeley researchers. One member of this genus has the longest known sperm and is
called bifurca. Genders of members of this genus can be distinguished by their "sex combs," and
mutations include yellow, ebony, white-eyed, and dumpy. They were studied extensively to test Hugo
de Vries' mutation theory by Thomas Hunt Morgan. For 10 points, name this genus of common model
organism melanogaster, more commonly known as a fruit fly.
ANSWER: Drosophila [prompt on "fruit fly"]
This organism includes a receptor tyrosine kinase known as Sevenless, and another protein named
Boss, or Bride of Sevenless. Both of those proteins are found in its ommatidia. When this organism's
four chromosomes were sequenced in 2000, it became the first insect to have its genome sequenced.
Its white-eyed mutants were studied by Thomas Hunt Morgan. For 10 points, name this model
organism in genetics research, whose scientific name is Drosophila melanogaster.
ANSWER: fruit fly [accept Drosophila melanogaster before read]
Toll genes in this genus [JEE-nus] were studied by Nobel Prize winners Christiane Nusslein-Volhard
[NOOS-leen VOLE-hard] and Eric Wieschaus [WIESCH-haus], leading to a greater understanding of
innate immune systems. These are similar to, but less colorful than, Tephritidae [tef-ri-TEE-day]. Another
Nobel Prize winner to study this genus was Thomas Hunt Morgan, who demonstrated that genes control
heredity by studying the melanogaster [mehl-ah-no-GAS-ter] species. Because these grow to adulthood in
ten days, they are easily used to study genetic mutations. Name these insects commonly called fruit flies.
ANSWER: Drosophila (prompt on "fruit flies")
The proteins sevenless and bride of sevenless are necessary for the development of this organism's
compound eye, which contains eight photoreceptors in each ommatidium (OH-mah-TID-ee-um). The
theory of sex-linked genes was first put forth after studying the inheritance of eye color in this organism,
whose four-chromosome genome and one-month life cycle make it ideal in genetics research. For 10
points, Thomas Hunt Morgan's research concerned what insect with scientific name Drosophila
melanogaster (droh-SOFF-ill-uh meh-LAN-oh-gas-ter)?
ANSWER: common fruit fly [or vinegar fly; or Drosophila melanogaster before read; prompt on fly]
Like slime molds, this organism's blastoderm develops as a syncytium, a cell containing many nuclei, which
facilitates the injection of DNA into its nuclei. Its salivary glands contain polytene chromosomes, which
have distinctive patterns of dark and light bands, and form chromosome puffs in sections where gene
transcription is occurring, allowing visualization of gene activity. Its phenotypes, such as those resulting
from mutations studied by Thomas Hunt Morgan, include, white eyes, yellow or ebony bodies, or having
legs on its head in place of antenna. For 10 points, name this insect of genus Drosophila, a model organism
in biology.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster or common fruit fly (accept "Drosophila" before mentioned, answer requires "melanogaster" after Drosophila is mentioned)
Synapse formation in this organism may be aided by the 38,000 isoforms of the gene encoding for its
DSCAM cell adhesion molecule. A 1971 paper by Konopka and Benzer is about "clock mutants" of this
organism. A receptor tyrosine kinase needed for the development of R7 cells in this organism's eye is
encoded in the gene sevenless. The P element is a transposon found in this organism, which was studied by
Alfred Sturtevant and first extensively bred by Charles W. Woodworth. The presence of bar eyes and
notches in the wings of this organism are linked traits. For 10 points, name this model organism, a type of
fly used in experiments by Thomas Hunt Morgan.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [or fruit fly; or D. melanogaster]
Calvin Brides discovered mutant versions of this organism caused by gene duplication, and also found
that the chromosomes on its salivary glands are abnormally large. The theory of sex-linked characteristics
was first put forth to explain white eyes in this organism, which were being studied at Columbia by Thomas
Hunt Morgan. For 10 points, name this common laboratory animal, the subject of many basic inheritance
studies.
ANSWER: small fruit fly [or vinegar fly; or pomace fly; or Drosophila melanogaster; or D. melanogaster]
Proteins in this organism include sevenless and bride of sevenless, both of which are expressed in its
ommatidia. George Beadle discovered that eye color in this organism was determined by a series of
chemicals. Another scientist who worked with this organism showed that genes on chromosomes are
the basic units of (*) heredity. That scientist, who studied genetic linkage using this organism, was Thomas
Hunt Morgan. For 10 points, name this commonly used model organism in biology, with scientific name
Drosophila melanogaster.
ANSWER: fruit fly [or Drosophila melanogaster before mentioned]
This organism features class II transposons called P elements, which cause a form of temperature-dependent
sterility in its offspring called hybrid dysgenesis. Its blastoderm stage is a syncytium, allowing rapid uptake
of injected DNA. Its salivary glands have giant polytene chromosomes formed from repeated
endoreplication. Common mutations in this organism include antennapedia, though it is most associated
with sepia eyes or vestigial wings. The two-week life cycle and sequenced genome make, FTP, what insect
also called the fruit fly a great model organism?
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster (prompt on fruit fly before it is mentioned)
The Schneider 2 cell line is derived from the embryos of these organisms. A series of insulin-like
peptides are secreted from the IPC cells of this organism, which are located in the brain. Common
strains include Canton-S and Dahomey, and imaginal discs in the (*) embryos of this organism
eventually differentiate during its development, which is partly controlled by pair-rule and segment-polarity
genes. A common method of mutagenesis in these organisms is to inject a plasmid containing a reporter
gene and an autonomous P-element, which then inserts into the genome. Benzer's clock mutants were
originally mapped in this organism, as were potassium channel defects leading them to shake under
anesthetic. Also used to create the chromosomal theory of inheritance by Surtevant and Morgan, FTP, name
these insects often used in genetic studies, also known as fruit flies.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster (accept "Fruit Fly" early)
This organism was the subject of a 1971 paper showing that genes could directly influence behavior via
circadian cycles. Its oocytes are polarized by bicoid and other maternal-effect genes, thus establishing an
antero-posterior axis. The discovery of distal-less and other highly-conserved Hox genes in this organism
showed that segmentation was controlled by homeotic genes. In his experiments with these organisms,
Thomas Hunt Morgan proposed the crossing-over mechanism and also demonstrated the existence of sex-
linked genes by showing that only male ones could be white-eyed. For 10 points, name this short-lived
arthropod, a common model organism in genetic studies.
ANSWER: Drosophila melanogaster [or D. melanogaster; or the common fruit fly]
Susumu Ohno wrote a 1970 book that launched the study of the role this process plays in the evolution
of genomes; Ohno proposed that two rounds of this happened in the ancestor of vertebrates. The results of
this process can undergo subfunctionalization and neofunctionalization. The Bar phenotype in flies is a
result of this action. This genetic process is the cause of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type I a. This process
creates paralogs. If the result of this process is located adjacent to its source, it is said to be tandem. When
this process occurs to the entire genome, polyploidy results. For 10 points, name this process in which
additional copies of genetic material are created, and which thus contrasts with deletion.
ANSWER: duplication
An odd asymmetric form of this condition is characteristic of Russell-Silver syndrome. A defect in
the FGFR3 gene leads to the most common cause of this condition. Children born with a
cloverleaf-shaped skull often experience the thanatophoric form of this condition. This is the most
obvious physical effect of Laron Syndrome because of a defect in the pathway to make IGF-1. A
dominant autosomal disease called (*) achondroplasia results in this condition due to the inability of
sufferers to make cartilage for epiphyseal plates. The "proportional" form of this disorder is common in
Turner syndrome patients, and it may also be caused by hypothyroidism. For 10 points, name this condition
which can be caused by growth hormone deficiencies.
ANSWER: dwarfism [or word forms]
This condition is most commonly caused by a gain-of-function mutation on a fibroblast growth factor
receptor gene. That mutation results in abnormal inhibition of chondrocyte division, so the condition is
called achondroplasia. People with this condition can be proportional if it is caused by abnormally low
levels of pituitary growth hormone, but those with achondroplasia have only abnormally sized arms and
legs. For 10 points, give this condition in which a person is abnormally short.
ANSWER: dwarfism [prompt on reasonable synonyms for short people]
The first synthetic, organic type of these substances was discovered when aniline was oxidized using
potassium dichromate; that compound is called mauveine. Another one of these substances was used to
develop the "classical" model of DNA intercalators, and is a derivative of acrindine. Types of these
substances called safranin and crystal violet are used to determine the chemical properties of bacterial cell
walls in a process named for Christian Gram. For 10 points, name these chemicals that are used to color
their targets.
ANSWER: dyes [or stains; do not accept "pigments"]
A hole in a part of this organ can cause an infection to be classified as chronic suppurative. The front of this
organ has a bump called a tragus, while the back of its pinna is called its helix. The inside of this organ has
three semicircular canals, which are near its organ of Corti inside of its cochlea. Its bones, called ossicles,
are the smallest bones in the human body. They are the malleus, incus, and stapes, which are commonly
called the hammer, stirrup, and anvil. Name these sensory organs used for hearing.
ANSWER: ears (accept cochlea before end of first sentence)
One structure within this organ contains a void known as the space of Nuel; that structure is the organ of
Corti. The outermost portion of this organ is known as the pinna, and this organ is the only one in the body
to produce cerumen. While traveling through this organ one would encounter the cochlea after passing the
ossicles, three bones better known as the stirrup, hammer, and anvil. For 10 points, name this sensory organ
that contains a namesake "drum" and aids in balance and hearing?
ANSWER: ear
This organ's so-called "hair cells" are found in its Organ of Corti. One part of this organ is filled with a
fluid called the perilymph. The oval window of this organ separates the stapes from this organ's vestibule,
and its round window acts as a pressure valve. This organ contains three semi-circular canals and a cochlea,
and ossicles in this organ include the hammer, anvil and stirrup. The tympanic membrane separates the
"middle" part of this organ from its "external" part. For 10 points, name this sensory organ, parts of which
include its namesake canal and drum.
ANSWER: ears
One disorder of this body part is Meniere's (men-EER's) disease, which may be treated by destroying
part of it. One part of this feature is the auricle (OR-ick-uhl), which in humans may be called the pinna
(PIN-uh). Another component is the organ of Corti (COR-tee), which is made up of hair cells that respond
to vibrations in the cochlea. This structure also contains three bones called the hammer, anvil, and stirrup.
For 10 points, name this structure on the head that is responsible for hearing.
ANSWER: ear [or inner ear before "auricle" is read; or cochlea before "auricle" is read; prompt on organ of Corti before "auricle" is read]
Darwinian tubules are vestigial muscles found on this structure. This structure is affected by
Meniere's disease, and can also be damaged by ototoxins. Signals from this structure are sent
through the eighth cranial nerve by its organ of Corti. A waxy substance called cerumen forms in this
organ, and sensory information from this organ is processed by the (*) temporal lobe. Vertigo is caused
by problems in a snail-shaped part of it, and bones in this organ include the malleus and stapes, the latter of
which moves fluid within this structure's cochlea. Its tympanic membrane, also known as this organ's
"drum," is vibrated by sound waves. For ten points, name this auditory organ.
ANSWER: ears (prompt on specific parts of the ear like "cochlea" or "eardrum")
Roughly ten percent of people have Darwin's tubercle on this organ and another portion of it contains
the Organ of Corti. This structure contains the bony labyrinth which itself includes the semicircular canals,
three tubes which assist in motion. The "middle" of this structure contains bones such as the malleus,
incus, and stapes, and is connected to the Eustachian tubes and the cochlea. This structure also includes the
tympanic membrane, or its namesake "drum." For 10 points, identify this anatomical organ that detects
sound.
ANSWER: ear
A 2008 article by Saphire describes its cellular entry as forming a "chalice" of glycoprotein 1
subunits. VP40 and VP24 are located in the matrix space beyond its viral envelope, which features 10
nanometer structures whose function is key to recent vaccine research. Those spikeproteins allow this
(*) filovirus composed of a single strand of negative sense RNA to avoid immune recognition, leading to
the effects of this virus, which were witnessed in non-human primates in Reston, Virginia. Also manifesting
in Sudan and Zaire strains, for 10 points, identify this disease, a certain hemorrhagic fever.
ANSWER: Ebola Viral Hemorrhagic Fever [accept Ebola virus or EVHO]
Recent attempts to make a vaccine against it involved recombinant adenoviruses, and it is currently
characterized as a filovirus containing single stranded RNA with a protein coat covered in VP40, VP24, and
glycoprotein spikes. One of its characteristic symptoms is caused by a chemical reaction between the virus
and platelets in the blood, which cuts cell-shaped holes in capillary walls. Other symptoms of this disease
include high fever and abdominal cramps. FTP, name this Category A Bioterrorism agent with Zaire and
Reston subtypes and a 90% mortality rate that causes bleeding internally and out of orifices.
ANSWER: Ebola
One species from this phylum that has been shown to vary drastically in color depending on diet is
Pisaster ochraceus. Though not cnidarians, members of this family known as cidaroids have been
found to prey on its members from class Crinoidea. Tiedemann's bodies in these organisms produce
pinocytic cells called coelomocytes, and these organisms take in food through (*) madreporites. These
organisms' stone canals are an element of their water vascular system. These organisms also possess
ampullae that contract to extend tube feet, and they exhibit radial symmetry. For 10 points, name this
phylum whose name means "spiny-skinned," which includes sea urchins and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata
The coelom [see-lem] forms the haemal systems of members of this phylum, which is the second largest
phylum of deuterosomes. Some members of the Ophiuroidea class in this phylum have a double row of
ambulacra. Organisms in this phylum contain ampullae, which form tube feet, and a water vascular system.
All members of this phylum exhibit fivefold radial symmetry, and its name derives from the Greek for
"spiny skin." For 10 points, name this phylum, which includes sand dollars, sea urchins, and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata or Echinoderms
Their skeletal features include the "Aristotle's lantern" as well as the "lime ring." The larvae of these
organisms are bilaterally symmetric until their left side absorbs their right. This largest phylum to contain
only saltwater organisms is the second-largest group of deuterostomes. Many of these organisms, such as
the sea urchin and sea cucumber, possess fivefold radial symmetry. For ten points, name this phylum that
includes starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata
This phylum's skeleton is composed of miniscule networks of calcium carbonate known as stereom. These
animals possess ampullae in their tube feet, which is part of their water vascular system used for feeding,
moving, and breathing. Examples of this phylum include class Asteroidea. The only deuterostome phylum
other than the Chordates, for 10 points, name this phylum which includes sea urchins, starfish, and sand
dollars.
ANSWER: echinoderms [or echinodermata]
One grouping under this phylum, distinguished by a concentrically arranged skeleton, lives on waterlogged
wood and is called sea daisies. These animals possess snapping structures used to keep away small
organisms, the pedicellaria, as well as an ambulacral system, used for respiration, locomotion, and defense,
and based on water pressure. That water vascular system drives structures used for feeding and gas
exchange, the tube feet. This phylum's members have imperfect radial symmetry of five parts, and include
sea cucumbers, urchins, and sand dollars. Name this phylum that also includes the class asteroidea-sea
stars-with a name that comes from the Greek for "spiny skin".
ANSWER: echinodermata [or echinoderms]
One member of this phylum was the textbook "keystone organism," whose biological impact is large
proportionate to its biomass in an ecosystem. Members of this phylum have exterior "tube feet," which are
extensions of their water vascular systems. This phylum contains radially symmetric organisms like sea
cucumbers, sand dollars, and crinoids. For 10 points, name this animal phylum whose members include
starfish and sea urchins, the name of which means "spiny skinned."
ANSWER: echinodermata [or echinoderms]
Some members of this phylum possess pincer-like pedicellariae, and those species also possess a
madreporite plate and a ring canal. A calcium carbonate material called stereom forms skeletal
plates in organisms of this phylum, some members of which possess spines and a mouth called
"Aristotle's Lantern". Classes in this phylum include (*) crinoidea and asteroidea, and members of it
possess a water vascular system and tube feet for locomotion. Adult members of this phylum typically
exhibit five-way radial symmetry. For ten points, name this phylum of animals that includes sea urchins and
starfish.
ANSWER: echinodermata (accept echinoderms)
Classes within this phylum include Stylophora and Blastoidea. Aristotle's lantern is a chewing organ of
one member in this phylum, and most members possess a stone canal which connects to the madreporite to
help regulate water balance. They include the class Asteroidea. Aside from the water vascular system,
members of this phylum possess tube feet and pentaradial symmetry. For 10 points, identify this phylum
that includes sea urchins and starfish.
ANSWER: echinodermata
One species from this phylum begins life in the bipinnaria stage, which is usually followed by a
brachiolaria stage. Members of this phylum possess an opening to filter water called the madreporite, which
is a feature of this phylum's water vascular system. The act of harvesting one class of organisms in this
phylum is called "trepanging." This phylum is the second-largest grouping of deuterostomes after Chordata.
For 10 points, identify this phylum of marine animals possessing radial symmetry, examples of which
include sea urchins and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [or echinoderms]
Cryptasterina hystera is a rare example of a viviparous organism in this phylum. The skeletal plates of
creatures in this phylum are made up of fine networks of calcium carbonate known as stereom. One member
of this phylum, the Xyloplax [ZY-lo-plax], may represent a sixth class, but it may just be an unusual
member of the Asteroidea class. Nearly all of its members are benthic, including sea lilies and sea
cucumbers. They have a water vascular system, and many members move via tube feet. For 10 points, name
this phylum of "spiny-skinned" creatures, including sand dollars, sea urchins, and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata or echinoderm
One class in this phylum traps food in mucus and uses cilia to move it down an ambulacral groove to the
mouth. That class is named Crinoidea. In members of this phylum, sclerocytes secrete calcium carbonate to
form the ossicles that make up their outer covering. In order to move, members of this phylum use ampullae
that squeeze water into tube feet connected to a water vascular system. This phylum, characterized by radial
symmetry, contains the classes Holothuroidea and Asteroidea. For 10 points, name this phylum of animals
whose name is Greek for "spiny skin" and which includes animals such as sand dollars, sea urchins, and
starfish.
ANSWER: echinodermata [or echinoderms]
Some animals in this phylum have small skeletal-like projections called pedicellaria. Animals in this
phylum that can be fossilized to form St. Cuthbert's beads are called crinoids. Scientists sometimes
only classify animals in this phylum if they contain stereom skeletons. The feet of animals in this
phylum, which contain ampulla and podia, are called tube feet. One of its subphyla is asterozoa,
many of which have a five-point radial symmetry, while examples of these without such symmetry
include sea urchins and sea cucumbers. Name this animal phylum whose members tend to be good at
regeneration, and which includes starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [or echinoderms]
Organisms in this phylum have pincer-like structures called pedicellariae (PED-ee-sell-AIR-ee-ay).
One species in this phylum has a set of large teeth arranged in "Aristotle's lantern." Some members
of this phylum contain a petalidium, a pattern of ambulacral plates through which tube feet project.
A sieve plate called a madreporite is the entry point to the (*) water vascular system, which serves as
the respiratory system for most members of this phylum. For 10 points, name this phylum in which adults
have pentaradial symmetry, which includes sea urchins, sea cucumbers, and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [or echinoderms]
Classes within this phylum include Holothuroidea and Crinoidea. Members of this phylum possess
ambulacral grooves that assist in food transport and locomotion as well as ampullae and tube feet, a
system known as the (*) water vascular system. Members of the most well-known class are known for their
ability to regenerate lost arms. This phylum takes its name from the Greek for "spiny skin." For 10 points,
name this marine phylum which includes sea urchins, sand dollars, and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [or echinoderms]
Some members of this phylum keep their bodies clean through the use of pedicellaria
(pe-deh-sell-AIR-ee-uh). Many members of this phylum exhibit pentaradial symmetry. Its species have a
system of interlocking calcium carbonate plates called stereom. Creatures in it have tube feet called podia.
Podia are found at the end of this phylum's main method of movement and respiration, the water-vascular
system. For 10 points, name this phylum of sea cucumbers and starfish, which has a Greek name to describe
members' spiny skin.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [or echinoderms]
Some members of this phylum exhibit pincer-like organs called pedicellariae. The larval development of
members of this phylum includes a shift from bilateral symmetry to radial symmetry. Some members of this
phylum consume their food using a structure known as Aristotle's lantern, and members of this phylum use
tube feet powered by the water-vascular system. For 10 points, name this phylum of aquatic animals which
includes sea cucumbers, sea urchins, and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [or Echinoderms]
Larvae of creatures in this phylum can be lecithotrophic or planktotrophic. Some species in this
phylum possess pedicellariae, and one organism in this phylum has contributed extensively to coral reef
destruction by eating coral polyps. One class in this phylum can eject its internal organs to deter
predators, and these organisms possess water vascular systems. Along with Chordata, members of this
phylum are deuterostomes, and all members have radial symmetry. For 10 points, name this phylum that
includes animals like sea cucumbers and starfish.
ANSWER: echinodermata
The relationship of the Pisaster organism in this phylum to the California mussel was used by Robert Paine
to define the term "keystone species." These organisms possess a system that allows them to feed and move
that is based on a central hydrocoel, from which emerge ambulacra, which lead to this phylum's
characteristic "tube feet." In addition to their water vascular system, organisms in this phylum possess radial
symmetry. This phylum encompasses such organisms as crinoids, cucumbers, urchins, and sand dollars. For
10 points, name this phylum that contains starfish, a phylum named for the "spiny skin" of its members.
ANSWER: echinodermata [accept echinoderms]
Members of this phylum contain a network of birefringent calcium carbonate crystals along its
skeleton, and the structure of the ossicles in it is called the stereom. The madreporite is a perforated plate
which is connected to the stone canal in the water vascular system of these organisms, which usually move
using five rows of tubed feet. This phylum includes classes like Asteroidia and Holothuroidea, and all
members exhibit radial symmetry. For 10 points, identify this phylum, whose name means "spiny skinned"
and is exemplified by sea urchins and starfish.
ANSWER: echinodermata
The Homalozoa are an unusual species in this phylum because they are secondarily bilateral, and
scholarly debate exists over whether this phylum's asteroidea and ophiuroidea form the same clade.
One of these species discharges parts of its organs when under attack and also uses sticky threads as
a defense mechanism. The arrangement of the mouth on one of these creatures is known as
Aristotle's lantern. They contain sensors at the end of their podia or tubed feet, which are connected to
their water vascular system. For 10 points each, identify this phylum whose members exhibit radial
symmetry, a phylum that includes sea cucumbers and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata (or Echinoderms)
This phylum's members have a pair of pouches that split from the archenteron, with each pouch constricting
into three portions. Members of this phylum draw in water through madreporites, which are a part of their
water vascular system, and they move by utilizing hydrostatic pressure to move five rows of tube feet. Some
species in this phylum have their teeth arranged in a structure called "Aristotle's lantern." This phylum
includes the classes Holothuroidea and Asteroida, and species in this phylum exhibit radial symmetry. For
10 points, identify this phylum which includes sea urchins and sea star, whose name means "spiny skin" in
Greek.
ANSWER: Echinodermata
One member of this phylum was used by Robert T. Paine as the first example of a keystone species.
That member is Pisaster ochraceus (pih-SAHS-turr oh-KRAH-see-us). Another member of this phylum
creates namesake "barrens" by devouring all the kelp in an area when they are not kept in check by sea
otters. Members of this phylum use madreporites (mah-dreh-PORE-ites) to filter water for their water
vascular systems. Members of this phylum exhibits bilateral symmetry as larvae, but pentaradial symmetry
as adults. For 10 points, name this marine phylum that includes sea cucumbers and starfish.
ANSWER: echinoderms (ee-KIE-noh-derms) [or Echinodermata]
One member of this phylum can decimate corals in the Great Barrier Reef and is known as the
"crown-of-thorns". Another member of this phylum in the genus Pisaster was the model organism for
the concept of keystone predators. These organisms draw water through the madreporite, which then
passes into the (*) stone canal and then the ring canal in its water vascular system. This phylum is the
second largest grouping of deuterostomes, and organisms have the power of regeneration of tissue, organs,
and limbs. For 10 points, name this phylum with fivefold radial symmetry, examples of which include sea
stars.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [or echinoderms]
One class in this phylum can projectile-vomit its organs and is called Holothuroidea; another class is
called Ophiuroidea. Members of this phylum often use ampulla to move and, like Chordata, are
deuterostomes. A structure known as stereom [*] often gives members of this phylum a calcified
endoskeleton, and the madreporite is connected to their tube feet within the water vascular system. For 10
points, name this animal phylum generally expressing pentaradial symmetry, which includes sea stars and
sea urchins and is named for their spiny skin.
ANSWER: Echinodermata or echinoderms
One member of this phylum, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, is often used to study developmental
processes, and another, Pisaster ochraceus, is an example of a keystone species. Most members of this
phylum have pedicellariae that possess three jaws, and some have a chewing apparatus known as Aristotle's
lantern. Members of class Asteroidea of this phylum have an ambulacral groove, and the madreporite is the
entrance to their water vascular system that includes tube feet. FTP name this phylum whose "spiny
skinned" members have radial symmetry and include sand dollars, sea urchins, and sea stars.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [accept echinoderms]
The purple example of one member in this phylum is a prominent member of West Coast kelp
forest communities and is consumed by sea otters. Members of this phylum possess tube feet known
as podia, as well as a red or yellow plate called a madreporite, which is connected to the stone canal
of its water vascular system. This phylum exhibits (*) radial symmetry and its class Asteroidea can
regenerate limbs. For 10 points, name this phylum of "spiny-skinned" organisms, including sea urchins and
starfish.
ANSWER: echinoderms [or Echinodermata]
Though organisms in this phylum have a central nerve ring around the gut, no organism in this
phylum contains a brain. This phylum's excretory system is linked to the circulatory system, and
opens into the environment at the madreporite (MAD-ruh-POR-ite). Organisms in this phylum
contain (*) tubefeet, which are part of the water vascular system. This phylum contains the simplest
deuterostomes (DOO-ter-oh-STOMEZ). The adults of all members of this phylum are pentaradially
symmetrical. For 10 points, name this phylum that contains sea urchins and starfish.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [or echinoderms]
One member of this phylum is Arbacia punctulata, a model organism commonly studied by developmental
biologists because its eggs are transparent. Some members of this phylum can chew through stone with an
organ known as "Aristotle's lantern," and members of this phylum have skeletons formed of calcite ossicles.
The ampulla and podia make up their (*) tube feet, which, along with the madreporite, are a component of
their water vascular system. These deuterostomes exhibit bilateral symmetry in their larvae, in contrast to
their radially symmetric adult forms. For 10 points, name this phylum of spiny skinned invertebrates that
includes sea cucumbers and sea urchins.
ANSWER: echinoderms or echinodermata
The skin of organisms in this phylum is embedded with small calcareous (CAL-suh-riss) ossicles.
The mouth of a group of organisms in this phylum was described by Aristotle and is known as his
namesake "lantern". A madreporite (MAD-rep-ore-ite) allows fluid into a structure characteristic to
this phylum, which then runs through the (*) stone canal. Connected tube feet make up this phylum's
water vascular system, enabling members to move across the ocean floor. For 10 points, identify this
phylum of "spiny-skinned" marine animals such as starfish and sea urchins.
ANSWER: echinodermata [or echinoderms]
Members of this phylum lack a formal excretory system, so they release waste in the form of
ammonia from their surfaces. Examples of members from this phylum include the Ophiuroidea and
asterozoa, and their ancestors were bilateral with a coelom consisting of three separate spaces. Like
Chordata, they are (*) deuterostomes, and their mesodermal skeletons contain plates called ossicles. Their
water vascular system allows them to utilize tube feet for locomotion, and species in this phylum exhibit
pentaradial symmetry. For ten points, name this animal phylum that contains sea urchins and starfish, named
for their "spiny skin."
ANSWER: Echinodermata
Some members of this phylum use podicellaria for locomotion and feed on organisms using a body part
called the lantern of Aristotle. This phylum of organisms is the first to have a true endoskeleton made from
mesodermal cells. The oldest members of this phylum are crinoids, and other groups of them include
ophiuroids and holothuroids. These organisms move and breathe by pumping material through a sieve plate
into a stone canal, which provides locomotion to their tube feet. Typically, these organisms make use of a
water vascular system and exhibit pentaradial symmetry. For 10 points, name this invertebrate phylum that
includes sea urchins and starfish.
ANSWER: echinoderms [Accept echinodermata]
One class in this phylum uses a structure known as Aristotle's lantern to eat. Organisms in this
phylum have calcium carbonate ossicles in a stereom structure, and the ampulla and podium make
up their characteristic (*) tube feet. Tube feet branch off from radial and ring canals in this phylum's
water vascular system, which is used for movement, feeding, and gas exchange. Like the chordates, they are
deuterostomes. The sea cucumbers and Asteroidea demonstrate this phylum's characteristic five-way radial
symmetry, as do the sea urchins. For 10 points, identify this invertebrate phylum named for its spiny skin.
ANSWER: Echinodermata [accept echinoderms]
A member of this phylum was at the center of Robert Paine's 1966 paper that introduced the
concept of the keystone species. This phylum's members A. punctulata and S. purpuratus are widely
used as model organisms in developmental biology. A characteristic feature of this phylum is centered
on the hydrocoel and contains extensions known as ambulacra. That feature of this phylum culminates
in tube feet and is called the water vascular system. For 10 points, name this phylum whose members
include sea cucumbers, sea urchins, and starfish.
ANSWER: echinodermata
A part of this tissue layer turns into the otic [OH-tik] vesicle and otic placode, which in turn form the
sacculus and cochlea [KOHK-lee-uh] in the inner ear. One part of this layer forms the lacrimal gland and
optic diverticulum, while another part forms the lens, making this layer primarily responsible for forming
the eye. The first of the three germ cell layers to develop in an embryo, it is responsible for the
integumentary system. Two parts of this are the neural crest and neural tube, which form most of the
nervous system. Name this most distal layer in developing embryos, located outside the mesoderm and
endoderm.
ANSWER: ectoderm
One common treatment for this condition is salpingectomy, and it is commonly detected by culdocentesis
and confirmed via laparascopy. The daughters of women who used DES while pregnant are more likely to
experience one of these, and it may be caused by complications called PIDs commonly resulting from
gonorrhea or chlamydia. Often signalled by unexpectedly low levels of hCG, while IUDs do not lead to an
increased risk of these, they do make all others impossible. Hepatic ones are known, if very rare, and while
they may take place within the abdominal cavity, they typically occur in one of the fallopian tubes. For 10
points, name this medical condition in which a zygote implants outside the uterus.
ANSWER: ectopic pregnancy [prompt on tubal pregnancy before "abdominal cavity" is read]
Scientists debate whether the extinct goat Myotragus balearicus had this property, which is often associated
with lammellar-zonal bone. Animals with this property generally have Q-ten values greater than one, and
their energy expenditure is calculated in terms of standard metabolic rate. Many animals of this type
generate cryoprotectants in cold regions, and pupfish are an unusual example of this property because they
use desert hotsprings to maintain a consistent environment. Inward blood circulation in marine iguanas and
basking in alligators are two adaptations to this property seen in reptiles. Identify this property,
characteristic of fish and amphibians, which requires certain animals to absorb heat from their surroundings
in order to regulate body temperature.
ANSWER: ectothermic [or poikilothermic; accept cold-blooded, but inform players that they properly should use "ectothermic"]
In plants, this problem also known as corky scab or dropsy is more likely when there is warm soil and
humid air. Often occurring in succulents, it is characterized by water-soaked blisters that can rupture or
become sunken. In humans, it can be a sign of congestive heart failure or kidney disease, though it is often
caused by pregnancy or eating salty food. It is characterized by puffiness under the skin, and a dimple often
remains after you push on somebody who has this condition. Name this swelling caused by excess fluid.
ANSWER: edema
It is the basis for the sequenator, whose 99% efficiency allows 50 cycles to proceed without too many
impurities. This procedure reacts phenylisothiocyanate with the N-terminus, resulting in a thiourea
functional group that is then treated with acid to form a phenylthio-hydantoin derivative that
separates from the chain. After purifying, the remaining peptide fragment goes through this process
again, allowing all amino acid residues to be sequenced. For ten points, name this procedure improving
upon Sanger degradation.
ANSWER: Edman degradation
The nucleolus of these cells is called the germinal spot. In plants, these cells are produced by the
archegonium. These cells divide into four smaller cells, three of which have small amounts of
cytoplasm and are called polar bodies. The outer membrane of these cells, called the zona pellucida,
is where the acrosome reaction occurs. They're not neurons, but these are the (*) largest cells in the
human body. These haploid cells form a zygote after being fertilized by their counterparts, sperm. For 10
points, name these female gametes produced in the ovaries.
ANSWER: egg cells [or ovum; or ova; or oocytes; or ovocytes; or ovarian follicles; prompt on gametocyte; prompt on gametes]
An experiment with some of these cells extracted from sea urchins showed that a surge of calcium ions
through these cells preceded the formation of an envelope around them. These cells are produced by the
archegonium in some plants. In humans, the zona pellucida surrounding this cell is hardened by the cortical
reaction after being broken down by the acrosomes of another cell. During cytokinesis in animals, this cell
receives most of the cytoplasm and thus results in the creation of polar bodies. The corpus luteum forms and
secretes estrogen after this cell finishes developing in the ovarian follicle. For 10 points, identify this
haploid cell which is fertilized by sperm.
ANSWER: egg cells [or eggs; or ovum; or oocytes; prompt on "gamete"]
A thick transparent membrane that surrounds one of these cells, called the zona pellucida, is surrounded by
the cells of the corona radiata. These cells are excreted along with torn patches of cumulus tissue by the
rupturing of the outer wall of a structure named for Graaf. Each one of these cells is formed along with three
polar bodies. When these cells are discarded, a corpus albicans forms from a corpus luteum and one of
these cells is expelled through the vagina via menstruation. For 10 points, name these female haploid
gametes that are fertilized by sperm.
ANSWER: egg cells [or eggs; or ova; or ovum; or oocyte; or ovocyte; prompt on gamete or gametophyte or ovarian follicle]
This cell is surrounded by the corona radiata, which supplies proteins to it. It is also protected by the
zona pellucida, which allows for the acrosome reaction to take place. Polar bodies exist inside of these
cells. Around a day after a surge of Luteinizing Hormone, this cell is released from its site of production.
That event ends the follicular phase of a cycle involving the discharge of this cell. For 10 points, name this
female gamete, a reproductive cell that is fertilized by sperm.
ANSWER: ovum [or egg cell]
The nucleus of an immature one of these cells is called a germinal vesicle, and one of these structures
is released during the luteinizing hormone surge. They mature through oogenesis, and these cells
contribute all organelles to the (*) zygote. Polar bodies result during the development of this cell, but it is
shed with the uterine lining in menstruation. For 10 points, name this cell that combines with the sperm in
fertilization, the female sex cell.
ANSWER: Ovum (accept ova or egg cell)
Okadaic acid induces GVBD in these cells, committing them to enter M phase. In zebrafish, activin
stimulates maturation of these cells during their quiescent period. These cells are pierced by
micropipets during ICSI, which sometimes employs a GnRH-agonist. The vitelline membrane
surrounds large examples of these cells that can be microinjected with cRNA in Xenopus. In mammals,
these cells are surrounded by the zona pellucida. Androstenedione from the theca is reduced by aromatase
in the granulosa cells that form the follicle surrounding these cells after they are stimulated by FSH. They
are produced in a process that also makes three polar bodies. For 10 points, name these female gametes that
form a zygote by being fertilized with sperm.
ANSWER: egg cells [or ovum; or ova; or oocytes; or ovocytes; or ovarian follicles; prompt on gametes; prompt on gametocytes; prompt on germ cells]
The output of this technique is calculated from three vectors that form Einthoven's triangle. Common
versions of this technique have three, five, or twelve leads. Fibrillation is diagnosed using this technique by
the absence of distinct P waves. The time between QRS complexes measured using this technique gives the
heart rate. For 10 points, name this technique that measures the electrical activity of the heart.
ANSWER: electrocardiography [or electrocardiogram; or ECG; or EKG; do not accept "echocardiogram"]
A popular guide to this technique was written by Dale Dubin, and a delta wave in this technique is
indicative of Wolf-Parkinson-White Syndrome. In this technique, a readout of right-axis deviation is
common in children and those with situs inversus, while left-axis deviation is common in pregnant
women. Both the Mobitz II and Wenckebach conditions are commonly detected using this technique,
which consists of readouts V1 through V6, readouts aVL, avR, avF and readouts I through III. The
Holter monitor is a 24-hour version of this instrument. Each readout in this technique contains a P wave, a
QRS complex, and a T wave, and it is commonly used to detect arrhythmias, blocks, and any issues with the
Bundle of His. For 10 points, name this medical technique which monitors the electrical signals generated
by the heart.
ANSWER: Electrocardiogram or ECG or EKG
Secondary detectors used with these devices usually consist of a scintillator in a Faraday cage and
were pioneered by Everhart and Thornly. Negative stains for using these devices include uranyl
acetate or phosphotungstic acid. Their remarkable properties arise because they are not subject to
the same (*) diffraction limit as their more mundane counterparts. Only extremely thin sections could be
used in their original "transmission" form; more recent types include the "scanning" form. For 10 points,
name these devices, which use the namesake particles to visualize smaller features than their optical
counterparts can.
ANSWER: electron microscopes [prompt on microscopes; do not accept "optical microscopes"]
Devitrification is used in the "cyro" version of this technique, which can use uranyl acetate as a
negative stain. Glutaraldehyde and osmium tetroxide are common preparatory agents in this
technique. Single-particle reconstruction can be performed in one version of this technique, which
sometimes requires an ultramicrotome for sample preparation. The apparatus in this technique
contains a pair of condenser apertures, which serve as (*) lenses. One variety of it coats the sample in
gold to analyze its surface, while another variety requires the samples to be thin-sliced. Those are the
scanning and transmission varieties. For 10 points, name this technique that gives higher magnification than
light microscopy by using negatively-charged particles.
ANSWER: EM or electron microscopy [accept more specific answers, prompt on "microscopy"]
Samples prepared for this process are often either stained with uranyl acetate, or are adsorbed to metal,
which is then dissolved by acid. Since most biological specimens are destroyed by this technique, it often
takes place at "cryo" temperatures. Samples for this process are often sliced into thin pieces and coated in
gold. This technique can determine the morphology of a surface in its "scanning" variant. Both that type and
the "transmission" form of this technique use particles with shorter de Broglie wavelengths than photons.
For 10 points, name this technique which fires a beam of negatively charged particles to magnify images.
ANSWER: electron microscopy [or EM; or scanning electron microscopy or SEM; or transmission electron microscopy or TEM; or cryoelectron microscopy; accept "microscopes" instead of "microscopy"; prompt on just "microscopes" or "microscopy"]
One version of this technique is aided by collecting an EELS spectrum. Uranyl acetate is used in
negative-staining protocols for this procedure, and samples are preferentially prepared in vitreous
ice for one version of this technique. A cryogenic version of this technique can be used in
single-particle reconstruction. One type of this technique requires using a microtome to take sections,
while another requires (*) coating the surface of the sample with a metal. Aberration limits the resolution
of this technique to around 2 picometers, which is much better than techniques using light. For 10 points,
name this technique which comes in scanning and transmission varieties, which uses negatively-charged
particles to image sub-cellular structures.
ANSWER: electron microscopy [or EM; prompt on "microscopy"; accept more specific answers like scanning electron microscopy or transmission electron microscopy before mentioned]
A mutation in one component involved in this process results in the degeneration of retinal ganglion
cells in young adult men in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy. An end product of this process is
eliminated in brown adipose tissue by the uncoupler thermogenin. Azide, carbon monoxide, and
cyanide inhibit enzymes involved in this process. In this process, the (*) Q cycle is followed by the
reduction of cytochrome c, and oxygen is the final acceptor. This process uses 2 molecules of FADH2 and
10 molecules of NADH and involves four complexes. For 10 points, name this process, part of eukaryotic
oxidative phosphorylation, in which negative charge is shuttled across the inner mitochondrial membrane,
followed by lots of ATP production.
ANSWER: electron transport chain [accept ETC; prompt on cellular respiration; prompt on oxidative phosphorylation]
Rotenone can block one part of this pathway, and superoxides can erroneously form in its first and third
sites. Iron-sulfur clusters act as carriers in it for the protonated form of Flavin mononucleotides, which are
transferred to another protein to form semiquinone. In it, succinate is converted to fumarate prior to the
formation of cytochrome c, which an eponymous oxidase alters to enable the formation of two water
molecules. It ultimately involves the movement of four protons across the inner membrane of the
mitochondria, thereby creating a proton gradient capable of powering the synthesis of ATP. For 10 points,
name this series of complexes responsible for oxidative phosphorylation in eukaryotes, often abbreviated
ETC.
ANSWER: electron transport chain [or "ETC" before it is mentioned; prompt on oxidative phosphorylation but do not accept "Krebs cycle" or "Citric acid cycle"]
2,4-dinitrophenol acts as an inhibitor of this process, as do all uncouplers. Some steps of this process are
catalyzed by the iron-sulfur proteins. This process sees the reduction of ubiquinone, and many steps in this
process involve a cytochrome. This process creates a proton gradient across the inner membrane of the
mitochondrion through a series of redox reactions initiated by the conversion of NADH to NAD+. For 10
points, name this chemical pathway which comes after glycolysis and the Krebs cycle which produces large
amounts of energy in the form of ATP.
ANSWER: electron transport chain [ETC, also accept oxidative phosphorylation, prompt on "ATP synthesis" or any equivalents describing making ATP before mention, prompt on "chemiosmosis"]
One component of this pathway, cytochrome oxidase, holds an O2 molecule at its iron-copper active
site until it is reduced and turned into water. In this pathway, an enzyme with F0 and F1 components has a
rotor powered by the movement of protons through a membrane. This pathway makes use of the NADH
and succinate produced by the citric acid cycle, producing 34 molecules of ATP. For 10 points, name this
pathway, a part of cellular respiration that produces ATP through the movement of negatively-charged
particles.
ANSWER: the electron transport chain [prompt on cellular respiration]
A dehydrogenase, a quinone pool, and a cytochrome carrier mark three entry levels in this process
for bacteria, which is generalized as branched, modular, and inducible. In eukaryotes, Coenzyme Q
transfers substrates to cytochrome bc1, which then transfers substrates to cytochrome C. Antimycin
and rotenone inhibit this process, while molecular oxygen usually serves as the primary (*) acceptor.
This process produces two molecules of water, and NADH and FADH2 feed into this process from the
Krebs cycle. For ten points, name this process that takes place in the mitochondrial inner membrane, which
synthesizes 32 ATP by shuttling the namesake particles.
ANSWER: Electron Transport Chain
A dehydrogenase, a quinone pool, and a cytochrome carrier mark three entry levels in this process
for bacteria, which is generalized as branched, modular, and inducible. In eukaryotes, Coenzyme Q
transfers substrates to cytochrome bc1, which then transfers substrates to cytochrome C. Antimycin
and rotenone inhibit this process, while molecular oxygen usually serves as the primary (*) acceptor.
This process produces two molecules of water, and NADH and FADH2 feed into this process from the
Krebs cycle. For ten points, name this process that takes place in the mitochondrial inner membrane, which
synthesizes 32 ATP by shuttling the namesake particles.
ANSWER: Electron Transport Chain
Thermogenin [THUR-moh-JEN-in] was given the name "uncoupling protein" due to its
effects on this process. This pathway contains transfers through coenzyme Q and
cytochrome ["SIGH"-toh-"chrome"] c, and it ends with an enzyme containing FO ["F sub O"] and
F1 ["F sub one"] components. This redox series begins in thylakoid membranes after water is split
during the light reactions. This energy transfer process creates a proton gradient to power ATP
synthase, and uses FADH2 ["F-A-D-H-two"] and NADH ["N-A-D-H"] from the Krebs cycle to provide
its namesake particles. Name this portion of aerobic respiration that harnesses the flow of negative
particles to generate ATP.
ANSWER: electron transport chain [accept oxidative phosphorylation or ETC; prompt on (aerobic) cellular respiration before "thylakoid"]
This process involves four main complexes consisting of proteins like succinate [SUCKS-sin-ate]
dehydrogenase and cytochrome bc1. Peter Mitchell proposed that this process is at the center of the
chemiosmotic (KIM-eye-oz-motic) theory, in which a gradient across the mitochondrial membrane pumps
protons, which in turn drives the production of ATP. For 10 points, name this cellular process which
involves the movement of a certain negatively charged particle.
ANSWER: electron transport chain
Some plants create an alternative version of this process via the use of the AOX protein, and GLDH
interfaces with this pathway during ascorbate synthesis. This process is disrupted by the protein
thermogenin and the chemical FCCP, and the antibiotics Rotenone and Antimycin A were used to elucidate
this process. Molecules can enter this pathway via either succinate dehydrogenase or a ubiquinone
oxoreductase, and the next steps involve Coenzyme Q and cytochrome c. Used to generate a proton gradient
across the inner mitochondrial membrane, FTP, name this set of chemical reactions which follows the Krebs
Cycle and produces ATP by the use of a donor and acceptor of negatively charged atoms.
ANSWER: Electron Transport Chain [accept oxidative phosphorylation]
Reactive oxygen species generated by one structure in this process are required for activation of
hypoxia inducible factor. One protein in this process is notable among its family for being water
soluble and functions through oxidation and reduction of its central iron atom. Oligomycin inhibits
one enzyme involved in this process. Peter Mitchell proposed his (*) chemiosmotic theory to explain
how a certain enzyme with F1 and Fo subunits was powered. Coenzyme Q acts as a transporter to complex
III in this process. This process involves the oxidation of NADH and FADH2 to create a proton gradient.
For 10 points, name this apparatus in the mitochondria that drives ATP synthesis by shuttling around its
namesake charged particles.
ANSWER: electron transport chain (accept oxidative phosphorylation before mention)
It can be decoupled by compounds such as 2,4-di-nitro-phenol and FCCP or the protein thermogenin,
whereas Rotenon and Antimycin inhibit it. Diseases such as Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy and
MERRF occur due to mutations in genes which control this process. The Krebs cycle uses a same
enzyme as one used in it, succinate dehydrogenase, and it sees coenzyme Q and cytochrome C mediate its
namesake particle transfer. Resulting in the formation of a proton gradient, for 10 points, name this
respiratory process which uses the gradient to power the addition of a phosphate group to ADP by ATP
synthase and also sees the formation of water.
ANSWER: oxidative phosphorylation [or electron transport chain; or ETC]
The antibiotic rotenone inhibits one step of this process, whose final protein has an oligomycin
sensitive region. This process sees a protein containing an iron-sulfur cluster interact with a semiquinone
intermediate. Coenzyme Q is responsible for transferring substrates to the cytochrome bc1 complex in this
process, which then transfers those substrates to cytochrome c oxidase. Peter Mitchell showed that this
process operates by chemiosmosis, in which a proton gradient drives the rotation of ATP synthase. NADH
and FADH2 from the Krebs cycle feed into this process, which occurs on the inner membrane of the
mitochondria. For 10 points, name this final step of oxidative phosphorylation in which 32 ATP are
synthesized by moving namesake negatively charged particles from one complex to another.
ANSWER: Electron transport chain [prompt on oxidative phosphorylation; prompt on aerobic respiration; prompt on ATP synthesis]
One variant of this assay developed by Czerkinsky is used to find cells that release particular cytokines
by spotting cells onto a membrane. Plates used for this procedure can be used to pan phage display
libraries. Like a western blot, this assay can use bovine serum albumin as a blocking agent. The results of
this assay are often reported as an index value with a pre-set cutoff. This assay can be made quantitative if a
checkerboard titration is used beforehand. Variations of this assay include one in which antigen is added to
an adsorbed antibody and another in which serum is added on top of already-adsorbed antigen; those are
the sandwich and indirect forms. This assay uses a microtiter plate. For 10 points, name this assay used to
find serum antibody concentrations or the presence of a particular antigen, commonly known by a
five-letter acronym.
ANSWER: ELISA [or Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay; or ELISPOT]
The variety of this named for Powassan, Ontario is transmitted by ticks, and the California variety is
transmitted by mosquitoes, just like varieties known as St. Louis, Murray Valley, and Japanese. Another
variety of this is caused by the bacteria Balamuthia mandrillaris, as opposed to by a virus. Symptoms may
include headache and fever, but more characteristic symptoms include photophobia, drowsiness, physical
weakness, disorientation, seizures and hallucinations, and one form of this was temporarily relieved by
Oliver Sacks' administration of L-dopa. For 10 points, name this condition most often caused in humans by
the Herpes simplex viruses, an inflammation of the brain tissue.
ANSWER: encephalitis [accept encephalitis virus before "bacteria"]
Molecular export from this structure is prevented by retention sequences like KDEL. Vesicles are
targeted to this organelle by COPI, and N-linked precursor oligosaccharides are key to one of its
functions. One type of this organelle contains large amounts of calcium and mediates skeletal muscle
(*) contraction. Grp78 and PDI are two major chaperone proteins located in this organelle. Lipid synthesis,
glycosylation, and folding and tagging of proteins all occur in this organelle. For 10 points, name this
organelle that is continuous with the cell membrane and comes in "rough" and "smooth" varieties.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum
Sec 61 alpha is part of the nonpeptidase partion of its translocon, which is joined to an alpha SRP
receptor that binds the hinged signal recognition particle GTPase on a ribosome. A dolichol
phosphate carrier is flipped from its cytosolic to its luminal side, serving as a scaffold assembly for
various oligosaccharides before they are transferred to an asparagine residue on nascent polypeptides. Site
of synthesis of mucoproteins in the intestine, serum proteins in the liver, and steroids in the smooth
derviative, For ten points, name this membranous organelle where post-translational modification takes
place, whose rough derivative is lined with ribosomes.
ANSWER: Endoplasmic Reticulum
The binding immunoglobulin protein or BiP is located in this organelle. Proteins are kept in this organelle
by the KDEL retention sequence. One variety of this organelle contains the protein calsequestrin and
releases calcium to cause muscle contraction. This organelle functions in the N-glycosylation of molecules
and detoxification. It also contains chaperone proteins, which aid in the folding of newly created proteins,
which are sent to the Golgi body. For 10 points, name this organelle that comes in "smooth" and ribosomerich "rough" varieties.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
One process occurring in this organelle is blocked by tunicamycin. Stress within this organelle causes
the activation of IRE1p, which in turn leads to the cleavage of Hac1 mRNA. Glucose-6-phosphatase
is attached to this organelle. One enzyme found within this organelle targets the N-X-S/T motif, and
transfers a branched polymer from dolichol to the target. This organelle, where protein (*) disulfide
isomerase is responsible for linking cysteines together, is also the site where N-linked glycosylation takes
place. The sequence KDEL is responsible for keeping proteins in this organelle, through whose membrane
they are threaded after the action of the signal recognition particle. Vesicles from this organelle travel to the
Golgi apparatus. For 10 points, name this organelle that comes in rough and smooth varieties, the former of
which is responsible for transporting proteins throughout the cell.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
SRPs move signal-sequence-bearing polypeptides from the cytosol to this structure, and a special form of it
stores and releases calcium ions in muscle cells. One type of this organelle synthesizes steroids in adrenal
cells and metabolizes glycogen in the liver, while another synthesizes proteins from structures on its surface.
For 10 points, name this cellular organelle with "smooth" and ribosome-rich "rough" varieties that aids in
the transport of cellular materials.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER; prompt on sarcoplasmic reticulum or SR before "steroids"]
The immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein, or BiP, is a component of this organelle. This organelle
plays a key role in detoxification and production of lipids, and its internal space is known as the lumen. Like
the Golgi apparatus, this organelle contains flattened sacs known as cisternae, and this network of folded
membranes is found in two forms depending on whether or not it contains ribosomes. For 10 points, name
this organelle which comes in smooth and rough varieties.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
CASQ2 is the cardiac form of a protein that can be found in one type of this organelle; that protein is
calsequestrin. Lysine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, and leucine form a retention sequence in this organelle
known as KDEL. Vesicles that are leaving this organelle are tagged with the protein COPII. Though not the
Golgi apparatus, this organelle can contain flattened areas known as cisternae, and a type of this organelle is
continuous with the double membrane of the nucleus. One version of this organelle named for its outer
appearance is involved n lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. For 10 points, name this organelle
surrounding the nucleus that comes in "smooth" and "rough" varieties.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER; accept sarcoplasmic reticulum or SR before "lysine"]
In this structure, oligosaccharides are transferred to asparagine residues from dolichol. The SRP localizes
polypeptides to the translocons of this organelle. In these organelles' membranes, P450 helps detoxify
substances by hydroxylation. In this organelle, protein disulfide isomerase oxides the sulfhydryl groups of
cysteines to form disulfide bonds. The KDEL sequence retains specific proteins in this organelle after they
are folded. Part of this organelle is continuous with the nuclear envelope; the surface of that portion is
studded with ribosomes. For 10 points, name this membranous organelle that comes in smooth and rough
varieties.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [accept smooth ER or rough ER; anti-prompt, i.e. "Can you be less specific?" on "sarcoplasmic reticulum"]
In muscles, calcium is stored in this organelle, and in the adrenal cortex this organelle synthesizes
steroids. ERAD is a process in which misfolded proteins are degraded in these structures, where they
are usually folded with the help of chaperones. One type of this organelle forms transport vescicles
to the (*) golgi apparatus and is prominant in hepatocytes, while the site of mRNA translation, ribosomes,
occur in another. For 10 points, name this system of membrane enclosed tubes and sacs that synthesizes
proteins and lipids and comes in smooth and rough varieties.
ANSWER: Endoplasmic Reticulum [accept ER, accept smooth ER before ERAD]
It is not the mitochondria, but the cytochrome P450 system localizes to this organelle. A tetramer
of Sec61 proteins forms the translocon in this organelle's membrane. COPII coated vesicles bud
from this organelle, which has a membrane protein complex that recognizes the signal recognition
particle. One protein in this organelle catalyzes N-linked glycosylation of proteins, while another is
responsible for forming disulfide bonds. One version of this organelle is responsible for (*) drug
detoxification, while secretory proteins are synthesized in another section of this organelle, which then
transfers those proteins to the Golgi apparatus. For 10 points, name this organelle which comes in rough
and smooth varieties, whose name means "little net".
ANSWER: Endoplasmic reticulum [or ER; accept smooth ER or rough ER]
Like the Golgi body, this organelle consists of subunits called cisternae. Stress of this organelle
hinders its ability to fold proteins and transport them in vesicles to destinations including the Golgi
body. The cell membrane is linked to the nuclear (*) envelope by this organelle, one form of which is
covered in ribosomes. For 10 points, name this lace-shaped organelle that has "smooth" and "rough"
varieties that transport cellular material.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum (accept ER)
The sequence KDEL marks proteins for retention in this structure. Chaperone proteins located in this
structure fold newly created proteins. A specialized variety of this structure stores calcium ions and is found
in smooth and striated muscle. That "sarcoplasmic" (sar-co-PLAZZ-mic) type of this organelle is in turn a
subset of a type of this structure which is the location of carbohydrate and steroid metabolism. That type is
known as "transitional" or "smooth." For 10 points, name this organelle, which also has a "rough" type that
contains ribosomes (RYE-bo-soams).
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER; or smooth endoplasmic reticulum; or rough endoplasmic reticulum; prompt on sarcoplasmic reticulum; prompt on SR]
This organelle typically constitutes more than half of the membrane content found in the cell and is
responsible for making both the COPII and mannose-6-phosphate modifications. Its association with the
outer membrane of the nuclear envelope allows for improved rates of signaling, though it is better known
for its role in gluconeogenesis and steroid, glycoprotein, and lipids synthesis. This organelle, composed of
an interconnected network of tubules and cisternae, can detoxify poisonous substances through its smooth
variety. FTP, name this organelle which contains ribosomes in its rough type.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum
DiOC6 is a fluorescent dye specific for this organelle. One type of this organelle contains calsequestrin
protein and releases calcium to trigger muscle contraction. In addition to the "sarcoplasmic" variety,
another type of this organelle is important in breaking down hydrophobic poisons and is ubiquitous in
liver cells. The type of this organelle that is most often used in lipid and protein production has
ribosomes attached to it. For 10 points, name this organelle that comes in "rough" and "smooth"
varieties.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [prompt on ER]
RPN1 and RPN2 code for an integral protein within this structure. One type of this structure contains
glucose-6-phosphatase and stores and pumps calcium ions. Vesicles coated with COP I are targeted to
return to this organelle, while those with COP II leave it. One type metabolizes glycogen and synthesizes
steroids, while another type synthesizes secreted proteins. Its lumen is contiguous with the perinuclear
space, and the two different types of this organelle synthesize lipids and proteins. For 10 points, name this
organelle in which the presence of bound ribosomes differentiates the "rough" and "smooth" types.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [accept rough endoplasmic reticulum before "glucose-6-phosphatase" is read]
A variant of this structure contains the ryanodine receptor and stores calcium ions. The secretory
pathway for a newly synthesized protein begins in this structure. This structure releases vesicles which are
sent for modification in the Golgi apparatus. This organelle is continuous with the nuclear membrane and is
referred to as either smooth or rough depending on if it is lined with ribosomes. For 10 points, names this
organelle that forms a network of transportation tubes in a cell.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER, accept sarcoplasmic reticulum or SR throughout]
This organelle contains the enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase, which catalyzes the final step of
gluconeogenesis. One form of this organelle stores and pumps calcium ions and is found in smooth muscle.
Although it is not the Golgi complex, COPI marks vesicles to be transported here, while COPII marks
vesicles to be sent from this organelle. Newly-synthesized proteins are bound to BiP in this organelle, which
comes in a "sarcoplasmic" type. For 10 points, name this organelle which comes in smooth and rough
varieties, the latter of which has ribosomes on its surface.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER; accept sarcoplasmic reticulum; accept rough ER and smooth ER before mentioned]
The KDEL retention sequence signals which proteins remain in this organelle, and one of this organelle's
functions is glycosylation (gly-COSS-ill-AY-shun) of proteins. COPI (cop one) and COPII (cop two)
proteins aid in transporting proteins between the Golgi body and this organelle. The presence or absence of
ribosomes on the surface of these organelles determines whether they are of the "rough" or "smooth"
variety. For 10 points, name this organelle that helps fold and transport proteins.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
In addition to causing the retrieval of v-SNARE proteins, the coat protein COP I targets proteins for
this organelle, while COP II targets proteins exiting this organelle. The common sequence KDEL marks
proteins for retention in this organelle, and most proteins synthesized in one type of this organelle
undergo glycosylation. Ribosomes are present on the surface of one type of this organelle. For 10
points, name this organelle that comes in rough and smooth forms and provides a transport network
throughout the cell.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [accept ER]
Glucose-6-Phosphatase is found in one variety of this organelle, which converts glucose-6-phosphate into
glucose during gluconeogenesis. N-linked glycosylation also occurs in the lumen of another variety of this
organelle. Vesicles coated with COP-II are transported away from this organelle, while vesicles coated with
COP-I are returned to it. The sarcoplasmic variety of this organelle stores intercellular calcium in muscle
cells. This organelle is continuous with the lamina of the cell nucleus. For 10 points, name this organelle
involved in cellular transport which is divided into rough and smooth varieties by the presence of
ribosomes.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
A special type of this material stores and pumps calcium ions, and is found in smooth and striated muscle.
One form of this material has functions in such processes as synthesis of lipids and steroids, metabolism of
carbohydrates, and regulation of calcium concentration, while in another form, proteins are transported via
vesicle to the Golgi apparatus after having been transported through this material's secretory passageway,
having been received from bound ribosomes lending it its namesake appearance. First seen by Porter,
Claude, and Fullham, for 10 points identify this organelle which comes in rough and smooth forms.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum or ER
Upon centrifugation, this organelle forms microsomes, and it contains dolichol (doll-EE-cole)
phosphate donors used in N-linked glycosylation. The Sec61 complex is used to transport some molecules
into this organelle, which also contains protein disulfide isomerase. The KDEL sequence keeps proteins in
this organelle. One type of this organelle is used to detoxify metabolites, while another type has ribosomes
on its surface. For 10 points, name this organelle which has rough and smooth types.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
Important proteins in this organelle include UGGT, protein disulfide isomerase, and calnexin. Cells
in muscles contain a modified form of this organelle that stores calcium. A retention signal for this
organelle is KDEL, and, in this organelle, initial N-glycosylation is performed. This organelle plays a
critical role in the (*) folding of some proteins and thus the signal recognition particle targets growing
polypeptides and the attached ribosome to this organelle. For 10 points, name this organelle that comes in
rough and smooth forms.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
One process that occurs in this structure is divided into O-linked and N-linked varieties. The
chaperone BiP is localized to this structure's lumen, and in liver cells, it detoxifies hydrophobic
chemicals. Other functions of this organelle include the breakdown of glycogen, lipid synthesis, and
disulfide bond formation. It consists of a network of vesicles and channels, which are sometimes
covered by ribosomes. For 10 points, name this cell organelle that comes in smooth and rough varieties.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
The enzyme COX-1 is a membrane protein of this organelle, which is the location of the enzyme used in the
final step of gluconeogenesis. The enzyme HMG-CoA reductase is another membrane protein of this
organelle, which is the site of lipid synthesis. This organelle is where carbohydrates are metabolized and
drugs are detoxified. Some muscle cells have a form of this organelle that stores and releases calcium ions.
One type of this organelle is named for its appearance when ribosomes are attached. For 10 points, name
this organelle with smooth and rough types.
ANSWER: endoplasmic reticulum [or ER]
This organelle is the location of binding immunoglobulin [ih-MYOON-oh-GLAH-byoo-lin] protein and the
enzyme protein disulfide-isomerase [die-SUL-fide ie-SOME-uhrase]. That protein is located in its lumen,
which is with the layers of the nuclear envelope. Like the Golgi [GOLE-jee] apparatus, it has regions called
cisternae [sis-TEHR-nay]. Some of it is bonded to ribosomes [RIE-boe-somes], and together they synthesize
proteins. Name this organelle near the nucleus which has rough and smooth regions.
ANSWER: rough endoplasmic reticulum (prompt on "ER")
Transport between these two structures requires the BET1 membrane protein. The GTPase SAR1A helps
assemble Sec23p/24p and Sec13p/31p into the coat that covers molecules being transported between these
structures. Transport between these structures is mediated by the vesicular-tubular cluster, also called their
namesake "intermediate compartment." The presence of a KDEL sequence causes the continuous retrieval
of molecules from one of these organelles to the other. In the first of these organelles, PDI creates disulfide
bridges in substrates which the second of these organelles might label with mannose-6-phosphate. COPII
coats proteins transported between these organelles. For 10 points, name these two organelles, the first of
which folds proteins which are then packaged by the second.
ANSWER: rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus [or rough ER and Golgi body; accept underlined portions in either order]
The discovery of these cells by Ferdinand Cohn helped disprove the theory of spontaneous generation, and,
unlike cysts, these cells form internally rather than grow on the cell wall. Those produced by the genus
Clostridium contribute to the severest form of food poisoning, while biowarfare with anthrax requires the
airborne disperal of these cells. Able to remain dormant for centuries, and resistant to UV rays, dessication,
high temperature, and chemical disinfectants, identify these thick-coated bacterial cells that can survive long
exposure to harsh environments.
ANSWER: endospores [prompt on spores]
An important medical application of this theory is the use of tetracycline to inhibit the apicoplast of
Plasmodium parasites. The nucleomorph inside cryptomonad algae is taken as proof for this theory, which
opposes the endogenous hypothesis. One controversial application of this theory explains the 9 plus 2
arrangement of microtubules in flagella and cilia, and the best molecular evidence for it comes from the
small ribosomal subunit. This theory accounts for the double membrane and circular DNA found inside
plastids and explains why certain organelles can replicate through binary fission. Largely the work of Lynn
Margulis, name this evolutionary theory which states that the ancestors of mitochondria and chloroplasts
were free-living prokaryotes that became engulfed by larger cells.
ANSWER: endosymbiotic theory [or serial endosymbiosis]
The MTT or TS assays measure the purple color produced by formazan, which correlates to the
reducing ability of these substances. The steady-state approximation was used for the BriggsHaldane equation governing their behavior, a slightly different take from the double reciprocal
Lineweaver-Burk and (*) Michaelis-Menten equations that govern their kinetics. One proposed
mechanism for these substances is the "induced fit model," and another suggests a lock-and-key fit with
their substrates. For 10 points, name this class of substances that are inhibited competitively and
allosterically, a class of biological catalysts that includes amylase.
ANSWER: enzymes [accept E1 on the first clue, but prompt on it afterwards]
Edward Tatum, George Beadle and Joshua Lederberg won the 1958 Nobel Prize for studying the
relationship of genes to these objects. Recombinant DNA technology uses "restriction" examples of these
objects. Competitive inhibitors bind to the active site of these objects, thus preventing them from binding to
substrates. Examples of these objects include catalase (CAT-uh-lace) and amylase (AMM-ih-lace). For 10
points, what proteins function as biochemical catalysts that speed up reactions?
ANSWER: enzymes [accept "one gene, one enzyme hypothesis" or similar answers before "these objects" is read]
Common types of these compounds found in the body include carbonic anhydrase and catalase, whose
efficiency is altered by temperature and pH. These proteins are prohibited from acting by non-competitive
inhibitors, a process which happens at the allosteric site. Non-protein molecules that aid these are known as
cofactors, while organic cofactors are the co- variety of these proteins. These act upon substrates at the
active site. For 10 points, name these catalysts-proteins that speed up reactions.
ANSWER: Enzymes
These molecules can be regulated by covalent modification. Daniel Koshland suggested the induced
fit model of these moecules. Trypsin and pepsin A are both types of these. Methanol poisoning is
cured by ethanol because ethanol competitively inhibits one of these by binding to its (*) active site.
One of the earliest models of their behavior treated a substrate as a lock and them as a key. One of these
molecules found in the liver breaks down hydrogen peroxide and is catalase. For 10 points, identify these
proteins that lower the activation energy of biochemical reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes [prompt on proteins]
One class of these molecules produces either "sticky ends" or "blunt ends." The efficiency of these
molecules can be expressed as kcat [k sub cat] over km [k sub m], and the Michaelis-Menten equation
describes the rates of their reactions. They bind with specific substrates at their (*) active sites, and
this specificity is described by the induced fit model. For 10 points, name these proteins that speed up
chemical reactions, including amylases and lactases, that are the biological equivalent of catalysts.
ANSWER: enzymes (prompt on catalysts before mention; prompt on protein before mention)
The ping pong mechanism is one method sometimes used to describe these molecules. RNA can act as
one of these molecules when it assumes the hammerhead configuration. They often possess complimentary
geometric shapes according to the lock and key model. They can be described using a Lineweaver-Burke
(LINE-"weaver" BURK) plot, which depicts Michaelis-Menten (mih-KAY-liss MEN-ten) kinetics. These
molecules act upon a substrate which binds to a certain active site. For 10 points, name these proteins that
catalyze biological reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes
The change of these substances to an intermediate form is expressed in the Ping-pong diagram. The
most used formula regarding the dynamics of these substances is the subject of the Michaelis-Menten
mechanism. The existence of two or more subunits on these substances causes conformational change
due to cooperativity. A (*) groove-like area on the surfaces of these substances is called the active site and
can change for induced fit. These substances bind to reactants called substrates and work by lowering
activation energy. For ten points, name these catalytic proteins which increase the rate of a reaction without
being consumed.
ANSWER: enzymes (prompt on "catalyst")
The ping pong mechanism is one method sometimes used to describe these molecules. RNA can act
as one of these molecules when it assumes the hammerhead configuration. They can be described
using a Lineweaver-Burke (LINE-"weaver" BURK) plot, which depicts Michaelis-Menten
(mih-KAY-liss MEN-ten) kinetics. They often possess complimentary geometric shapes according to
the (*) lock and key model. These molecules act upon a substrate which binds to a certain active site. For
10 points, name these proteins that catalyze biological reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes
A substance of this type is used as an amplifier attached to the secondary antibody in ELISA. Adenosine
derivatives like FAD are often necessary in order for "apo-" ones to function. The simplest expression for
their rates of reaction contains a term with maximum reaction velocity in the numerator and the Michaelis
constant in the denominator. They are believed to bind via induced fit. Heterotropic allostery entails
regulation of these molecules by a non-substrate compound. For 10 points, name these proteins which
accelerate biochemical reactions by lowering their activation energies.
ANSWER: enzymes [prompt on "catalysts"; prompt on "proteins"]
These types of molecules that are made up of RNA include hairpin and hammerhead. The kinetics of these
molecules is described by the Michaelis-Menten equation. An antibody is linked to one of these proteins in
an immunosorbent assay that can be used to determine HIV's presence in blood. BamHI [bam H one] and
EcoRI [eco R one] are examples of the "restriction" type used in cleaving DNA at specific sites. The lock
and key model of these proteins was replaced by the induced fit model. In competitive inhibition, the
substrate is unable to bind to their active site. For 10 points, name these proteins that act as catalysts in
biochemical reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes [prompt on "catalysts" or "ribozymes"]
Their efficiency can be increased by hydrogen tunneling. Their dynamics are modeled through
Michaelis-Menten kinetics. Inhibitors of them can act competitively or non-competitively. They experience
cooperative binding and they can be regulated through allosteric regulation. The induced fit explanation for
their action is an upgrade to the lock and key model. Their active site is the location their substrates bind to.
For 10 points, name these proteins that act as catalysts.
ANSWER: enzymes
One equation that models the behavior of these molecules divides the product of Vmax ("V sub
max") and S by the sum of Km ("K sub M") and S, and that equation is part of the Michaelis-Menten
kinetics describing these molecules. Their activity can be controlled via allosteric regulation and by
(*) competitive and noncompetitive inhibitors. The induced-fit model is a more accurate variant of the "lock
and key" model that describes how their active sites bond with substrates in order to lower the activation
energy of a reaction. For ten points, name these proteins that catalyze biological reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes (prompt on "catalysts" until mentioned)
One model of these molecules assumes passive diffusion and relates reaction rate to substrate concentration.
These molecules, the subject of the Michaelis-Menten model, can be inhibited either competitively or non-
competitively, depending on whether the inhibitor binds to their active site. The binding of these molecules
to a substrate is referred to as the "lock-and-key" model due to their high degree of specificity. For 10
points, name these biological catalysts such as protease and lactase.
ANSWER: enzymes [prompt on catalysts]
The kinetic properties of these molecules are described by V sub max and K sub m. Zymogens are
inactive forms of these molecules. These molecules can be un-competitively, non-competitively, or
competitively inhibited. These molecules can change shape a little while binding to a target in a process
called induced fit. Their active sites is where they perform work on substrates. These biological molecules
lower activation energies. For 10 points, name these proteins that catalyze reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes
Inhibitors of these molecules often work by mimicking a reaction's transition state. The specificity of the
interactions involving these molecules is described by the "lock and key" model. The kinetics of these
molecules is typically expressed using the Michaelis-Menten equation. One of these molecules that aids in
the production of DNA is DNA polymerase (poh-LIH-mer-ase). Lysosomes contain a high number of these
substances necessary for degrading worn out cellular structures. For 10 points, name these proteins that act
as catalysts.
ANSWER: enzymes
One measure of these entities' effectiveness, in inverse seconds, is as high as 40 million for an example
of them within the peroxisome, and is called the turnover number. Briggs and Haldane updated the
Michaelis-Menten model of their kinetics. Competitive and non-competitive inhibition can weaken these
molecules. Substrates bind to the active site of these molecules, whose names often end in "-ase." For 10
points, name these proteins that act as catalysts for biological reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes
These substances can use either using a ping-pong mechanism or a ternary complex intermediate.
One model of them defines the parameters K-m and V-max and uses a steady-state approximation.
They can be inhibited non-competitively and competitively, and the change in their structure during
substrate binding is described by the (*) induced-fit model. They can be allosterically regulated and
perform their action at their active site. For 10 points, name these proteins that catalyze reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes
Zinc cofactors used in DNA replication are an example of this type of substance, whose kinetics are
measured by the Michaelis-Menten equations. A conformational change occurs when allosteric
regulation inhibits its (*) active site, and this type of substance causes a specific substrate to proceed to
product in the "lock and key" model. The suffix "-ase" denotes, for 10 points, what type of proteins used to
speed up biological reactions?
ANSWER: enzymes (prompt on catalysts)
Transforming growth factor beta, in the presence of interleukin-3, suppresses their differentiation, and the
migration of them is regulated by chemokines such as CCL11 and CCL24. An abundance of them are
associated with Loffler's syndrome, and levels of them decrease by fifty percent in normal patients in the
Thorn test. Associated with the cytotoxic PRG2, which is also known as major basic protein, they contribute
to the IgE-mediated response. Along with neutrophils and basophils, these polymorphonuclear cells are part
of a group known as granulocytes. Colored bright orange by a namesake acidic stain, for 10 points, name
these white blood cells that are important in defense against parasitic infections.
ANSWER: eosinophils
Eosinophilic granuloma and Letterer-Siwe disease are subtypes of histiocytosis X, which is characterized by
an excess of Birbeck granules in a cell type native to this part of the body. Another cell type here is a part
of a disk receptor and are attached to slowly adapting mechanorecptors. Containing the Langerhans and
Merkel cells, the Malphigian layer refers to the basal and spinosum sublayers of it. Consisting primarily of
keratinocytes, for 10 points, name this outermost layer of the skin.
ANSWER: Epidermis
Darier's disease and squamous cell carcinoma affect one structure of this name. Trichomes can be found on
a structure with this name, which also refers to a layer that consists of stratum granulosum and spinosum.
The cork cambium produces material that replaces this structure, which borders palisade and spongy cells
and is the location of guard cells that flank stomata. Desmosomes cross-link keratinocytes in this structure,
which in other organisms is located above the mesophyll and covered by a cuticle. For ten points, identify
this term applied to the outer protective sheath of plants and the outermost layer of skin in animals.
ANSWER: epidermis
A famous early development in this field occurred when pregnant agouti mice were fed a diet rich in
vitamin B12. This diet silenced the gene which causes the traits of yellow fur and a tendency toward
obesity. Additional research suggests that it could identify and regulate many cancer-causing oncogenes.
This field of study is primarily concerned with the methylation of cytosines and histones. FTP, name this
subfield of biology which studies the changes in genotype or gene expression by a mechanism other than the
underlying DNA sequence, from the Greek for "above genetics".
ANSWER: epigenetics (accept epigenome)
Angelman syndrome results from this type of inheritance due to paternal imprinting, and this concept
has been used to explain why the children of women pregnant during the Dutch famine of 1944 show
a greater incidence of obesity and diabetes. This mode of inheritance for the mouse agouti gene can
produce identical twins with different coat colors and is not thought to exist in plants, most of whose
cells remain totipotent. This phenomenon controls animal cell differentiation and works by histone
acetylation or DNA methylation. Identify this type of inheritance in which the expression of traits is
not directly linked to a nucleotide sequence.
ANSWER: epigenetics [accept genetic/genomic imprinting before it is mentioned; prompt answers involving regulation of or differential gene expression]
One drug used to treat this condition causes a namesake "fetal syndrome" including microcephaly and
gum overgrowth; that drug is phenytoin. This condition, which, like bipolar disorder, can be treated by
valproic acid, occurs because of aberrantly synchronous firing of neurons. This condition, which comes in
juvenile myoclonic and childhood absence varieties, is diagnosed using an electroencephalogram. For 10
points, name this condition characterized by recurrent seizures.
ANSWER: epilepsy [or seizure disorder until it is read]
It can be applied to the theory of local breeding values to predict the effects of random drift on genetic
architecture. Its presence in founder events, inbreeding, and bottlenecking can produce an increase in
additive genetic variance. Analysis of this type using double mutants is employed to develop order-of-
function maps for genes that regulate cellular pathways, and it can result in the nonpenetrance of mutant
genes such as the gene for Marfan syndrome. Individuals who have a homozygous recessive mutation that
blocks the addition of fucose to an H substance precursor fail to express A and B type blood groups and
posses the Bombay phenotype, an example of this effect. For 10 points, the gene for albinism is an example
of what type of gene, which masks the phenotypic effects of a hypostatic gene?
ANSWER: epistatic gene or epistasis
A positive response to the Paul-Bunnell heterophile antibody test indicates infection by this virus, and the
Miller-Hutt-Fletcher process is one way it can target cells. Marmoset cell immortality is a result of this virus
which can be responsible for both inhibition of the IL-10 receptor and promotion of autoimmune disease
states through polyclonal B cell expansion. FTP, name this B-cell infecting virus linked to conditions like
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, oral hairy leukoplakia, Burkitt's lymphoma, Hodgkin's Disease, and
mononucleosis.
ANSWER: Epstein-Barr virus
One possible immunogen of this agent is gp350/220, the glycoproteins on its surface that allow entry into
the host. One cell line that releases this virus was the B95-8 which was created by transforming certain cells
in marmosets with it, and the Akata cell line produces a version more similar to wild type viruses. This
agent can be detected by a version of the heterophile antibody test known as the Paul-Bunnell test. This
agent binds to the CR2 receptors of the cells which it infects. Cancerous cells infected with this virus are
common in cases of nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and it is also implicated in a form of cancer which produces
cells with a "starry sky" appearance, Burkitt's lymphoma. For 10 points, name this herpesvirus which
causes mononucleosis.
ANSWER: Epstein-Barr virus [accept EBV; accept human herpesvirus 4]
IDEXX Defined Substrate Technology is able to show its presence when beta-glucuronidase metabolizes 4-
methylumbelliferyl-beta-D-glucuronide to produce fluorescence. Tani, et al. showed that its persistence in
sediment of urban streams and Juncosa showed that native Guyanians developed resistant strains of it by
exposure to a drug chemically similar to ciprofloxacin. It is the main prey of the T4 phage, and it was grown
in a medium containing ammonium chloride in the Meselson-Stahl experiment to show the
semiconservative nature of DNA. For 10 points, name this gram-negative bacteria, whose virulent forms
such as 0157:H7 produce shigatoxins and are a danger to humans through fecal contamination of food and
water.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
These organisms were part of an experiment in which they developed the ability to metabolize citrate
over a 20-year period of evolution. Another experiment in which these organisms were used grew them on
a nitrogen-15 medium and showed that DNA replication was semiconservative. This organism is infected
by the T4 phage, and it was used in the Lenski and Meselson-Stahl experiments. Its O157:H7 strain is a
common cause of food-borne illness. For 10 points, name this gram-negative bacterium commonly found in
the intestine.
ANSWER: E coli [or Escherichia coli]
In experiments led by Richard Lenski, this organism evolved to metabolize citrate, while wild-type strains'
inability to do so can be used to differentiate them from Salmonella. It is targeted by the T4 bacteriophage,
and one early application of recombinant DNA enabled it to produce human insulin. This organism's
O157:H7 strain is often the cause of food poisoning. For 10 points, name this Gram-negative intestinal
bacterium commonly used as a model organism.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
One serotype of this organism can produce a toxin similar to the one secreted by organisms of genus
Shigella (shih-GEH-luh). The Meselson-Stahl experiment used these organisms, while the lac operon was
first discovered within it. Classified as an enteric (en-TEH-rick) since it is found within the human
intestines, strains of this organism such as O157:H7 are known to cause foodborne illnesses. This
gram-negative, rod-shaped species is attacked by the lambda phage. For 10 points, name this species of
bacteria often found in undercooked ground beef.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
Some strains of these organisms are capable of synthesizing verotoxin, which resembles shiga toxin, and
infection of humans by those strains often leads to hemolytic uremic syndrome. One structure found in these
organisms is often upregulated by adding IPTG, and the activity of that structure in these organisms is
indicated if X-gal turns blue in a commonly used assay. That structure codes for beta-galactosidase and is
the lac operon. This organism was the subject of the Messelson-Stahl experiment, and the T4 bacteriophage
infects these organisms. For 10 points, name this rod shaped gram negative bacterium, whose strains include
the virulent O157:H7.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli [or E. coli]
This organism has been used by Baumgardner et. al. as a computer to solve a Hamiltonian path problem.
The K12 strain of this organism is commonly used in laboratories. Richard Lenski discovered that some of
these organisms could metabolize citric acid after several thousand generations of reproduction. The first
example of DNA helicase was found on this organism's F plasmid. Meselsohn and Stahl proved the
semiconservative nature of DNA replication in this organism, and Jacques and Monod studied the lac
operon in this organism. It is targeted by the T4 bacteriophage and contains the restriction enzyme EcoRI
[eco-r-one]. Name this bacterium, a model organism that produces lots of Vitamin K in the small intestine.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
"
An FDA decision is pending on the use of this organism in Mutaflor therapy. Since 1988 this organism
has been studied at a Michigan State University lab where it evolved the ability to use citrate as
an energy source. The Meselson-Stahl experiment proved that DNA replication is semiconservative
using this organism, and Joshua Lederberg discovered its conjugation mechanism of gene exchange.
Humans depend on this organism to produce vitamin K in the colon, though its O157:H7 ["O one
five seven H seven"] strain can cause deadly food poisoning, such as in contaminated spinach in 2006.
Name this rod-shaped gut bacteria, the most important model organism of molecular genetics.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
Richard Lenski has studied long-term evolution in this organism. The disease hemolytic uremic syndrome
occurs after an infection with this organism. In another experiment, this organism was used to prove that
DNA undergoes semi-conservative replication. A strain of this organism, 0157:H7, produces Shiga-like
toxins that damage the lining of blood vessels in the intestine. For 10 points, name this bacterium that can
be acquired by consuming undercooked ground beef.
ANSWER: E. coli [or Escherichia coli]
In 2003, Iwata and Kabak used crystallography to obtain the structure of its lactose transporter. It developed
an ability to consume citrate in an experiment by Richard Lenski and its DnaK and DnaJ proteins are
homologs of the eukaryotic chaperones Hsp70 and Hsp40. Its verocytotoxic and enterohemorrhagic
varieties are grouped together under the category of Shiga toxin producers, and in 2001, a Nature article
reported a complete genetic sequence of its pathogenic O157:H7 strain. Often used to grow libraries of
recombinant DNA, they were observed to undergo conjugation by Edward Tatum. FTP, identify this Gram-
negative bacterium, a favorite model organism of biologists.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
This organism was used to prove the semiconservative reproduction of DNA by Meselsohn and Stahl.
Though it is not Shigella, types of this organism carry Shiga toxins. Lederberg and Tatum studied the
F-plasmid of this organism to describe conjugation. This organism produces much of the Vitamin K2 in the
large intestine, and it is an indicator species for fecal coliform. For 10 points, name this species of bacteria,
a
model organism whose malignant strains cause food poisoning.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
G-A-A-T-T-C is the recognition site for a sticky-end-producing restriction enzyme produced by this
organism. Meselson and Stahl demonstrated the semiconservative nature of DNA replication in this
organism, and Jacob and Monod used this organism to study the lac operon. Recombinant DNA
techniques allow for commercial production of human proteins by this bacterium. For 10 points, name
this prokaryotic model organism, naturally found in animals' guts, which causes food poisoning scares
with undercooked red meat.
ANSWER: Eschericia coli [accept E. coli; accept EcoRI before "organism"]
Richard Lenski has been running a long term experiment on this species's evolution. The Lederbergs
conducted experiments on auxotrophic (OX-oh-TROFF-ick) strains of this bacteria. This bacteria is a
common source of urinary tract infections. A safe strain of this bacteria is K12, while one of the more
problematic strains of this bacteria is O157:H7. For 10 points, name this Gram-negative bacteria that, like
Salmonella, can cause food borne illness, and is a important model organism.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
Since 1988, Richard Lenski has observed the evolution of this organism in the laboratory, and members of
the genus Shigella are very closely related to this organism. The MM294 strain of this bacterium is
commonly transformed to be resistant to antibiotics such as ampicillin and kanamyacin. Notable genes in
this bacterium encode (*) lactose permease and beta-galactosidase, which help break down lactose to
glucose and galactose, and Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase famously infected this organism with T2
bacteriophages. The lac operon is present in, for 10 points, what model organism that is found in animal
intestines and can cause food poisoning?
ANSWER: Esherichia coli
This organism developed the ability to metabolize citrate in one experiment, and it has been used in
recombinant form to produce usable human insulin. Seymour Benzer used this organism with a T4
phage to investigate gene structure, and conjugation was first observed in it by Edward Tatum. In 2001,
a complete genetic sequence was made of this organism's O157:H7 strain. That type may cause bloody
diarrhea and kidney failure if consumed. For 10 points, name this model organism, a bacterium
sometimes found in the intestines.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli
This organism's genome acquired a virulence factor from the 933W prophage. One product of this
organism, which is named for a different bacterium, is a toxin whose A subunit cleaves the 28S
ribosomal RNA and whose B subunit binds to globo-tri-aosyl-ceramide. Children infected by this
organism can suffer from a form of kidney failure similar to TTP called hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
Unusually for its species, it fails the Sereny invasion test, it cannot grow in 0.15% bile salts, and it
does not ferment (*) sorbitol. It's not Shigella, but this organism has the ability to produce shiga-like toxin.
For 10 points, name this infectious gram-negative bacterium, which has the serotype O157:H7, is
transmitted by undercooked hamburgers, and causes bloody diarrhea.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli O157:H7 [or Enterohemorrhagic E. coli; you only need E. coli, but all of the clues refer to O157:H7; accept just O157:H7 before mention]
Even with hlyA deactivated, hemolytic F4+ strains of one variety cause septicemia. One variety uses
fimbrial adhesins to bind to human cells, while a related kind causes fever and uses intimin instead of
fimbriae. Its entero-hemorrhagic variety produces Shiga toxins and is commonly associated with urinary
tract infections and food poisoning, though most strains are commensalists that facilitate digestion and
produce small amounts of vitamins B12 and K. Conjugation was first observed in, for 10 points, this
bacterium that lives in the lower intestine.
ANSWER: E. coli [or Escheria coli]
In recent years, numerous teens taking doxycycline for acne were terrified into thinking they had developed
cancer of this organ from actually benign ulcerations. Alcoholism-associated damage to this organ occurs in
Mallory-Weiss syndrome, while Hammond's Crunch is a creepy sign indicating that it may have
experienced a Boerhaave rupture. The Sellick procedure compresses this organ by putting pressure on the
cricoid cartilage, while muscular difficulties associated with it occur in achalasia. This organ does not
normally contain goblet cells, though in a disorder named for Barrett they can replace some of its squamous
epitheal cells. This organ is ciliated in amphibians, while in humans its lower portion meets the cardia to
form the angle of His, which prevents it from being damaged by stray acid. A bolus passes through this
organ, which pierces the diaphragm, thanks to peristalsis. For 10 points, identify this organ often damage in
gastric reflux disease, a long tube between the mouth and stomach.
ANSWER: esophagus
This structure disconnects from its rostral organ in Zenker's Diverticulum, and Schatzki rings can impede
the function of this structure. Plummer-Vinson syndrome causes webbing to appear in this structure, and
Barrett's syndrome is caused by metaplasias in one portion of this structure. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
leads to lesions in it due to the overproduction of gastrin. Its mucosa consists of a layer of non-keratinized
squamous epithelium, and it passes through a namesake hiatus in the diaphragm. It is bound by the
epiglottis and cardiac sphincter, and peristalsis moves a bolus through this structure. FTP, name this
muscular tube that connects the pharynx to the stomach.
ANSWER: esophagus
A disease in which intestinal tissue replaces tissue that normally belongs in this organ is named for Norman
Barrett. In ruminants, objects move both ways in this organ, while in humans, only one direction of travel is
generally allowed. Objects in this organ move towards the cardiac sphincter at its lower end due to smooth
muscular contractions called peristalsis. Name this muscular tube that transports boluses from the pharynx
to the stomach.
ANSWER: esophagus (accept Barrett's esophagus before "this organ" is read)
A Schatzki ring is the narrowing of the lower part of this organ. Bleeding occurs in tears in the lower
epithelium of this organ in Mallory-Weiss syndrome. Redifferentiation of cells in the lower end of this
organ is caused by Barrett's disease. GERD occurs when this organ is exposed to increasingly acidic
conditions. The cardiac sphincter separates this organ from the stomach, and failure of that sphincter to
close properly may lead to the reflux of acid into this organ. This organ's muscles move in a wavelike
motion called peristalsis to transport boluses down to the stomach. For 10 points, name this tube-like organ
that transfers food from the mouth to the stomach.
ANSWER: esophagus [or gullet]
A common inducible form of the Cre-Lox system fuses the Cre protein to a mutant T2 form of the
receptor for this molecule. Raloxifine and Tamoxifen selectively inhibit the action of this compound in
some organs, while with another hormone it increases the expression of steroid hormone binding globulin
from the liver. This hormone, which is secreted by granulosa cells, is produced from precursors by
aromatase, and a rise in this hormone results in the LH surge that triggers ovulation. Responsible for
controlling the proliferation of the endometrium, its precursors include cholesterol and testosterone. Along
with progesterone, its decline causes menopause. For 10 points, name this female sex hormone.
ANSWER: Estrogen [accept Estradiol ,Estriol, or Estrone]
The G protein-coupled receptor GPR30 binds to this compound. T47D cells can lose receptors for this
compound due to long-term deprivation in vitro. The indicator phenol red was shown to mimic this type of
compound, and tamoxifen is an antagonist of its receptors. This hormone was administered as part of the
controversial Ashley Treatment to induce growth attenuation. It is not progesterone, but it is produced in
granulosa cells after they receive necessary precursors from thecal cells. Aromatase facilitates the
conversion from androgens like testosterone to this hormone, which is why aromatase-inhibitors are
sometimes an effective method for treating breast cancer. For 10 points, name this primary female sex
hormone.
ANSWER: estrogens
Production of this hormone is stimulated by FSH and LH. Replacement therapies for this hormone may lead
to higher levels of breast cancer and stroke. The contraceptive Depo-Provera (DEP-oh-pro-VAIR-uh)
notably does not contain this hormone. Osteoporosis in older women is in part caused by a deficiency of
this type of sex hormone, which promotes breast development and ovulation. For 10 points, name this class
of female sex hormone.
ANSWER: estrogen
Plant phytoserms and drugs suchs as Lasofoxifene and Femarelle act on these types of compound's
receptors. Anastrozole inhibits the production of this compound. In mice, these compounds regulate
alveoli formation, loss, and regeneration. Diethylstilbestrol and its precursor Bisphenol A are
artificial varieties of these type of compounds. These compounds can be formed through an aromatase-
catalysed reaction with the aromatization of androgens. One of these compounds suppresses FSH during the
follicular phase. The level of this hormone increases to a local maximum during the middle of the luteal
phase, and peak and drop just before ovulation For ten points, name these female sexual hormones.
ANSWER: estrogens [before testosterone, accept estrone, estriol, or estradiol]
The Ashley Treatment involves the use of this chemical in growth attenuation, and this chemical also sees
use in the treatment of prostate cancer, albeit with potential side effects such as gynecomastia. This
chemical uses the transmembrane GPR30 receptor and theca cells produce its precursor. It causes the
increase of LH in the luteal surge and influences endometrium thickening. In addition to being used in oral
contraceptives due to its role in a negative feedback loop, the E3 form of it becomes dominant in
menopause as this chemical's primary source of production, the ovaries, cease activity. For 10 points, name
this steroid hormone which functions as the primary female sex hormone in all vertebrates.
ANSWER: estrogen
GPR30 is a receptor primarily for this messenger. It is antagonized by tamoxifen. It is created by
through the conversion of a similar compound by aromatase. Stilbestrol is an analogue of this. This is
actually a class of hormones including estradiol. Along with progesterone, it is the most common substance
used in hormone replacement therapy for post-menopausal women. It For 10 points, name these hormones
associated with female reproductive traits.
ANSWER: estrogen [or estradiol before mentioned]
ZEA is a fungal compound that imitates these hormones, whose receptors are activated by bisphenol A.
These compounds' receptors are selectively modulated by raloxifene and tamoxifen. Their levels are
decreased by anastrozole because they require aromatase for their production. These compounds, which
contain eighteen carbons and are derived from cholesterol, are secreted from the ovaries along with
progesterone. For 10 points, name this hormone family, important for sexual development in women.
ANSWER: estrogens [prompt on sex hormones; prompt on steroid hormones]
This molecule can suppress the inflammatory response mediated by toll-like receptor 4. This
molecule's protection against seizures was not observed in mice lacking the delta subunit of the
GABA receptor. Low IQ, central nervous system dysfunction, and facial abnormalities are
characteristic of a congenital defect caused by too high an (*) intake of this molecule during pregnancy.
High intake of this molecule can cause thiamin absorption problems leading to Korsakoff's Syndrome,
while an enzyme important to this compound's metabolism is acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, which is absent
in many Asian populations. Cirrhosis of the liver can result from extended intake of, for 10 points, what
molecule produced via a namesake fermentation, notably found in wine?
ANSWER: ethanol [or alcohol]
Mutations in an enzyme which oxidizes this substrate are the basis of the McDonald-Kreitman test.
A Cys-46, Cys-174, His-67, and a critical zinc ion surround it in the active site of a protein which
oxidizes this compound. This compound precipitates DNA from aqueous solution. Biosynthesis of this
compound and carbon dioxide increase in the absence of oxygen according to the Pasteur effect. Like
(*) lactate, synthesis of this compound regenerates NAD in the cytosol. A 70% solution of this compound
is used in molecular biology labs to kill microbes. The oxidation of this compound into acetaldehyde is
often faster in Han Chinese and Korean populations, causing the "Asian glow" phenomenon. For 10 points,
name this compound, which yeast form in fermentation.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol]
Its chloride salt has been used to treat trypanosomiasis in livestock and in humans, and resistant strains of
Trypanosoma congolense were reported as early as 1993. In molecular biology labs, however, users try to
avoid exposure, as it is a powerful mutagen. An alternative is the cyanine-based SYBR ("SIGH-ber")
family, which is not only chemically safer but also allows excitation with visible blue light rather than the
near-UV source which this bromide salt requires. Many labs therefore reserve it for difficult detections, and
even then only add it after the gel is run. For 10 points, name this orange-brown dye whose fluorescence
increases twenty-fold after it intercalates with DNA.
ANSWER: Ethidium bromide or 3,8-Diamino-5-ethyl-6-phenylphenanthridinium bromide (prompt on "Novidium", "Homidium", and "EtBr")
The receptor for this molecule is complexed with the CTR1 protein in the ER of responsive cells, and
that receptor's c-terminus is homologous to bacterial two-component systems and contains a histidine
kinase domain. A rise in this molecule corresponds with the climacteric stage of a certain process.
The synthesis of this molecule relies on MTA nucleosidase and an enzyme that synthesizes a
cyclopropane derivative called ACC, which is cleaved from S-adenosyl methionine in the Yang cycle.
Ein3 mutants are insensitive to this hormone. This molecule is responsible for causing the thickening,
shortening and hooking of the hypocotyl in response to a barrier, known as the triple response. This
hormone is responsible for leaf abscission and fruit ripening, and is the cause of one bad apple spoiling the
bunch. For 10 points, name this gaseous plant hormone.
ANSWER: Ethylene
1-MCP serves as an antagonist to this compound, and intermediates in its synthesis include 5-
methylthioribose and Ado-met. Those intermediates appear in the Yang cycle, which synthesizes it from
methionine, and cells commonly transport it as ACC before a final cleavage. Ein3 is a nuclear factor that
responds to this hormone, which causes the triple response in Arabidopsis, allowing seedlings to push past
obstacles. For 10 points, name this compound that induces leaf abscission and fruit ripening and is the only
gaseous plant hormone.
ANSWER: ethylene [accept ethene]
Asymmetrical production of this hormone inhibits elongation of cells on one side of the apical hook.
Synthesis of this hormone is stopped after the seedling is exposed to light, and its triple response
consists of loss of gravitropism, inhibition of elongation, and lateral swelling in stems. Production of
this hormone is increased after (*) wounding, and silver salts delay senescence by inhibiting it. For 10
points, name this plant hormone that stimulates fruit ripening and has chemical formula C2H4.
ANSWER: ethylene [or ethene]
The Excavate supergroup of this taxon lack a notable structure and another division of this taxon is
Unikonta. Flagella in this group show a nine plus two arrangement. Contrary to previously held belief,
these are not the only organisms with proteins in the tubulin family. One hypothesis holds that these are the
result of endosymbiosis. These contain mitochondria and membrane bound organelles including a nucleus.
For 10 points, name this domain of life that contains animals and plants.
ANSWER: eukaryota [or eukaryotes]
The term was originally introduced by Suzanne Batra in 1966 to describe some hierarchical behavior of
species of hymenoptera, and Eward O. Wilson suggested this trait occurs so often in that order because of
their haplodiploidy. Wilson's elucidation of the characteristics of this behavior, which does occur in other
orders like isoptera and at least once in rodentia, is the most commonly used, and centers on the
demonstration of reproductive division of labor, overlapping generations, and cooperative care of young.
Most often seen in bees, ants, termites, and the naked mole rat, for 10 points name this organizational
system recently undermined in some species of honeybee whose name is a combination of Greek and Latin
for "well and truly cooperative".
ANSWER: Eusociality (Eusocialism)
Generation of oxygen through chemical reaction is known as "oxygen" this. The differential type of this in
computer science attempts to optimize a solution by iteratively testing a candidate solution. The "stellar"
type of this begins with the gravitational collapse of a giant molecular cloud into protostars, and, for the
most massive stars, ends with a pair-instability supernova. Lamarck produced a theory of this, while the
modern theory of this explains allele frequency changes through natural selection. Name this term, most
often used to refer to the change in characteristics of species over generations, and associated with Darwin.
ANSWER: evolution
Georges Cuvier was an early opponent of this theory, one proponent of which was Geoffroy
Saint-Hilaire. Arguments used against this theory include William Dembski's concept of specified
complexity and Michael Behe's irreducible complexity, which argues that this theory cannot explain how
the eye developed. This theory was developed by Alfred Russell Wallace independently of the man most
associated with it. For 10 points, name this theory presented in Darwin's On the Origin of Species.
ANSWER: evolution [or natural selection]
In some annelids, flame cells are part of this system and appear at the end of nephridia, while insects use
Malphigian tubules. In humans, both aldosterone and anti-diuretic hormone help regulate this system, the
former acts on the distal convoluted tubule. The bowman's capsule begins the functional unit, which
contains the loop of Henle, of this system. That unit is the nephron. For 10 points, this is what system,
where in humans, kidneys regulate the removal of water from the body.
ANSWER: excretory system
In this system, crustaceans have a labyrinth, which receives fluid from a coelomic sac, all of which comprise
the antennal glands, while flatworms commonly employ blind tubules containing ciliated solenocytes. In
Coleoptera and Lepidoptera, the distal end of this system is embedded in fat tissue, and it uses an actin
structure and a lining of microvilli to conduct the hemolymph. That same system is responsible for the light
produced by glowworms and is called the Malpighian tubules. Unlike simple ones like flame cells, aquatic
and terrestrial ones may be distinguished by whether ammonia diffuses through the skin or is converted to
uric acid. Important components of the human one, however, include the liver, the sweat glands, and of
course the kidneys. For 10 points, identify these organ systems responsible for expelling nitrogenous
wastes.
ANSWER: excretory systems
The organs of this body system are damaged by alpha-amanitin [ah-mah-NY-tin]. In flatworms, this
system is composed of flame cells. Creatinine [kree-AT-ih-neen] clearance can be used to gauge the
efficiency of this body system, whose dysfunction can result in gout. Malpighian [mal-PEE-gee-un]
tubules [TOO-byools] in insects fulfill the role of this system, which diffuses ammonia in
fish and produces dry uric acid in birds and reptiles. Name this body system that filters
nitrogenous [ny-TRAH-jeh-nus] wastes from the blood, storing urine in the bladder after concentrating
it in the kidneys, and is generally responsible for removing waste products.
ANSWER: excretory system
An excess amount of this controllable process is one major cause of amenorrhea. The Cori cycle
corrects metabolic imbalances that arise during this process. One subtype of this process can be split
into eccentric, concentric, and isometric phases. Different types of this process benefit from the
recruitment of (*) "fast-twitch" or "slow-twitch" tissues. This process results in the buildup of lactic acid,
because glycolysis produces energy without the presence of oxygen. For 10 points, name this process
which strengthens muscles and raises fitness.
ANSWER: physical exercise [prompt on muscle movement; accept any subtype of exercise, such as weightlifting or synonyms, or cardiovascular or aerobic exercise]
The evolution of this construct is sometimes cited as a cause of the Cambrian explosion. Because of their
toughness, these constructs are often used paleontologically to examine animals. Ecdysis occurs when an
animal sheds one of these, which allow it to grow. All arthropods possess one of these.However, some
animals, such as clams, have no need to do so-they simply add new material to the old one. Name this
hard, external covering that is composed of chitin and can be strengthened with calcium carbonate,
sometimes contrasted with endoskeletons.
ANSWER: exoskeleton
The Laboulbeniales [lah-bool-ben-yahl-es] order of fungi are parasites that feed exclusively on this
anatomic structure, while the simplest organisms to possess this structure are the marine moss animals. The
replacement of this structure uses a process called ecdysis [ek-DY-sis], and in terrestrial arthropods it is
perforated by spiracles [SPEERuh-kulz] to permit respiration. In many animals this structure is made of the
complex sugar chitin [KY-tihn] and it is notable for being flexible only at the joints. Requiring continual
molting and regrowth, name this hard outer covering of crustaceans and insects that support the body and
takes the place of bones.
ANSWER: exoskeleton(s) [prompt on shell]
One of these events occurred during the Late Devonian (duh-VO-nee-un) Period, and other notable
events of this type include the Ordovician-Silurian (or-doe-VISH-ee-un sill-UR-ee-un), Permian-Triassic
and End Triassic. The best known of these events occurred at the end of the Cretaceous Period and was
likely caused by by an asteroid's impact. For 10 points, name these events in which all living members of
multiple species were wiped out.
ANSWER: mass extinctions
Among the proposed explanations for these events are the hypothetical companion star Nemesis and the
periodic disturbance of Oort cloud comets known as the Shiva hypothesis. A mass of 25 kilograms was a
significant limit in the most recent of these events, and the largest may have been triggered by an eruption
of the Siberian Traps. The evolution of inedible seed plants may have contributed to one of these events in
the late Devonian, while Walter and Luis Alvarez used a worldwide iridium layer to suggest an asteroid
theory for the K-T one. The formation of Pangaea probably caused the demise of sea scorpions and
trilobites in the Permian-Triassic one of these events, also called the Great Dying. Occurring five times
since the Cambrian period, name these events in which more than 50% of animal species disappear from the
fossil record.
ANSWER: mass extinction-level events [accept reasonable equivalents that include extinct; accept biotic crisis; accept ELE]
A concentration of iridium corresponds to one of these events that took place at the K-T boundary,
and which was likely due to the Chicxulub [CHEEK-shoo-loob] impact. The coelacanth [SEE-lihkant] is an 
example of a Lazarus taxon which experiences this event but then reappears in the fossil
record. More recently, this event occurred to the (*) passenger pigeon and dodo. Dinosaurs experienced
this about 65 million years ago. For 10 points, name this event in which an entire species dies.
ANSWER: (mass) extinction event(s) (prompt on dying or similar answers; accept asteroid impact or logical equivalent until "Chicxulub" is read)
The medical condition astigmatism occurs in this organ. Oxidation of vitamin A results in the production
of the pigment-bearing portion of rhodopsin, which is found in this organ. This organ contains the fovea,
which is found at the center of the macula and contains a high concentration of cone cells. The name given
to this organ also names the calm weather found at the center of cyclones, such as hurricanes. For 10
points, identify this organ that detects light and allows sight.
ANSWER: eye
In one structure found in these organs, horizontal cells, amacrine cells, and ganglion cells connect to
neurons called bipolar cells and are involved in lateral inhibition. In some arthropods, these organs
are made of thousands of ommatidia. In one of these organs' structures, cells made of disks
containing rhodopsin are absent from the (*) fovea, which sits at the center of the macula. They contain
an aqueous humor and a vitreous humor, and are surrounded by a sclera that connects with the cornea. For
ten points, identify these organs that contain a lens and retina to process light.
ANSWER: eyes (accept compound eyes; until "ommatidia" is read, prompt on retina)
In the human body, the movement of this structure is governed by six muscles, which include the medial
rectus and the superior oblique; when these muscles do not work together properly, the result is a condition
known as strabismus. This organ is covered by three layers of tissue; the middle vascular layer is called the
choroid and lies just underneath the sclera. Much of the volume of this organ is filled with a watery fluid
known as the aqueous humor. For 10 points, identify this organ, in which a pigmented membrane called the
iris allows light to enter through an opening called the pupil.
ANSWER: Eye
In July 2013, Colombia became the first country to eliminate transmission of onchocerciasis [AHN-kuh-surSY-uh-siss], 
the most common parasitic disease of this organ. The ancestral Pax6 gene controls
development of this organ in all bilateral species, and the "light switch" theory holds that evolution of it
triggered the Cambrian Explosion. Growth of new blood vessels in the choroid can lead to the "wet" form
of macular degeneration in this organ that requires vitamin A for its rods to function. Glaucoma and
cataracts impair what organ that detects light at the retina to produce vision?
ANSWER: eye [accept onchocerciasis before it is mentioned]
Stemmata are a variety of this structure found in insect larvae, but adult insects often have an "apposition"
type made of hexagonal ommatidia. Recoverin and crystalin are proteins in this structure. The hyaloid canal
passes through the vitreous humor that occupies most of these organs. Vitamin A consumption affects the
cones of these organs, which are less sensitive than rods. Macular degeneration and cataracts are conditions
that can affect these organs. For 10 points, name these organs in which light is focused onto the retina by
the lens, facilitating sight.
ANSWER: eyes
In arthropods, this structure is composed of multiple ommatidia. Crystallins are responsible for the
transparency of a part of this structure that is controlled by the ciliary muscles. In reptiles, it is covered by
the nictitating membrane. The most basal organisms to possess a homologue of it are the euglenids, which
use chromophores rather than rhodopsins. A scotopic process in this organ occurs mostly in cells outside the
macula. In cephalopods, this organ is polarization-sensitive, and the nerve that receives sensation from it
lies behind the rods and cones, eliminating the blind spot. For 10 points, identify this organ whose retina
detects photons, enabling vision.
ANSWER: eye [accept eyespots; accept compound eye; prompt on "lens"]
One type of this organ is composed of subunits called ommatidia. In humans, this organ's hyaloid artery
regresses, leaving a canal through the liquid vitreous humor within it, and its front is controlled by the
ciliary muscle. A structure on the back of this organ contains the especially-effective fovea within an
oval-shaped yellow spot that can undergo "degeneration" called the macula. For 10 points, name this organ
lined by the rods and cones of the retina, which is used for vision.
ANSWER: the eye
During development, the hyaloid artery supplys blood to this organ, and it recedes to form Cloquet's
canal. One disease of this organ occurs in a Meibomian form which sees blockage of some oil glands.
Another part of it is held together by the zonule of Zinn, while Amacrine cells are a type of pear
shaped neurons found here. One part of this organ sees the formation of a "cherry red spot" that
appears in patients suffering from Tay Sachs, and another portion of it consists of inner and outer plexiform
layers and has a depression named the fovea. The canal of Schlemm is found at the base of the sclera and
drains the aqueous humor. Consisting of a retina, a lens, an iris, For 10 points, identify these organs of sight.
ANSWER: eyes
This tissue names a type of fin found on some fish between the dorsal and caudal fins. Some types of this
tissue contain mitochondria with a unique uncoupling protein that initiates an oxidative phosphorylation
reaction to produce heat instead of ATP. Yellow bone marrow consists mainly of cells from this tissue.
Ob/ob mice contain greater amounts of this tissue because of their inability to secrete leptin, which these
cells produce to suppress hunger. To help with nonshivering thermogenesis, human infants have a form of
this tissue with many mitochondria that give it a brown color. For 10 points, name this tissue that stores
energy in the form of lipids.
ANSWER: fat [or adipose tissue; or adipocytes]
When cells in this tissue die, they are surrounded by macrophages forming a crown-like structure. A side
effect of HIV protease inhibitors is a redistribution of this tissue. It's not bone marrow, but the stromal
vascular fraction of this tissue is a great source of mesenchymal stem cells. This type of tissue produces
leptin and is divided into white and brown types. It is also known as adipose tissue. For 10 points, name
this type of connective tissue which stores lipids.
ANSWER: body fat tissue [or adipose tissue until it is read]
In addition to apoptosis, the CIDEA gene plays a role in the breakdown of these. The tissue associated
with this is responsible for much of the body's thermogenesis. Leptin acts as an indicator of the level of this
in the body. It is stored in tissue that can be brown or white. This is stored in adipose tissue. These are
triglycerides, meaning they are lipids. Trans ones are associated with heart disease and they can be
saturated or unsaturated. For 10 points, name this material that stores energy in the long term for humans
and whose presence brings about an increase in weight.
ANSWER: fats [or fatty acids; accept adipose tissue before mentioned; prompt on lipidss; accept oil before thermogenesis]
Mice with an excess of neuropeptide Y have high levels of it, and these compounds are broken down in a
process called beta-oxidation. Lots of these compounds are localized in structures important for
non-shivering thermogenesis, known as brown adipose tissue. Commercially, they are altered by changing
some cis isomers to trans ones and by hydrogenating unsaturated ones. For 10 points, name these
compounds including of triglycerides, a colloquial name for oils and lipids.
ANSWER: fats [accept lipids, oils, and triglycerides until mentioned; accept waxes; prompt on fatty acid s]
These molecules release acetyl CoA through beta oxidation. The position of double bonds in these
molecules can be described using either delta notation or omega notation. Although most of those double
bonds are cis in nature, processed foods can contain a "kink" in these molecules due to trans double bonds.
For 10 points, name this class of carboxylic acids that contain long hydrocarbon chains and are often found
in oils.
ANSWER: fatty acids [or unsaturated fatty acids; prompt on fat; prompt on lipids]
Bound to serum albumin in vertebrates, their double bonds are unconjugated and cis, and are
usually separated by a methylene and found, if at all, at C-9, C-12, and C-15. The 12 carbon lauric,
14 carbon myristic, 16 carbon palmitic, and 18 carbon stearic types have high melting points, while
18:1-delta-9 oleic and 18:2-delta-9,12 linoleic acids have low melting points due to kinks produced by
double bonds. Found in triglycerides and waxes, For ten points, name these carboxylic acids with
unsaturated or saturated hydrocarbon chains, a type of lipid found in oils and lard.
ANSWER: fatty acids
The rate limiting step in the synthesis of these compounds is the formation of malonyl-coA from acetyl coA.
That reaction is catalyzed by a complex containing beta-keto acyl synthetase and the acyl carrier peptide.
Prior to oxidation, these compounds are transferred to the mitochondria via a carnitine intermediate. Methyl
esters of these compounds are often utilized as biodiesel, and triglycerides consist of a glycerol backbone
which is esterified with three of these compounds. For 10 points, identify these substances, which have a
carboxylate group and a long aliphatic chain, whose "omega-6" and "omega-3" variants are consumed as
dietary supplements.
ANSWER: fatty acids [prompt on fats; accept long chain carboxylic acids or equivalents]
This structure contains the fovea capitis at one end, and its posterior contains the linea
aspera. The head of this structure articulates with the acetabulum, and this bone also contains
the greater and lesser trochanters. The two intercondylar fossae of this bone house a pair of
important ligaments, and an injury to it, rather than to the pelvis, often results in a broken hip.
Connected via the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments to the tibia, for 10 points, name
this largest bone in the body that is found in the thigh.
ANSWER: femur
Pauwels classification describes fractures to one part of this bone, which suffers avascular necrosis in Legg-
Calve-Perthes disease. Several muscles attach to this bone via the linea aspera, and its points of attachment
to other structures include the lateral and medial condyles and the greater and lesser trochanters. This bone
is the origin of the vastus lateralis. The head of this bone joins with the acetabulum of the coxal bone in a
ball and socket style joint. This bone connects with the patella and articulates with the tibia. For 10 points,
name this longest bone in the body which is located in the thigh.
ANSWER: femur
One part of this bone undergoes necrosis in Legg-Calves-Perthes disease, and one type of fracture of this
bone is sorted by the Winquist and Hansen classification. The pectinus muscle attaches to the pectineal line
on this bone. This bone contains protrusions called the greater and lesser trochanter. This bone's namesake
artery is an extension of the external iliac artery that moves behind the inguinal ligament. The head of this
bone fits into the acetabulum, forming a ball-and-socket joint with the pelvis. For 10 points, name this
largest bone in the body that is located in the upper leg.
ANSWER: femur
In humans, the efficiency of the abductor mechanism is increased by the high angle of this structure's neck,
and its bicondylar angle is much higher than in apes. It is laterally rotated by the popliteus muscle, and the
obturator externus inserts on this bone's trochanteric fossa. It is reinforced along the anteroposterior axis by
the linea aspera. This bone's distal end has a high lateral lip where it articulates with the largest sesamoid
bone in the human body, and connects to the cartilaginous medial and lateral menisci. Its head, which
contains the fovea capitis, articulates with the lunate surface of the acetabulum. For 10 points, identify this
bone which is connected by the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments to the tibia, the longest bone in the
body.
ANSWER: femur
One part of this structure undergoes avascular necrosis in Legg-Calves-Perthes disease. If this
bone's namesake artery is blocked, the cruciate anastomsois provides circulation, and this bone's
neck connects its greater and lesser trochanter to its head. Its head articulates with the acetabulum,
where it creates a (*) ball-and-socket joint, and its lateral and medial epicondyles connect with the fibula
and tibia, respectively. For 10 points, name this bone in the thigh.
ANSWER: femur
The vastus intermedius attaches to the linea aspera on the posterior surface of this bone. The fovea capitis is
located at the head of this bone. Its lateral epicondyle attaches to both the popliteus muscle and the fibular
collateral ligament, while the medial epicondyle joins with the tibial collateral ligament. A broken hip is
caused by a break in not the pelvis but this other bone. For 10 points, name this bone of the thigh, the
longest bone in the body.
ANSWER: femur [prompt on early thighbone]
The product of one type of this process is recycled in the Cori Cycle after it is transported to the liver.
This biochemical process is preferred over oxidative phosphorylation by organisms like yeast, and it is
essential to such diverse phenomena as muscle soreness and the brewing of beer. For 10 points, name this
alternative pathway to cellular respiration, in which cells anaerobically break pyruvate into products like
ethanol or lactic acid instead of oxidizing it to carbon dioxide.
ANSWER: fermentation
Among the byproducts of this process are MSG and the artificial butter flavoring
diacetyl [die-uh-SEE-tul]. Eduard Buchner received the 1907 Nobel Prize for extracting the enzymes
that perform this process, which regenerates the two NAD+ molecules needed to sustain glycolysis.
Commercially important genera that perform this process include Saccharomyces and Lactobacillus,
and the Pasteur effect explains how oxygen inhibits this process. There are lactic acid and alcohol
pathways for what anaerobic process used to make foods like yogurt, sauerkraut, and wine?
ANSWER: fermentation [accept word forms; prompt on anaerobic (cellular) respiration]
The product of one type of this process is recycled in the Cori Cycle after it is transported to the liver.
This biochemical process is preferred over oxidative phosphorylation by organisms like yeast, and it is
essential to such diverse phenomena as muscle soreness and the brewing of beer. For 10 points, name this
alternative pathway to cellular respiration, in which cells anaerobically break pyruvate into products like
ethanol or lactic acid instead of oxidizing it to carbon dioxide.
ANSWER: fermentation
The most abundant genus within this phylum or subdivision is commonly known as Bracken. Members of
that genus often play an important role in succession in subtropical regions and are particularly resilient
weeds because of their sturdy rhizomes. Their gametophytes tend to die after their sporophytes detach to
disperse spores, a process which is aided by the presence of springy sporangia. Members of this group are
notable for possessing megaphylls, unlike other seedless vascular plants, and their leaves, or fronds, can
only open after their fiddleheads uncurl. FTP, name these seedless vascular plants.
ANSWER: ferns (also accept Pteridophyta or Filicophyta)
This group is susceptible to infection by Chirosia betuleti, which causes Knotting gall. The family
salviniaceae contains small, free-floating examples of this division of organisms, which had a huge
radiation in the late Cretaceous period. The indusium is a scaly covering for the sorii of these
organisms. This division is characterized by a small (*) heart-shaped gametophyte stage called the
prothallus. This group, which includes marattoids, psilotales, leptosporangiates, and horsetails, are more
evolved than lycophytes due to having megaphylls on their true leaves. These organisms are among the first
evolutionarily to have xylem and phloem. For 10 points, name these seedless vascular plants, whose leaves
are called fronds.
ANSWER: ferns [or pteridophyta]
This is the most famous kind of organism to grow a prothallus. The marattioid and ophioglossoid
organisms of this type form, along with horsetails, the taxonomic group that these organisms are the most
prominent part of. These organisms form a tiny, heart shaped gametophyte , form the majority of the group
pteridophyta, and possess xylem and phloem, unlike bryophytes. However, they have neither flowers nor
seeds, reproducing instead with the spores found in their fronds. For 10 points, name these plants that
evolved early, much like mosses.
ANSWER: ferns [or pteridophyte and Pteridophyta before mentioned]
CD81 or CD9-knockout mice do not properly undergo this process. Sir Robert Edwards won the
Nobel Prize for developing a way to emulate this process, a key component of which is triggered by
the binding of GalT to ZP3. The "calcium bomb hypothesis" explains the increase in cytosolic
calcium
concentration during this process. The release of cortical granules initiates the "slow block" during
this process. A type of cell involved in it undergoes the (*) acrosome reaction as it approaches the zona
pellucida, after which its mitochondria are excluded. Amphibians and fish are among the animals that
undergo this process externally; in mammals, it is followed by implantation in the uterine wall. For 10
points,
name this process that creates a zygote from the union of a sperm and an egg.
ANSWER: fertilization [or fecundation; or syngamy; or acrosome reaction until it is read; prompt on "conception"]
This biological process is preceded by a reaction that is triggered by the ZP3 protein of the zona
pellucida and results in the exocytosis of hyaluronidase from a secretory granule, the acrosome
reaction. Its completion sees the penetration of the cumulus oophorus and the formation of a second
(*) polar body. This process does not occur in parthenogenesis and can be performed in vitro to produce
a blastocyst for implantation. For 10 points, name this process that involves the fusion of a
spermatozooal nucleus and an egg nucleus to produce a primary embryo nucleus.
ANSWER: fertilization [accept word forms]
One of these species sucks the blood of masked boobies when water is scarce, and exhibits a unique
soil-scratching behavior that allows it to smash booby eggs. Currently controversy exists over whether
these species should be placed into as many as six genuses or just one genus, Geospiza. Bmp4 and
calmodulin are among the molecules that influence the size and shape of their most widely-studied feature.
All but one of these species studied by Peter and Rosemary Grant live in the same island chain, while the
other lives on Cocos Island. For 10 points, name this group of fourteen species that mainly live in the
Galapagos Islands, whose variety in beak size and shape make them an ideal model organism for studying
speciation.
ANSWER: Darwin's Finches [prompt on finches; prompt on Galapagos finches; prompt on Geospiza difficilis or vampire finch before Geospiza is mentioned]
Peter and Rosemary Grant did work concerning these animals that are a primary example of
adaptive radiation. Their fourteen species are classified into ground, tree, and warbler varieties. The
namesake of these animals noted that depending on their diet, which varied from seeds, buds, and
insects, these animals' (*) beaks seemed to be shaped in a way that facilitated their niche. For 10 points,
name these small birds studied in the Galapagos Islands by the author of The Origin of Species.
ANSWER: Darwin's finches [or Galapagos finches before mention]
Most of the original specimens of these creatures were shot by Syms Covington and examined by John
Gould. They were studied in depth by David Lack and Peter and Rosemary Grant, and they possess an
unexplained yellow and pink coloration of their beaks just after birth. They are closely related to the
American Emberizidae. There are fourteen species of them, one of which lives on Cocos Island and the rest
of which reside in the Galapagos. For 10 points, name this set of Passerine birds studied by the English
scientist who formulated the theory the natural selection.
ANSWER: Darwin's finches [prompt on finches]
The characteristic feature of these organisms is strongly correlated with differential expression of Bmp4.
Many of these organisms belong to the genera Camarhyncus and Geospiza. All of these are found within
the family Thraupidae, and were studied by John Gould when their namesake brought them back to
England. In the 1980s, Peter and Rosemary Grant observed a shift in characteristics within this group when
a drought caused a population's average beak size to increase due to the different ecological niches they
occupy. For 10 points, identify these birds that helped to devise their namesake's theory of natural selection
and which can be found on the Galapagos Islands.
ANSWER: Darwin's Finches [accept Geospiza (fortis) before "camarhynchus" or Galapagos finches before mentioned]
These events mediate serotiny in some Eucalyptus species and in lodgepole pines. The oldest known one of
these events occurred in the Silurian, when the first tracheophytes appeared. Plants in environments prone
to these events often can resprout adventitiously. After them, soils develop a hydrophobic surface and lose
nitrogen to volatilization. The health of chaparral is probably maintained by the regular occurrence of these
events. These events may be prevented by inducing controlled forms of these events or establishing
"breaks" that prevent them from propagating. For 10 points, name these high-temperature events which only
humans are known to be able to manipulate.
ANSWER: fires [accept anything that refers to things being on fire like wildfire, forest fire, and brush fire]
One type of these creatures, Danio rerio (DAH-nee-oh RAY-ree-oh), is an important model organism.
These creatures use counter current circulation and a lateral line sensory system. One class of them includes
the "lung" type and the once-believed-to-be-extinct Coelacanth (SEE-luh-kanth). Common types of these
organisms are divided into classes Osteichthyes (OSS-tee-ICK-thees) and Chondrichthyes
(KON-DRICK-thees) based on the presence of a bone or cartilage skeleton. For 10 points, name these
aquatic verbrates, examples of which include koi and sharks.
ANSWER: fish
This group of vertebrates included placodermi, whose heads and necks were covered by bones. Currently
considered to consist of several classes, some of these vertebrates contain photophores that emit light. This
group includes the agnatha, which is jawless. Some of these animals have gas bladders, and these
vertebrates include chondrichthyes [kon-DRIK-thees] and osteichthyes [oh-STIK-thees]. Name these
vertebrates that do not have limbs with digits and which include lampreys, rays, sharks, and guppies.
ANSWER: fish
This quantity usually increases monotonically according to a statement often formulated as the Price
equation; that statement is Fisher's fundamental theorem and says this quantity varies with population
variance. One kind of behavior is called inclusive if it indirectly increases this quantity. This quantity
depends on the proportions of other species present, as it is a function of phenotype. For 10 points, give this
term that refers to an individual's ability to out-reproduce its peers, increasing the frequency of its genotype
through natural selection.
ANSWER: fitness
In Stuart Koffman's NK model, this value is a scalar function of an input string on a phase space,
and the coefficient s is equal to one minus this value. The covariance between this value and of a
characteristic denoted z appears in Price's equation, and setting this value equal to z in that theorem
recapitulates Fisher's fundamental theorem, which states that this quantity is directly proportional to
variance. Sewall Wright visualized this quantity as a (*) landscape, and taking the optimal form of this
quantity minus the average over the optimal gives the genetic load. The absolute form this quantity is
defined as the fraction of a given genotype that survive times average fecundity. For 10 points, name this
quantity central to evolutionary biology, the ability of a particular organism to survive and pass on its genes.
ANSWER: fitness
The NK model is a "landscape" of this concept, in which evolving populations tend to climb to local
maxima. Haplodiploidy may contribute to the development of eusociality under the inclusive theory of this
concept which holds that it can be increased by altruism. It is measured by the selection coefficient, and
genetic load is the percentage difference between the ideal and mean values of this quantity denoted w. This
quantity is zero for ligers, mules, and other sterile animals, and natural selection favors the survival of
individuals with higher levels of it. For 10 points, name this concept that describes an individual's ability to
survive and reproduce in an environment.
ANSWER: fitness
The inclusive type of this property is addressed by Hamilton's Rule, which multiplies the benefit to the
recipient of an altruistic act by the genetic relatedness to the actor. An example of the inclusive type of this
property is kin selection, and this is used to explain the continued existence of bees, ants, and other
organisms studied by sociobiologists. The absolute measure of this property is the ratio of the number of
individuals after and before selection. Name this quality of certain populations to survive and reproduce.
ANSWER: (Darwinian or evolutionary) fitness (accept adaptive value, selective value, or adaptability, prompt on ability to "survive" or "altruism")
The probability distribution of phenotypes is part of Hartl's definition of this concept, and an altruistic act
must increase this quantity to pass Hamilton's rule. The inclusive variety of this explains why worker bees
care for their sisters, and when most alleles are neutral for this quantity, genetic drift overtakes natural
selection. Most courtship behavior is driven by the relative type of this quantity, for which mules rate a
zero. Generally decreased by inbreeding and increased by adaptability, identify this evolutionary measure of
reproductive success, the contribution of an individual to the gene pool of the next generation, which
usually goes up the longer an individual survives.
ANSWER: Darwinian fitness [or adaptive value; or selective value]
Gram positive organisms have two basal rings that hold this structure, while gram negative organisms have
four. Bacteria of the spirochete variety have a specialized variety of this structure located in the periplasmic
space whose rotation causes the corkscrew like motion of the bacterium. In eukaryotic cells, this structure is
composed of a bundle of nine fused pairs of microtubule doublets surrounding a surrounding two central
microtubules. Prokaryotic cells can be classified on as monotrichous or peritrichous depending on how
many of these they have. FTP, name this appendage in cells with their whip-like motion responsible for
locomotion of the cell.
ANSWER: Flagella or Flagellum
One version of this structure has an inner skeletal structure called an axoneme. In bacteria, these
structures are often seen in conjunction with a polar membrane. In eukaryotes, they are powered by a
protein called dyenin, and they are composed of a characteristic "9 plus 2" arrangement. These
structures are anchored to a cell via a basal body. This structure's movement is powered by the
acrosome in the sperm cell, which it allows to be motile. For 10 points, name this whip-like cell structure
functioning in unicellular organism motion.
ANSWER: flagella [or flagellum]
The gametes of the Chytridiomycota have this structure while other fungi divisions do not. In Arabidopsis,
the MAPK receptor family recognizes the protein that makes up this structure, while the receptor for the
same proteins in the innate immune system is TLR-5. The orientations of these structures can be
characterized as "monotrichous" or "amphitrichous." In bacteria, components of this structure are attached
by four rings, while in eukaryotes they are composed of a 9+2 microtubule arrangement. These structures
are composed of a rod, hook, and filament. For ten points, name this cellular structure used in cell motility.
ANSWER: flagellum or flagella
A namesake protein component of this structure is detected by Toll-like Receptor 5. Tg737, whose mutation
causes polycystic kidney disease in mice, is responsible for transport within this structure, which is also
dependent upon complexes of IFT proteins. Y. Pestis uses a structure homologous to these to inject
virulence factors into host cytoplasm, known as the Type III secretory system. They have a P, L, and MS
ring in gram-negative bacteria, and in all organisms their central body is called the axonene. In Eukaryotes,
they contain a 9+2 set of microtubules around a central pair and use dyenin and ATP hydrolysis to power
their whipping motion. Similar to cilia, for 10 points, name these projections used by cells to swim.
ANSWER: flagellum [or flagella]
This organelle is structurally homologous to a Type III secretory system. In Gram-negative bacteria, L,
P, and MS rings surround its hook and basal body. Eukaryotic ones have a 9+2 arrangement of
microtubules and use power from dyenin and ATP to move. Prokaryotic ones rotate like a screw. Like a
similar structure, they contain an axoneme (AK-suh-neem), but they are longer than cilia. For 10 points,
name these whip-like structures used by sperm cells to move.
ANSWER: flagellum [or flagella]
This structure is powered by the motion of the protein dynein (DIE-neen), which in turn derives its
energy from ATP hydrolysis. The core of this organelle consists of a base anchored by a basal body and a
bundle of nine pairs of microtubules surrounding two central pairs of microtubules. This organelle is
structurally similar to the cilia (SIH-lee-uh). For 10 points, name this hairlike structure that is involved in
moving the cells of most living organisms in a whip-like manner.
ANSWER: flagellum [or flagella]
In bacteria, its theoretical formation from the Type III secretion system refutes arguments for its
"irreducible complexity" made by intelligent design proponent Michael Behe. Like its smaller counterparts,
this structure's axoneme contains the protein dynein and a characteristic "9 plus 2" arrangement of
microtubules, and they connect to the cell membrane via a basal body. Algae that are members of the
phylum that cause red tides usually have two of these structures. For 10 points, name this usually-singular
tail-like structure which propels the motion of sperm cells and bacteria, and beats differently from cilia.
ANSWER: flagellum [accept flagella]
It's not the mitochondria, but these organelles are the site of the Mot complex, which pumps protons.
Cryptomona unusually have two of these on either side. They evolved from the type III secretory system.
This organelle's subcomponents are interconnected by dynein, and one side of it is attached to the basal
body. It consists of nine doublets of microtubules arranged in a central doublet. For 10 points, name these
whiplike projections used by cells to move.
ANSWER: flagella [or flagellum; do not accept or prompt on "cilium" or "cilia"]
Spirochetes (SPY-ro-KEATS) have modified versions of these structures known as axial filaments. In
bacteria, the hook, or base of this organelle, is covered. This organelle is attached to a basal body. In
eukaryotes, they are the longer of two types of structures that are composed of a "nine plus two"
arrangement of microtubules. Unlike that other structure, cilia, these structures work by rotating in a
clockwise or counterclockwise manner. For 10 points, name these whiplike projections that are the main
method of cell motility in Euglena and sperm cells.
ANSWER: flagella [or flagellum]
The archael types of these structures are formed with class three signal peptides and are modified by
N-linked glycans. If a cell has multiple examples of these, then the cell is referred to as polytrichous.
These structures consist of a (*) basal body and can include dynein if in a eukaryotic cell its microtubules
have an axoneme, or a nine plus two arrangement. They function by means of propulsion unlike a closely
related structure and are present on sperm cells. For 10 points, name these whip-like structures used for
movement like their counterparts cilia.
ANSWER: flagella [or flagellum]
The flgB ["f-l-g-b"] operon controls transcription of the distal rod protein of its blepharoplast, and fliF
proteins aggregate into the MS ring of this structure. The secretion system referred to as T3SS uses a
simpler version of one component of this organelle. Nexin links the components of these organelles
together, preventing them from being dissolved, while its shaft passes through four rings, rather than two, in
Gram-negative bacteria. In eukaryotes their motion results from the alternating movements of two sets of
dynein arms, while those of prokaryotes are screw-shaped and rotate. The defining external feature of sperm
cells, these are, for 10 points, what long structures in eukaryotes that whip back and forward to allow for
movement?
ANSWER: flagellum [or flagella]
One key component of these structures is recognized by TLR5, and the slender-body and resistive-force
theories explain their function. In humans this and similar structures use tektin B1. Preparation of these in
archaea use a prepilin peptidase homologue and are similar to type IV pilus systems. Bacterial ones are
similar to type III secretion systems. They have C and MS rings and their action comes from MotA and B
proteins. Consisting of a hook, rod, filament, and motor, and the parts located in and near the cell
membrane are known as the basal body. They can work by rotating or moving back and forth. For 10
points, name these structures that allow microbes to move that are also present on sperm.
ANSWER: flagellum [or flagella]
These structures are present in the non-stalked cells in the Caulobacter life cycle. Chytrids are the
only members of their kingdom to possess these structures, and in bacteria, these structures are
highly homologous to proteins in the Type III secretion system. The organization of these structures
is the basis of classifying bacteria into group such as "lophotrichous," and these structures have (*)
M/S and L/P ring complexes. Some bacteria that lack these structures use Type IV pili to achieve their main
function. During chemotaxis, variable motion of these structures leads to biased random walks. These
structures are divided into the basal body, hook, and rod regions, and in eukarya, these structures' axonemes
have microtubules in a "9+2" arrangement. For 10 points, name these structures that aid in cellular motion
and are longer than cilia.
ANSWER: flagella [or flagellum]
These structures contain an FliG switch that allow them to change direction. The life cycle of
Naegleria fowleri contains a stage named for these structures between a cyst and trophozoite stage.
Those of Selenomonas are arranged into fascicles. Aeromonas and Vibrio parahemolyticus have both
lateral and polar examples of these structures, and they are driven by the mot complex via a
hydrogen ion gradient. These structures contain the (*) L, P and MS rings on one side, and they evolved
from the Type III secretory system. These structures are anchored by the basal body, and like cilia they
contain a nine plus two set of microtubules. For 10 points, name these whiplike projections used by bacteria
and spermatozoa for propulsion.
ANSWER: flagella [or flagellum]
In bacteria, these can be arranged in monotrichous, lophotrichous, amphitrichous, or peritrichous
schemes; Michael Behe argued that the 'irreducible complexity' of these is evidence for intelligent
design. In eukaryotes, their 9-plus-2 axoneme include the protein [*] dynein, while in bacteria their
filament is attached to the hook at the junction and they rotate, unlike in animals such as Euglena where
they thrash back and forth. Distinguished from cilia only by their singular beating pattern, for 10 points,
name this tail-like projection in a cell that is often used for locomotion.
ANSWER: Flagellum [accept flagella]
The Mot protein drives this structure in bacteria. The inner part of these structures is known as the
axoneme. The number of rings attached to these structures is among the differences between Grampositive and Gram-negative bacteria. Spirochetes contain an internal version of this structure known
as an axial filament. Along the outer part of these structures are pairs of dynein which uses a force
derived from ATP hydrolysis. These structures contain a 9+2 arrangement of microtubules and are
found on sperm cells. For 10 points, name this tail like structure that like cilia are used for cell locomotion.
ANSWER: flagella or flagellum
In archaea, these structures are produced by a type II-like secretion system, while in bacteria, they are
produced by a type III-like system. These structures can be enlarged for observation in the Leifson and Ryu
stains. Cells possessing them can be called monotrichous or polytrichous based on their number, and in
bacteria, the MotA and MotB proteins form proton channels, which power the activity of these structures.
They consist of a basal body, a hook, and a filament, and have a rotatory motion in bacteria, and they are
also found on eukaryotic cells such as and sperm cells. For 10 points, identify these whip-like structures
used by motile cells to help them move about.
ANSWER: flagella [or flagellum]
One portion of these structures is hypothesized to be homologous to bacterial type III secretion systems, and
choanocytes on sponges possess these structures. Organisms in one phylum named for these structures have
grooves called cingula that contain the sulcus. In bacteria, the rod connects this structure's hook and
filament to the basal body, and organisms with these structures include Chlamydomonas. These structures'
axonemes have a 9+2 arrangement of microtubules, and these propel organisms like Euglena by rotating or
moving back and forth. Contrasted with cilia, these are, for 10 points, what whip-like structures used by
sperm for locomotion?
ANSWER: flagellum [or flagella]
The P-ring connects these structures to the cell, and the so-called polar organelle is found in close
proximity to these structures. H. pylori uses this structure to burrow into the mucosal lining of the
stomach. These rotating structures are connected to a basal body and have a base of nine plus two
arrangement of (*) microtubules. These structures are notably absent in Paramecium. For 10 points,
identify these long, whip-like bacterial structures used for locomotion, contrasted with the shorter cilia.
ANSWER: flagella [or flagellum]
A scientist with this surname used aniline dyes to discover chromatin and chromosomes. Kevin Brown
discounted the myth that Winston Churchill's father paid for the schooling of another man with this
surname. That scientist with this surname was assisted by Merlin Price in finding a compound later
mass-produced by Florey and Chain. That scientist with this surname, who had earlier discovered
lysozyme, discovered a beta-lactam by analyzing fungal contamination in staphylococcal cultures. For the
point, give this surname shared by the founder of cytogenetics and the discoverer of penicillin.
ANSWER: Fleming [or Flemming; or Walter Flemming; or Alexander Fleming]
This scientist names a museum that is located at St. Mary's Hospital where he made his most notable
discovery. This man modestly praised his partners Howard Florey and Ernest Boris Chain for their work in
his most famous discovery. He himself dismissed the popular story that he saved the young Winston
Churchill from death. This man's most famous discovery came after he grew a mould while studying
staphylococci. For 10 points, name this Scottish biologist who discovered the antibiotic penicillin.
ANSWER: Sir Alexander Fleming
This scientist discovered that antiseptics were harming soldiers during World War I. This discoverer of
lysozyme shared a Nobel Prize with Howard Florey and Ernst Boris Chain after discovering a beta-lactam
molecule that inhibits peptidoglycan (PEP-tid-ohg-LIE-can) cross-linking in bacterial cell walls. For 10
points, name this man who accidentally discovered the first antibiotic, penicillin.
ANSWER: Alexander Fleming
These structures are produced after the VR transition, where the central zone of the SAM becomes
active. These structures are supported by a peduncle, which branches off into more than one pedicels. The
calyx is a layer that helps protect these structures and surrounds the corolla. These structures contain a
stigma, which is the upper part of a carpel. Birds and insects can carry out pollination of these structures,
which are only found in angiosperms. For 10 points, name these plant structures, whose colorful parts are
called petals and can smell nice.
ANSWER: flowers
The ABC model of these structures' genetic development was derived studying the model organism
Arabidopsis (uh-rab-ih-DAHP-sis). A calyx of sepals is found at the lower end of these objects, whose
parts generally come in multiples of three in monocots (MAH-noh-cots). Angiosperms
(AN-gee-oh-sperms) are defined by these objects' presence, and their filaments, tipped by anthers,
compose their stamen. Once these object's pistils are pollinated they can grow into fruit. For 10 points,
name these radially-symmetric, colorful plant parts with petals.
ANSWER: flowers (prompt on plants before angiosperms)
These structures are arranged along the spadix in members of the Araceae family, and are arranged in
"heads" in members of Compositae. In a model of these structures, A, B, and C type transcription
factors direct cell division and patterning in them. Generally, these structures can be thought to consist
of three whorls called the perianth, androecium, and gynoecium. In dicots, separate parts of these
structures appear in sets of four or five, while in monocots, they generally appear in threes. Sepals grow
around them for protection, and they often produce nectar to attract pollinators. For 10 points, name
these plant reproductive structures which contain stamens, pistils, and petals.
ANSWER: flowers [prompt on "petals" until "androecium"]
In one model of these structures' development, the B gene interacts with the A and C genes to determine the
makeup of their four layers. Their primitive and advanced types are distinguished by the presence of a
structure consisting of the corolla and calyx, called the perianth. They are supported by pedicels and
peduncles, and their bases are surrounded by sepals. Parts of these structures include ovules, styles, and
stigmas, and they are absent in gymnosperms. Featuring carpels, stamens, and pistils, these structures spread
and receive pollen. For 10 points, name these plant structures with petals.
ANSWER: flowers [prompt on "blossoms" or "blooms"]
The Frye-Edidin experiments can be rationalized by it as being the result of free diffusion, but one problem
with it was discovered by Kusumi and concerned a "skeleton fence." First developed in 1972 by Singer and
Nicolson, it states, among other things, that lipids and proteins can rotate. In addition, it describes a certain
structure as a functionally asymmetric lipid bilayer studded with embedded proteins that aid in transport.
For 10 points, name this model used to conceptualize cell membranes.
ANSWER: fluid mosaic model
This phenomenon is measured after a capillary is heated with an IR-Laser in microscale
thermophoresis. A technique that relies on this phenomenon uses a labelled complementary strand of
DNA to locate the physical position of a DNA sequence, and is contrasted with a chromogenic variety
of a certain technique. Probes used in real-time PCR, such as TaqMan, have this property, which is
used as a marker in a form of (*) in situ hybridization. In gel electrophoresis, nucleic acids are often
intercalated with a molecule that has this property, ethidium bromide, which makes them visible under UV
light. A protein first isolated from jellyfish that has this property has a bright green color. For 10 points,
identify this property which can make things glow after they have absorbed light, which is contrasted with
phosphorescence.
ANSWER: Fluorescence [accept word forms such as Fluorescent]
Enzymes that reduce this compound are inhibited by trimethoprim and methotrexate, and it is
often conjugated to polyglutamate in dietary sources. This compound is used as a cofactor in
enzymes responsible for one-carbon transfers, and like vitamin B12 its deficiency causes (*)
megaloblastic anemia. It is given to pregnant mothers to prevent spina bifida in the fetus. For 10 points,
identify this important metabolite found in leafy green vegetables like spinach.
ANSWER: folate [accept dihydrofolate, tetrahydrofolate, THF, or vitamin B9]
Synthesis of this compound can be prevented using sulfa drugs, which replace the para-aminobenzoic
acid that ordinarily reacts with pteridine to create this substance. THF derivatives of this compound
are integral to the synthesis of dUMP. The cancer drug methotrexate works by inhibiting the
metabolism of this substance. High levels of this compound interfere with most malaria treatments,
and coenzymes of this substance are necessary for synthesizing DNA from purines and thymidine.
Along with (*) cyanocobalamin, this vitamin is necessary to synthesize homocysteine. The rate of neural
tube defect formation is reduced by taking large doses of this water-soluble vitamin in early-term
pregnancies. FTP, identify this B-vitamin named for its presence in leafy vegetables, which after B12 has
the highest numerical designation among compounds that are actually B-vitamins.
ANSWER: folic acid [or folacin or folate or pteroyl-L-glutamic acid or pteroyl-L-glutamate; accept vitamin B9]
The inflammation of one region of this body part is called plantar fasciitis. Amoebas create an extension
of their cell named for this body part that can surround food or be used for locomotion. In humans, this
body part contains the metatarsals. The phylum Gastropoda is named for the Greek for stomach and this
body part. For 10 points, identify this body part found below the ankle in humans that is the measure of
distance in the Imperial system.
ANSWER: foot
When a single species dominates this type of ecosystem, it is classified as monodominant. This type
of ecosystem can be harmed by the Scleroderris [SKLAIR-oh-DAIR-iss] canker fungus, which is one
of the species that can cause this type of region's dieback. An adjective used to describe a common
type of this area means 'falling off' to refer to its seasonal changes. The removal of some organisms
in these areas, known as thinning, is used to improve the overall health of these regions. These types
of areas can have an understory and a canopy, and the taiga is also known as the "boreal" type of
this area. Name these regions where trees play a major role.
ANSWER: forests [accept more specific answers such as rain forests; accept woods or woodlands]
William Smith's study of these objects led him to posit the "principle of faunal succession." Edward
Cope and Othniel Marsh entered an extremely competitive "war" to hunt for these things. These objects
were used as evidence of "catastrophism" by one of the earliest people to study them, George Cuvier
(COO-vee-ay). Studied in paleontology, they are sometimes captured in resin or created through the
permineralization of bones. For 10 points, name these remains of plants and animals used to reconstruct
extinct animals like dinosaurs.
ANSWER: fossils [or fossil layers; or bones]
The zombie effect must be accounted for when studying the remanie or derived types of these objects.
William Smith pioneered the identification of strata using them; his namesake principle of succession
is essentially an application of the principle of superposition. Biases in the composition of these
objects caused by the conditions that lead to their formation are studied by taphonomists. The (*)
index type of these items are useful in dating since they are limited to a small region within the geological
time scale. George Cuvier formulated his theory of catastrophism by examining these items. Types of these
items include gastroliths and coprolites, the latter of which is solidified feces. For 10 points, name these
remains of prehistoric life, which are studied by paleontologists.
ANSWER: fossils
One disease associated with this effect causes dwarfism, polydactyly, and occasional heart abnormalities,
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, and this effect has been blamed for an increased proportion of Huntingon's
among Afrikaners. Examples of populations displaying it are the Pennsylvania Dutch and Martha's
Vineyard. It often results in a non-random sample of genes and causes results similar to bottlenecking. For
10 points, name this effect causing reduced genetic variation which arises from a colony being settled by a
small portion of the original population.
ANSWER: Founder Effect [prompt on Genetic Drift]
This phenomenon can be advantageous in haplotype analysis when mapping the spread of disease and
linkage disequilibrium. This is possible because regions in linkage disequilibrium encompass greater
chromosomal distances. After the 1883 Krakatoa eruption, which erased all life on the island that remained,
new populations of organisms experienced this after their arrival. The settlers of Quebec also demonstrated
this phenomenon when they exhibited minimal genetic variation even after an eighty-fold change in
population. Sometimes caused by a population bottleneck, it can occur even though the separate group is
not strictly a new population. FTP, what is this decrease of genetic variation that occurs when a new colony
with a limited set of alleles is established by a small number of individuals?
ANSWER: Founder effect
Labuda et al. attributed the prevalence of rickets among Quebecois to this effect. Wallace et al. found that
it could be found among Amerindian populations by examining the mitochondrial DNA. Prevalence of
fumarase deficiency in Fundamentalist Latter-Day Saint populations is one clear modern example of it
among human populations as are numerous examples among various Pacific islands. First described by
Ernst Mayr in 1952, it can result in increased genetic drift. For 10 points, name this effect that can follow a
bottleneck event, in which a population arises from a limited number of original members.
ANSWER: founder effect
The formulator of this idea rejected the shifting balance theory, instead stating that geographic isolation was
required for speciation, and that this idea along with gene loss and small population size could accelerate
speciation. One consequence of this is the high incidence of Huntington's disease among descendants of the
original Afrikaners in South Africa. One version of it can be used to explain progressive decreases in
genetic diversity as humans migrated from Africa, the serial version. This can also be more generally
depicted, if the population increases, as a bottleneck. An extreme example of genetic drift, for 10 points,
name this effect, formulated by Ernst Mayr, that results when a new population is started by a sample not
representative of the larger parent population.
ANSWER: founder effect [prompt on "genetic drift" or "bottleneck" before mentioned]
The population of Martha's Vineyard has an unusually high rate of deafness, peaking in the town of
Chilmark, where one of twenty-five people could not hear. This phenomenon is due to this form of genetic
drift, in which a small population selected from a larger one is isolated and interbreeds, limiting genetic
variation.
ANSWER: founder effect
First outlined by Ernst Mayr, this concept can account for the unusually large deaf population on Martha's
Vineyard and the smaller size of seeds in certain island regions of Canada. It can result if population flows
are constrained, and it explains the high prevalence of Ellis-van Creveld syndrome in Amish populations. A
specific example of genetic drift, FTP, name the effect that describes the decrease in genetic variation
observed when a small population separates from a larger population.
ANSWER: Founder effect
Late in life, this biologist joined JD Bernal's team and discovered that the tobacco mosaic virus has
single-stranded RNA. This scientist's assistant Raymond Gosling took Photo 51, a diffraction pattern
shaped like an X. While employed at King's College, Maurice Wilkins stole this biologist's X-ray
diffraction images of a B-form helix. She later died of ovarian cancer and never won a Nobel Prize. For the
point, name this crystallographer whose work was appropriated by Watson and Crick in their "double
helix" model of DNA.
ANSWER: Rosalind Franklin
With Aaron Klug, this scientist showed that all particles of tobacco mosaic virus were the same size, and
this scientist discovered that different types of coal have different pore sizes in a doctoral thesis. This
supervisor of Raymond Gosling took photo 51, which showed the paracrystalline B-form of a certain
substance; that work was done in Maurice Wilkins' lab. For 10 points, name this scientist whose X-ray
diffraction pictures were used by Watson and Crick to develop the double-helix model of DNA.
ANSWER: Rosalind Elsie Franklin
Total internal reflection microscopy is often used in the single-molecule version of this technique, which
popularly uses a malemide-based reaction to tag cysteine residues. Its efficiency is directly proportional to
an overlap integral dependent on the fourth power of wavelength, and that calculation usually assumes an
orientation factor of 2/3, meaning freely rotating dipoles. Cy3 and Cy5 are a popular pair used in this
technique, which even more commonly uses CFP and YFP. Dipole-dipole coupling allow transfer of an
excited chromophore's energy to an acceptor chromophore in this technique, causing a detectable shift in
color when two molecules are close together. For 10 points, name this technique commonly used to screen
for protein-protein interactions, in which two molecules are labelled with different dyes and then imaged.
ANSWER: FRET or [Forster Resonance Energy Transfer; or Fluorescent Resonance Energ Transfer]
One early Jurassic ancestor of this order is viernaella herbsti, which possessed its characteristic nine
presacral vertebrae. A present-day member is able to survive dry conditions by burrowing
underground and secreting a water-tight mucus cocoon. When this order reproduces, the male
grasps the female in an amplexus. Yet another member of this order has large oocytes, making it
useful for studies of (*) body plan development. This order also contains the smallest known vertebrate,
the model organism Xenopus laevis, and the colourful, toxic phyllobates terribilis; the aforementioned
creatures are the "African clawed" and "golden poison dart" animals of this kind. For 10 points, name this
order of amphibians whose larvae are known as tadpoles.
ANSWER: frogs [or Anura]
One type of these creatures is induced by chrionic gonadotropin from pregnant humans to lay
millimeter-wide eggs; that model organism in development labs, Xenopus laevis, has clawed feet.
High thyroxine concentrations in the back of these animals cause their jaws to deform and their tails
to (*) disappear. These animals of order Anura include a family which warns of its batrachotoxin emissions
with bright colored skin, the "poison dart" type. For 10 points, name these reptiles whose amphibious stage
is the tadpole.
ANSWER: frogs [or toads or tadpoles; prompt on amphibians]
In some of these organisms, Buller's drop accumulates at the hilar appendage, causing a break in the
apiculus-sterigma boundary. These organisms exhibit clamp connections and Spitzenkorper, and consist of
structures divided by septa. One division in this taxonomic classification is named for a sac-like structure,
or ascus, and another division is characterized by the presence of basidiospores. Mycorrhizae are symbiotic
associations between these organisms and plant roots. These organisms are composed of chitinous hyphae,
which together form a mycelium. For 10 points, name this kingdom whose members include yeasts, molds,
and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi or fungus
This kingdom's cell walls can be inhibited from forming by echinocandins (ek-EYE-no-CAN-dinz).
Mating in these organisms requires the formation of a heterokaryon (het-er-o-KAR-ee-on), followed by
fusion of nuclei to form a diploid zygote. Members of this kingdom have bodies consisting of filaments
called hyphae, whose cell walls contain chitin (KITE-in). Organisms of this kingdom can form a symbiote
with plant roots, called a mycorrhizae. For 10 points, name this kingdom that includes mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi [or fungus]
This classification contains all of the organisms that contain both glucan and chitin (KAI-tin) in their cell
walls, and the examples that have cells with two nuclei are called Dikarya. While Arthrobotrys are capable
of trapping nematodes, most of these organisms are saprophytes, meaning they feed off of dead or decaying
matter. Many of them are characterized by a group of cells surrounded by a cell wall, a tubular structure
known as a hyphae, and their study is called myphology. Name this kingdom that includes yeasts, molds,
and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi or fungus
Members of this kingdom can produce carcinogenic aflatoxins (AFF-luh-TOCK-sins). An important
phylum in it is Ascomycota (ASS-ko-my-KO-tuh). Mycorrhizae (my-CORE"-iz-ay) in this kingdom form
important symbiotic relationships with plant roots. Important structures of organisms in this kingdom
include the parisitic haustoria (how-STORE-ee-uh) and the filamentous hyphae (HY-fee). For 10 points,
name this kingdom that includes yeasts, molds, and mushroom-producing organisms.
ANSWER: fungi
Alpha-aminoadipate produced during lysine biosynthesis in some species of these organisms can be
used to produce cephalosporin. Fusion of structures possessed by these organisms is known as (*)
anastomosis. Doliporus covered by a parenthosome are characteristic of septa in the basidiomycetes variety
and asci are spore bearing cells characteristic of the ascomycete variety. For 10 points, name this kingdom
consisting of members that possess chitinous cell walls and grow using filaments called hyphae, which
compose their mycelia.
ANSWER: fungi (or fungus)
This kingdom includes the organism that Beadle and Tatum used to prove the one gene-one enzyme
hypothesis. Coenocytic ones do not have cells separated by septa. Ascomyceta and Basidiomyceta are two
phyla that belong to this kingdom. They can exist in a symbiotic relationship with plants in mychorrizae,
and structures that are found on them include hyphae. For 10 points, name this kingdom, which includes
molds, yeast, and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi
Growth in these organisms occurs at the Spitzenkorper, a structure composed of microfilaments and
vesicles. They can be either septate or coenocytic, depending on whether division of cytoplasm occurs.
Some use haustoria to penetrate cell walls, and are often mutualistic growths on plant roots. One group of
these organisms creates ascocarps to hold the spore-containing asci, while others possess basidia-tipped
gills on their fruiting bodies. They are composed of hyphae, which have chitin in their cell walls and form a
mycelium in their food source. For 10 points, name this saprophytic kingdom containing mushrooms.
ANSWER: Fungi [or Fungus]
One phylum within this kingdom contains Woronin bodies. Their cell membranes have ergosterol
(err-GAW-steh-roll) and they include the disease causing Aspergillus (ahs-purr-GILL-uhs). Phylums
in this kingdom include Ascomycota (AHS-koh-my-kah-tuh) and basidiomycota
(buh-SIH-dee-oh-my-kah-tuh). Penicillin was extracted from another member of this phylum. Their
cell walls, like insect exoskeletons, are made of (*) chitin (KIE-tin), and their bodies are composed of
thread-like hyphae (HIGH-fay) that form a mycelium (my-suh-LEE-um). Members include bakers' yeast.
For 10 points, name this kingdom that includes mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi
These organisms contain clamp connections and Spitzenkorper, which are the organizing centers for their
growth. They are classified as either septate or coenocytic, based on whether or not cytoplasmic division
occurs. They reproduce using either a sac-like ascus or a basidia and use rhizomorphs to anchor themselves
in place. A symbiotic relationship between them and plants is called mycorrhizae. They are composed of
chitinous hyphae which branch to form mycelia. For 10 points, name this taxonomical kingdom which
contains mushrooms.
ANSWER: Fungi [or Fungus]
Like euglena, these organisms synthesize L-lysine using alpha-aminoadipate as an intermediate. One of
these organisms, C. neoformans, may use melanin to extract energy from gamma radiation. Cup-shaped
reproductive organs consist of conidia-containing asci in one type of these organisms, and others produce
alfatoxins or ergot alkaloids. Mycorrhizae are symbiotic associations between these organisms and plant
roots. They are comprised of chitinous hyphae, and with algae, they form lichens. For 10 points, name this
kingdom that includes molds and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi [accept word forms]
One genus of these organisms is Aspergillus. One type of these organisms called "fairy rings" possess
cells with more than one nucleus, called coenocytes, while these organisms more typically divided by septa
into different sections of cells called hyphae. These hyphae in turn create a connected network called a
mycelium. Often reproducing through spore dispersal are, for 10 points, what kingdom of organisms
exemplified by mushrooms?
ANSWER: fungi or fungus
Organisms in this kingdom possess a growth structure called a Spitzenkorper
(SPIT-zen-korp-er). Dutch elm disease is caused by the sac type of these organisms, which use asci to
reproduce. S. Cerevisiae (seh-reh-VEE-say) is an example of the Ascomycota (ah-skoh-my-KOH-tah)
type of these organisms. These organisms feed using the (*) hyphae (HIGH-fae) on their mycelium
(my-seh-LEE-um), and they possess chitinous (KIE-tuh-nuhs) cell walls. They form mycorrhizae
(my-core-HIH-zay) in symbiosis with plants. For 10 points, name this kingdom that includes molds, yeasts,
and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi [or fungus]
Some of these organisms produce sexual structures that are classified as unitunicate, bitunicate, or
prototunicate. One of these organisms was used to prove the "one gene - one enzyme" hypothesis by Beadle
and Tatum. These organisms may possess asci or conidial anastomosis tubes, examples of specialized
hyphae. These eukaryotes form mutualistic relationships with the roots of vascular plants in mycorrhizae,
and they are often pioneer species when partnered with photosynthetic algae in lichens. Spores allow bread
mold to reproduce in, for 10 points, this kingdom of organisms which includes yeasts and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi
Buller's drop is a method by which some of these organisms reproduce their cells. Two compatible
organisms in this kingdom are able to combine their cells through anastomosis. Coenocytes and
Spitzenkorper are found in these organisms, which includes Aspergillus and Candida albans. (*) Asci
are the sexual spore-bearing cells produced in the ascomycete variety, while others possess basidia-tipped
gills on their fruiting body. Members of this kingdom possess chitinous hyphae, which compose their
mycelia. For 10 points, name this kingdom whose members yeast, mold, and mushrooms.
ANSWER: Fungi or fungus [accept mushrooms or basidiomycota before "kingdom"]
When reproducing, these organisms can use basidia, and some of these organisms have namesake "guns."
Some of these organisms have clamp connections that cross their septa to allow their cells to have two
nuclei, a state that can also occur when these organisms undergo plasmogamy. These organisms are
composed of structures whose growth is organized by Spitzenkorper and which can undergo anastomosis.
That process occurs in the hyphae of this kingdom of organisms, which make up their mycelia. For 10
points, name this kingdom that consists of puffballs, molds, yeasts, and mushrooms.
ANSWER: Fungi [accept word forms]
One type of these organisms contains egg-like structures called peridioles which contain material involved
in asexual reproduction. These organisms are classified based on the type of spore-bearing structure they
possess--examples of those structures include the basidia and the ascus. These organisms can form
structures containing arbuscules--those are symbiotic relationships between them and plant roots called
mycorrhizae. These organisms possess a mycelium, which consists of a network of hyphae, and they contain
chitin in their cell walls. 10 points, name this kingdom which contains organisms such as yeast and
mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi [or fungus]
This group of organisms contains an organizational center for growth called a Spitzenkorper
(SPIT-zen-korp-ehr). They reproduce via cells called basidia (bah-SIH-dee-uh) and asci (AS-key), both of
which produce spores. Lichens are a type of symbiotic organism composed of an algae and a member of
this group of organisms. They contain a mass called a mycelium (my-SEEL-eh-um) composed of a thread
like material composed of chitin (KIE-tin) called hyphae (HIGH-fay). For 10 points, name this kingdom of
eukaryotic (yoo-kah-ree-YAH-tick) organisms studied by mycologists that include yeasts and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi [or fungus]
Cytoplasm loss in these organisms is mitigated by Wororin bodies which plug into septal pores. Their
method of reproduction can employ either a basidia or an ascus, and some of these organisms employ
rhizomorphs to imitate plant roots. A symbiotic relationship between a plant and one of these organisms is
called mycorrhizae. They possess hyphae composed of chitin cell walls which branch out to form mycelia,
and some of them reproduce using spores. For 10 points, name this kingdom that includes mushrooms.
ANSWER: Fungus [accept Fungi]
Candida and Aspergillus are genuses within this group of organisms that can cause infectious disease in
humans. This group of organisms can reproduce asexually by the production of conidia. Their cells are
called coenocytic (SEE-no-SIT-ic) when they are not separated by septa. This kingdom includes the model
organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Members of this kingdom produce mycelia, which are made up of
many hyphae. For 10 points, name this kingdom, which includes molds, yeasts, and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi [accept ascomycetes or ascomycota until the word "coenocytic" is read]
In one of the major reproductive modes of these organisms, Kar3p and Cik1p proteins extend microtubules
from the spindle pole body, eventually initiating fusion along the edges of the spindle pole bodies and
nuclear membrane fusion, resulting in the formation of a diploid cell. This process, called karyogamy,
occurs only in the ascocarp or basidiocarp, depending on the organism. Preceding karyogamy in these
organisms is a stage in which two parental mycelia fuse cytoplasm. FTP name this kingdom of organisms
with chitinous cell walls, which includes slime molds and mushrooms.
ANSWER: Fungus or fungi
An structure unique to these organisms, the Spitzenkorper, is an apical body that is important in
determining the direction of growth of these organisms. Some types of these organisms form
arbuscules, a type of haustorium. The only type of these organisms that have flagella are the
chytrids. These organisms can enter a symbiotic relationship with (*) plant roots called mychorrizae.
Members of this kingdom have mycelia, which are made up of filaments called hyphae, and their cell walls
are made of chitin. For 10 points, name this kingdom, which includes yeasts and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi
One organelle in these organisms is located near the plasma membrane and regulates growth; that organelle
is called the Spitzenkorper. Some of these organisms synthesize aflatoxins, which can cause severe liver
damage, and one of these organisms infects rye plants and causes ergots. These organisms have cell walls
that lack glucose and are instead made up of chitin. The symbiotic relationships between these organisms
and the roots of vascular plants are referred to as mychorrhizae, and some members of this kingdom have
mycelia, which are composed of hyphae. For 10 points, name this kingdom of spore-producing organisms
that contains penicillin, yeast, and most mushrooms.
ANSWER: Fungi [or fungus; prompt on mushrooms; prompt on yeast]
Some organisms in this taxanomic kingdom produce compounds such as psilocybin [sylo-sy-bin], and phyla
[fye-la] in this kingdom include Basidomycota [basi-do-myco-ta]. The model organism S. cerevisiae ["S
cere-visi-ay"'] belongs to this kingdom, and organisms in this kingdom usually grow as hyphae [hi-fay],
which in in turn make up mycelia. Penicillin is made from organisms in this kingdom, and the organisms
used to make beer and bread belong to this kingdom. For 10 points, name these kingdom which includes
yeasts and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungus [accept fungi or funguses]
Coenocytic members of this kingdom lack septa, and another group in this kingdom, the ascomycetes,
reproduces asexually using conidia. A unicellular member of this kingdom mates using "alpha" and
"a" mating factors. Other members of this kingdom can form (*) mycorrhizae with plants, and lichens
are a symbiotic relationship between photosynthetic microbes and members of this kingdom. Notable
members of this kingdom include Neurospora crassa and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and most members of
this kingdom have chitin in their cell walls. For 10 points, name this kingdom that includes yeast, bread
mold, and mushrooms.
ANSWER: Fungi
Some melanin-containing types of these organisms can produce energy from gamma radiation. Clamp
connections and croziers allow cells in some organisms of this kingdom to have two nuclei. One dikaryon
form of these organisms reproduces through asci and is known as the "sac" type. These organisms consist of
hyphae, which make a mat called a mycelium. For 10 points, name this kingdom of heterotrophic organisms
that includes decomposers like molds, yeasts, and mushrooms.
ANSWER: fungi [or funguses]
The feoB protein's n-terminus contains the key domain of these proteins. An example of these is
mutated in McCune-Albright syndrome. Attempts to change the localization of one notable example
of these proteins has lead to development of farnesyltransferase inhibitors. They contain switch I and
II components. (*) Phospholipase C is activated by the q parts of these. They come in heterotrimeric form
and the small type found in the Ras superfamily. Many of them activate adenylate cyclase, which simulates
the production of the secondary messenger cyclic AMP. For 10 points, name this class of proteins that are
involved in signal transduction, named for the fact that they bind compounds containing guanine.
ANSWER: G proteins [accept guanine nucleotide-binding proteins]
Both pseudohypoparathyroidism and McCune-Albright Syndrome are caused by mutations to these
molecules. Calmodulin can reverse the inhibition on the RGS protein, which regulate these molecules,
caused by PIP3. Whooping cough is the result of toxins catalyzing a cysteine residue's
ADP-ribosylation. These molecules are often structural (*) heterotrimers and thus have an alpha
subunit that separates from the beta-gamma subunit upon activation. Richard Axel and Linda Buck won the
2004 Nobel Prize in Physiology for showing that olfactory receptors activate these proteins. Ras proteins
are a type of these proteins, which control the production of second messengers such as cyclic AMP.
Cholera toxins target, for 10 points, which group of signaling proteins named for their ability to bind to
guanosine triphosphate?
ANSWER: G Proteins [accept guanine nucleotide-binding proteins before "guanosine"; or GTP-binding proteins before "guanonsine"]
These proteins form a complex with a beta-2 adrenergic receptor that is a key target of anti-asthma drugs.
The alpha subunits of these heterotrimeric proteins dissociate from the dimeric beta-gamma subunit to
activate effector molecules like adenylyl cyclase. Their alpha subunits effectively hydrolyse a certain
nucleoside triphosphate. Rhodopsin is in a family of receptors coupled to these proteins, which are often
coupled to transmembrane receptors. For 10 points, name these proteins that get their single-letter name
because they bind guanosine nucleotides.
ANSWER: G proteins [accept guanosine nucleotide-binding proteins before "guanosine"]
The 2012 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Robert Lefkowitz and Brian Kobilka for their
research on this superfamily of proteins. Another protein in this superfamily is involved in detecting
electromagnetic radiation through the conversion of 11-cis-retinal to all-trans-retinal. Two types of
these proteins are named Frizzled and Smoothened, and some can activate phospholipase C.
Rhodopsins and Adrenergic ones are proteins from this superfamily, of which some members can bind
histamine or adenyl cyclase to form cAMP. For ten points, name this superfamily of seven transmembrane
domains proteins which bind to their namesake proteins which in turn bind the complement of cytosine.
ANSWER: G-Protein Coupled Receptor (or GPCR).
An analog of this compound, vigabatrin, mimics its effects and inhibits this compound's catalysis, and
in Little's Disease, muscles cannot properly absorb this compound, leading to cerebral palsy.
Medium spiny neurons secrete this compound, and its activation causes cells to remain in the (*) Sphase. The synthesis of this compound requires the vitamin B6 derivative pyridoxal pyrophosphate, and
benzodiazepines enhance its effects. Commonly synthesized from glutamate, it plays a similar role to
glycine in the central nervous system. For 10 points, name this principal inhibitory neurotransmitter.
ANSWER: GABA [or gamma-aminobutyric acid]
This neurotransmitter is the namesake of a Krebs cycle shunt used in plants under going stress that
bypasses succinate thiokinase. Vigabatrin blocks an enzyme that converts this compound to succinic
semialdehyde. Neurons in the medial globus pallidus along with large basket cells primarily produce
this neurotransmitter. Benzodiazepines bind to its pentameric ligand gated chloride channel type
receptor. Many (*) anti-anxiety drugs target this neurotransmitter, and this compound can cause IPSPs. It
is created by glutamic acid decarboxylase. For 10 points, name this inhibitory neurotransmitter synthesized
from glutamate.
ANSWER: GABA [accept gamma-Aminobutyric acid]
This molecule is released by climbing fiber activation of Purkinje cells, and Huntington's disease is
partially caused by the loss of cells that secrete this substance in the striatum. It is produced in a reaction
that uses the enzymes GAD and pyridoxal phosphate, or vitamin B6 and its receptor works by widening a
chloride channel, which in turn neutralizes norepinephrine. Benzodiazepenes and barbituates work by
binding to receptors for this molecule, which is synthesized by decarboxylating glutamate. For 10 points,
name this inhibitory mammalian neurotransmitter with a four letter abbreviation.
ANSWER: GABA [or gamma-aminobutyric acid]
Hyperforin and Deramciclane serve as reuptake inhibitors for this molecule, which are secreted by
chandilier cells in one organ. During development of the hippocampus, this molecule is responsible
for most excitable responses until the development of glutamate responses, and its receptors can be
divided into the ligand-gated A type and the metabotropic B type. Climbing fibers and Purkinje cells
of the cerebellum exclusively secrete this molecule, whose receptors are agonized by bicuculline and
barbituates. Created by the decarboxylation of glutamate, for 10 points, name this inhibitory
neurotransmitter responsible for anti-convulsive effects, usually designated by a four-letter abbreviation.
ANSWER: GABA or Gamma-aminobutyric acid
One type of receptor for this neurotransmitter is defined by being insensitive to bicuculline and baclofen.
The enzyme that creates this molecule from an amino acid with an acidic side chain requires pyridoxal
phosphate, or Vitamin B6, as a cofactor. An potent agonist of one of its receptors is found in the Amanita
mushroom genus and is muscimol. This neurotransmitter serves somewhat the same purpose as glycine. The
B type of its receptor is coupled to G proteins while the A type of its receptor is a pentameric ligand-gated
chloride channel to which benzodiazepines bind. It is released by Purkinje cells and is formed by
decarboxylating glutamate. For 10 points, name this inhibitory neurotransmitter of the CNS.
ANSWER: GABA [or gamma-Aminobutyric acid]
L-655,708 is a selective inverse agonist for this molecule's receptor, and an extracellular application of this
molecule decreases the power of gamma oscillations, but not in alpha-5 knock-outs. Metabolically,
succinyl-semialdehyde is involved in its namesake shunt, which forms succinate from 2-ketoglutarate, but
its transport can be blocked by TBOA. THIP is selective for the benzodiazepine-sensitive delta subunit of
this molecule's receptor, which can be antagonized by picrotoxin and bicuculline. Serving a physiological
role similar to glycine in the nervous system, its competitive agonists like muscimol serve as anxiolytics.
FTP name this molecule synthesized from glutamate, a common inhibitory neurotransmitter that has a fourletter acronym.
ANSWER: GABA or gamma-aminobutyric acid
Picrotoxin and bicuculline (BUY-cook-YOU-lean) antagonize this compound's receptors. An
agonist of this compound produced by the Amanita mushroom is called muscimol (MUSK-im-all).
This compound is synthesized by decarboxylation of (*) glutamic acid using a Vitamin B6 cofactor. This
neurotransmitter's receptors are divided into A & B types and are the target of benzo-diaz-epines. It has a
role similar to that of glycine. For 10 points, name this chief inhibitory neurotransmitter, which has a four
letter acronym.
ANSWER: GABA [or gamma-amino butyric acid]
It is formed in a namesake shunt, which is dependent on a decarboxylase that uses PLP as a cofactor. This
neurotransmitter's receptor is activated by benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and alcohol, and it operates by
opening chloride channels. For 10 points, name this inhibitory neurotransmitter formed from the
decarboxylation of glutamate.
ANSWER: GABA or gamma-aminobutyric acid
An overdose of an agonist of this compound's receptors can be reversed using flumazenil. This
compound's A receptors are blocked by picrotoxin, and those A receptors have two alpha, two beta,
and one gamma subunit. This compound is broken down to succinic semialdehyde. Activators of this
compound's receptors are used to treat delirium tremens, which occurs during alcohol withdrawal.
This compound is produced by a namesake (*) shunt that depends on a PLP-cofactor-using enzyme.
Baclofen is an agonist of this compounds receptors used to treat spasticity. This compound is formed from
the decarboxylation of glutamate and its effects are allosterically enhanced using benzodiazepines. For 10
points, name this inhibitory neurotransmitter.
ANSWER: GABA [or gamma-aminobutyric acid or gamma-aminobutyrate]
Some reuptake inhibitors of this compound are hyperforin and tiagabine, and it aids in the regulation of the
proliferation of neural progenitor cells. A compound known as PLP, an active form of vitamin B6, is
metabolized with L-glutamic decarboxylase in order to synthesize this at its namesake shunt, and
antagonists of this compound are picrotoxin and bicuculline. The most common form of cerebral palsy,
Little's disease, arises when the ability to absorb this compound is absent. Axons of Purkinje cells release
this neurotransmitter, while common agonists of it include THIP and muscimol. Synthesized from glutamae,
for 10 points, name this major inhibitory neurotransmitter.
ANSWER: GABA or gamma-aminobutyric acid
A theory named for Medea is an antithesis to this theory because it theorizes that the subjects of this
theory are in fact suicidal. This theory encompasses two theories that stress the importance of stuff
like coccolithophores, the CLAW and anti-CLAW theories, which are named in part for the person
who proposed this theory. The Medea theory is evidenced by the Great (*) Dying. One simulation used
to test the validity of this theory considers the behavior of black and white daisies, and how much light they
absorb and reflect. This theory is supported by the low level of Milankovitch cycles that the namesake of
this theory undergoes, as well as by the historical constancy of ocean salinity and the amount of oxygen in
the atmosphere. This theory is contradicted by the Snowball Earth hypothesis. First posited by James
Lovelock, for 10 points, what is this hypothesis that posits that our mother planet is alive?
ANSWER: Gaia hypothesis
The book introducing this idea talked about Dr. Intensli Eeger, who creates nitrogen fixing bacteria that
decide to live with algae and destroy the world. Its creator teamed up with Andrew Watson to design
Daisyworld, which used daisies with different albedoes to regulate warmth. This idea's backers claim that
biogenic sulfur and iodine gases from the oceans are evidence that life in one part of the world has adapted
to help lifeforms in other parts. For 10 points, name this hypothesis that abiotic and biotic parts of the world
complexly interact to maintain homeostasis proposed by James Lovelock and named for a Greek goddess of
the earth.
ANSWER: Gaia Hypothesis
A "strong" version of it was discussed in The Seven Mysteries of Life by Guy Marchie, while its
most famous formulation was introduced in the article "Is Mars a Spaceship, Too?" This theory has
been modeled by Andrew Watson using his Daisyworld simulation. Its development is largely
attributed to (*) Lynn Margulis and James Lovelock, who postulated the existence of feedback loops
similar to homeostasis. For 10 points, identify this theory stating that all life on earth functions as a
selfregulating "super-organism," named after the Greek earth goddess.
ANSWER: Gaia hypothesis
The biologists Peter and Rosemary Grant spend up to half of every year at this geographic location. The
waved albatross breeds at this location, to which the swallow-tailed gull is near-endemic. The flightless
cormorant and the only marine iguana are both native to this geographic location, which is also home to the
world's northernmost penguins. Lonesome George died in 2012 on this archipelago, which is located on the
Nazca plate. Charles Darwin studied the beak size of the finch population on this archipelago, which was
named for its giant tortoises. For 10 points, name this group of islands located 600 miles west of South
America.
ANSWER: Galapagos Islands [or Archipielago de Colon]
They are more prevalent in tropical regions due to longer growing seasons, and thus more available active
meristematic tissue. A wide range of organisms have the ability to generate them, including fly larvae,
bacteria, mites, and fungi. Some very complex structures can be formed from the parasites' secretion and
manipulation of growth factors. Though some types are found on leaves, the best-known ones grow on
branches or trunks. Their high concentration of tannic acid has led to some of them being used as medieval
sources of ink. For 10 points, name these parasitically-induced abnormal growths on plants, types of which
include "oak apple," "Aleppo," and "crown."
ANSWER: galls
Aschoff's recesses are present in the columnar epithelium of this structure, whose neck is adjacent to
Hartmann's pouch. The artery that flows to it branches into Calot's vessels. Calcification of this structure
occurs in a disease named for this organ's porcelain-like appearance under such a condition, and it attaches
to the right side of the lesser omentum via the hepatoduodenal ligament. This organ contains a duct with a
spiral fold, and it's emptied via the action of CCK from the intestine. Its cystic duct joins with the hepatic
duct to form the common duct, and it's attached to the dorsal face of the liver. For 10 points, name this
organ which is used to store bile, the site of gallstones.
ANSWER: gallbladder
Folding in this organ's membrane can lead to Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses, and it is commonly removed
together with an enlarged Calot's lymph node. One disorder of this organ involves its mucosa being spotted
with many small deposits of cholesterol, making it resemble a strawberry. It receives input from the cystic
duct. The substance most associated with it passes through the sphincter of Oddi after it contracts due to the
hormone cholecystokinin. Its removal is known as a cholecystectomy and is often performed to remove the
stones associated with it. Pear-shaped and positioned below the liver, for 10 points, name this bile-storing
organ.
ANSWER: gallbladder (or cholecyst)
The entire mass of this organ is sometimes referred to as the corpus vesicae fellae. The Sphincter of
Oddi and the hormone CCK control the release of products from the pancreas and this organ. One of the
main causes of jaundice is the creation of a certain "stone" in this organ. This organ is removed during a
cholecystectomy and stores a product that is released into the duodenum of the small intestine during
digestion. For 10 points, name this organ that stores bile produced by the liver.
ANSWER: gallbladder
One problem that occurs in this organ involves the blocking of its neck in Hartmann's pouch. Along with
affecting the pancreas, the secretion of cholecystokinin (KOHL-uh-SIS-toh-KEE-nin) causes this organ to
release its contents into the small intestine. This pear-shaped organ is located in a fossa, or a small
depression, that places this organ directly beneath another with which it shares a common duct. For 10
points, name this organ that is found directly underneath the liver, and is responsible for the storage of bile.
ANSWER: gallbladder
This organ is enlarged, palpable, and non-tender in Courvoisier's sign. This organ can become inflamed by
an impacted Hartmann's pouch. Calcium deposits in this organ's wall can lead it to be known as porcelain.
The hormone CCK causes this pear-shaped organ to contract and release a liquid into the duodenum. The
ampulla of Vater can become obstructed by this organ's namesake stones. This organ stores a liquid that
helps emulsify fats, and it is connected to the liver by the hepatic duct. For 10 points, name this organ that
stores bile.
ANSWER: gallbladder [or cholecyst]
This organ is calcified in a condition named for its resemblance to porcelain, and a condition caused by
an excess of cholesterol is named for this organ's resemblance to a strawberry. Like the pancreas, it is
emptied through the action of the hormone cholecystokinin (COAL-uh-sis-toe-KINE-in). Its cystic duct
connects with the common hepatic duct; that connection forms a duct named for a substance the liver
produces but this organ stores. For 10 points, name this organ found just above the liver, whose main
function is to store bile.
ANSWER: gallbladder
This organ disappears in lampreys during development from larvae to the mature organism. One disorder in
this organ can be diagnosed with a strongly positive Murphy's sign, and is often treated with prolonged
consumption of ursodiol. Cancer in this organ is often preceded by a calcification of its walls, a condition
commonly called having a "porcelain" form of this organ. Discharge from this organ is controlled by the
sphincter of Oddi, and the substance stored in this organ is sent to the duodenum by a certain duct. This
organ is often removed when substances made of cholesterol and calcium salts, its namesake stones,
become painful to a patient. For 10 points, name this organ that stores the bile it receives from the liver.
ANSWER: gallbladder
This organ is unique in the digestive tract for its lack of a Muscularis mucosae. Its most notable activity is
prompted when the hormone Cholecystokinin is released. While it is not the Pancreas, this organ was
recently found to contain beta-cells, meaning that it can produce insulin. This organ is the starting point for
the cystic duct, which later joins the ampulla of Vater. The sphincter of Oddi causes a certain substance to
travel from this organ to the duodenum of the Small Intestines. However, humans can easily survive without
this organ. For ten points, name this organ that stores bile.
ANSWER: Gall Bladder
Cantile's line connects this organ to the inferior vena cava, and it is home to tubular structures called
the ducts of Luschka. This organ empties when the CCK hormone is released, and it is broken up into
three segments, the body, neck, and fundus. Like the kidneys, this organ can form "stones," but its
buildups are made up of cholesterol and salts in a disorder known as cholelithiasis. For 10 points, name
this organ that lies next to the liver and stores bile.
ANSWER: gallbladder [or cholecyst]
Their differences can be traced to AMPA vs. metabotropic glutamate receptors at the outer plexiform layer
that invert the signs preserved in the inner plexiform layer. Peter Schiller found that two types of them can
be selectively inactivated, resulting in deficits in bright and dark detection. They project to the pretectum,
which via the Edinger-Westphal nucleus mediates the pupillary light reflex. They also project to the
superior colliculus in coordinating eye movements and to the suprachiasmatic nucleus for directing
circadian rhythms. Stephen Kuffler found that they respond to luminance contrast, and are found in P and
M, and on-center and off-center varieties. For 10 points, name these cells whose axons make up the optic
nerve leaving the retina.
ANSWER: retinal ganglion cells; not "spinal ganglion" or "spiral ganglion" or "basal ganglion"
In hippocampal astrocytes, these structures have been shown to accelerate potassium clearance when
composed of Cx43 and Cx30 subunits. It doesn't contain actin, but it is localized to the submembrane
cytoskeleton by drebrin. Mice unable to synthesize this structure are night-blind, since it forms part
of the pathway leading to ON-type ganglion cells. In Drosophila, shaking B codes for innexins, which
make up an invertebrate homologue of this structure. They carry (*) current at bidirectional synapses,
and consist of two connexin hexamers. It is believed that these structures, rather than sodium-potassium-
ATPases, are responsible for conducting cardiac action potentials. Analogous to plasmodesmata, for 10
points, name these connections that allow the free flow of cytoplasm between cells.
ANSWER: gap junction channels [accept nexus; accept intercytoplasmic junctions before "cytoplasm" is read and prompt afterwards]
SARS causes this by overexpressing of the 3b protein and a mutation in CDC123 has been shown to cause
this in rat fibroblasts. Recent studies have also shown that this event does not only occur at restriction
points, instead that it can occur at any time based on the amount of DNA present when it is necessary. It is
usually caused when cdk-4 associates with another molecule, preventing the cdk-activating kinase from
phosphorylating, which in turn blocks the effects of CSF-1, or colony-stimulating factor. If a cell does not
come out of this condition, it may begin to undergo apoptosis. For 10 points, name this event that occurs
when a cell is not large enough to enter the S or M phase.
ANSWER: Gap phase arrest [Accept G1 phase arrest or G2 phase arrest before end of question; accept "apoptosis" before mentioned]
The rate of this process is increased when central chemoreceptors detect a decrease in the pH of the
cerebrospinal fluid. The intercostal muscles help accomplish this process in humans. Arachnids accomplish
this process through book-like organs composed of lamellae. Its extent is measured by the tidal volume.
Defects in this process lead to acidosis due to buildup of carbonic acid in the blood. In insects, this process
occurs through the spiracles of the tracheal system. Laplace's Law explains the importance of surfactants in
accomplishing this process in the alveoli. For 10 points, name this process by which carbon dioxide is
exhaled and oxygen inhaled in the lungs.
ANSWER: gas exchange [Accept respiration or breathing, as well as same-knowledge equivalents]
This hormone's releasing factor is the human analog of bombesin, and activation of somatostatin-2 receptors
on the cells that release this hormone can inhibit its release. One form of this peptide acts upon the D cells
of the antrum, and overproduction of this hormone leads to Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Usually secreted in
the presence of calcium and amino acids, it binds to enterochromaffin-like cells and stimulates the release of
histamine, and it also binds to chief cells to stimulate the release of pepsinogen. For 10 points, name this
digestive hormone secreted by G cells, which regulates the secretion of gastric acid in the stomach.
ANSWER: Gastrin
Excessive amounts of this hormone cause Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, and this hormone is very similar to a
hormone formerly known as pancreozymin, cholecystokinin (KOH-luh-SIS-towki-nin). They both activate
other cells by using five C-terminal amino acids. This hormone activates Enterochromaffin-Like Cells, and
it works with histamines to activate parietal cells. Its primary role is to cause the release of potassium
chloride and hydrochloric acid. Identify this hormone released by G cells which stimulates digestion in the
stomach.
ANSWER: gastrin
The extinct Maclurites of this class are a characteristic fossil of the Ordovician Period, and members of its
genus Murex were long the source of the royal dye Tyrian purple. Some species in this class serve as
intermediate hosts to the schistosomiasis (shis-tuh-soh-MAI-uh-sis) flukes that can infest rice paddies and
all show unexpectedly asymmetric bodies due to torsion in the developing embryo. The most venomous
creature in the ocean is the cone species from this class and members of its prosobranch subgroup can
retract their bodies inside their mantle-secreted shells. Feeding with the aid of a toothed-organ called a
radula, name this largest class of mollusks that includes the snails and slugs.
ANSWER: Gastropoda
Some members of this class engage in the act of apophallation, in which a partner's penis is chewed off
following sex. In some members of this class, the lungs open to the exterior via an opening known as the
pneumostome. The withdrawal reflex of one member of this class has been studied by Eric Kandel. In
addition to the model organism Aplysia, members of this class include nudibranches , whelks, and abalones.
Members of this class undergo rotation of the visceral mass in a process known as torsion. For 10 points,
name this largest class of mollusks whose members also include slugs and snails.
ANSWER: Gastropoda [or gastropods]
In Xenopus, this process sees movements like ingression, invagination, involution, epiboly and
convergent extension. It occurs along a feature called the primitive streak and sees cells undergo an
epithelial to mesenchymal transition in order to migrate and proliferate. During it, the mammalian
embryo loses radial symmetry and gains bilateral symmetry. This process sees the emergence of the
ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm and occurs after a stage called the blastula. For 10 points, name this
process in the development of an embryo which sees the emergence of three germ layers.
ANSWER: gastrulation
This technique can be followed up by ethidium bromide staining which allows easy visualization of
the resulting bands. The namesake component in this procedure must be covered with tris acetate
buffer and ladders must be placed in the end wells to allow comparison. Polyacrylamide may used to
produce the matrix when the samples are small, though agarose is more commonly used. For 10 points,
identify this technique wherein an electric field separates DNA molecules according to size as they travel to
the positive electrode.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis or "run a gel" (accept word forms)
This technique is commonly described by the Smoluchowski theory, which seeks to explain movement of
the dispersed particles independent of their shape but fails if the double layer is too thick. A zymogram can
be used to detect enzyme activity in one variant of it, while the zone type utilizes isoelectric focusing to
separate molecules based on their electric charge with respect to pH changes. Gene sequencing and protein
separation can be done with the SDS-PAGE variety. FTP, name this electrokinetic technique often
completed in agarose gel.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis
One form of this technique is usually performed in a tris-glycine solution, and another variant of this
technique relies on the fact that a protein will come to rest a point at which its pI is equal to the surrounding
pH. Proteins are often treated with mercaptoethanol prior to being subjected to one form of this technique in
polyacrylamide, and ethydium bromide is often used to view the results of this technique. PCR products are
run through this technique to scan for contamination, and a crucial step in performing this technique
involves ensuring that the contents of the pipet will fall through the buffer into the desired well. For 10
points, name this procedure, in one form of which DNA flows through an agarose matrix due to the
application of an electric field.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis [prompt on electrophoresis; accept specific types like DNA gel electrophoresis SDS-PAGE or isoelectric focusing]
A trick when creating the matrix for this technique is to use a pipet tip to push bubbles away.
Combining this technique with chloroquine is used to tell apart positive and negative supercoiling.
Sanger sequencing involves a capillary version of this technique to read the fluorescent markers. This
technique is performed before transferring to nitrocellulose paper in Southern Blotting. It is typically
performed in tris-acetate buffer, and the (*) intercalating agent ethidium bromide is used to image the
results under a UV light. A "ladder" is used as a marker in this technique, which separates fragments based
on size. For 10 points, name this technique, in which a current applied to a DNA sample forces it to migrate
through an agarose matrix.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis
Ferguson plots can be used to analyze the results of this technique. One material sometimes used in
this technique is made using a crosslinker such as APS or TEMED. The TBE and TAE buffers are
commonly used in this technique. Proteins are sometimes denatured with sodium dodecyl sulfate
prior to being analyzed using this technique. Fluorescent intercalating agents such as (*) ethidium
bromide are used to stain the results of this technique. Standard markers used in this technique are referred
to as "ladders." The matrix used in this technique is typically composed of polyacrylamide or agarose. For
10 points, name this technique used to separate different sized fragments of nucleic acids by placing them in
a gel matrix and subjecting them to an electric field.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis [prompt on answers like "running a gel"]
Low-molecular-weight compounds with amino and carboxyl groups called carrier ampholytes are
used in the capillary zone type of this process. Urea and formamide are mixed in as denaturants in a
variant of the temperature gradient type of this process. IPG strips can be used for isoelectric
focusing in its 2-D type. A "smile" appears in this technique when excess voltage is used. A piece of
equipment used for it has a (*) comb pattern to help separate loading wells, and sodium dodecyl sulfate
coats targets in SDS-PAGE, a variant of it. An intercalator used in this process is ethidium bromide, which
visualizes DNA bands under UV light. A ladder of markers with set kilodalton values appears on one side
of
its result. For 10 points, name this technique that separates proteins by molecular weight or charge.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis [prompt on partial answers]
Bad results in this technique can occur due to the "smiling" effect. Tris, EDTA, and either borate
or acetate make up the most common buffer used in it. Mobility shift assays to study protein-DNA
interactions use this technique. This procedure is the final step of Sanger sequencing, after
chain-termination occurs from a ddNTP. The intercalating agent (*) ethidium bromide is frequently
used in this technique. The product of this procedure is blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane and treated
with radiolabelled probes in a technique named for Southern. In this technique, a comb is inserted into an
agarose or polyacrylamide matrix to form wells. For 10 points, name this technique in which an
electromotive force separates DNA fragments based on their length.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis
This technique is often done with a "ladder" that is then used as a reference for the results. Restriction
fragment length polymorphism analysis can be performed by this technique and Southern blotting.
Ethidium bromide is used as a stain in this technique, which causes the results to fluoresce under
ultraviolet light. This technique's results are a series of bands, in which the distance migrated
is inversely proportional to the masses of the analytes [AAN-uh-"lights"]. When performing this
technique, samples are placed in wells in a matrix typically made of agarose. Identify this technique
that uses an electric field to separate DNA or proteins in the namesake medium.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis
This procedure is used after cleavage by hydroxyl radicals in footprinting, and this procedure is also
used to visualize RFLPs. Proteins subjected to this procedure are often treated with SDS to denature them.
A "ladder" mixture is used as a marker in this procedure, which uses ethidium bromide for visualization.
For 10 points, name this laboratory technique which uses an agarose or polyacrylamide matrix and an
electric field to separate macromolecules, like DNA, by size.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis
This technique comes in "blue native" and "clear native" forms, depending on the use of a
triphenylmethane dye. Discontinuous buffers like tris-glycine are used to improve resolution in a form of
this technique. This technique is one of the principal steps of the Southern blot. A staining agent used in it
fluoresces orange under UV and contains bromine. Its pulsed-field form is used to separate extremely large
molecules by size and charge. For 10 points, identify this technique in which an electric field is run through
a polyacrylamide or agarose matrix.
ANSWER: gel electrophoresis [prompt on electrophoresis]
Kimura gave primacy to the force of this effect in his "neutral theory." In this phenomenon, alleles can
undergo "fixation" despite having deleterious effects. This phenomenon can occur due to a massive natural
disaster in the "bottleneck effect," or when a smaller population separates from a larger population in the
"founder effect." For 10 points, name this effect in which chance occurrences cause rapid evolution in a
small population.
ANSWER: genetic drift [or the founder effect before it is read; or the bottleneck effect before it is read]
The results of one model used to describe this phenomenon can be obtained by solving the Markov chain
associated with the model, named for Wright and Fisher. In the Moran model this phenomenon occurs twice
as quickly as in the Wright-Fisher model due to a tridiagonal transition matrix. In Kimura's neutral theory,
this phenomenon, rather than natural selection, drives evolution. Random environmental events cause the
bottleneck effect, a type of this phenomenon, and small initial groups experience this phenomenon's
founder effect. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that is the random change in allele frequency in a
population.
ANSWER: Genetic Drift
A model of this phenomenon that uses a tridiagonal transition matrix and has absorbing states at 0
and N is the Moran model, which adds timesteps to a model that assumes no generational overlap.
This phenomenon is dominant in systems whose Tajima's D is equal to zero. When this is the only
phenomenon acting, the time to fixation is equal to four times n sub e. A theory which posits that
most instances of fixation are actually due to this phenomenon was developed by (*) Motoo Kimura
and is called neutral theory. Wright and Fisher developed an early model of this process, which is more
powerful for smaller populations and occurs due to random sampling. Examples of this effect include the
bottleneck effect and the founder effect. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which alleles change over
time due to random variation.
ANSWER: genetic drift [prompt on things like "random mutation" or "random variation" or "neutral variation"]
This principle can be mathematically modeled by the Moran model and the Wright-Fisher model, the
latter of which is named for its originator, Sewall Wright. This principle generally only results in minor
changes according to the Hardy-Weinberg principle, and it is especially likely to happen if an event results
in a population bottleneck. Small populations are especially sensitive to a special case of this principle
called the founder effect. For 10 points, name this general term for the change in frequency of an allele in a
population over time.
ANSWER: genetic drift [prompt on founder effect until mentioned]
A method to calculate the distance between two sequences that only assumes this process is the Cavalli-
Sforza chord measure. One model of this process that assumes overlapping generations is named for Moran,
and is an alternative to the Wright-Fisher model. Kimura's neutral theory states that this process is the cause
of evolutionary changes. Examples of this evolutionary mechanism include the founder effect and the
bottleneck effect. The causes of micro-evolution include mutations, natural selection, gene flow, and this
process, which has an increased impact in small populations. For 10 points, name this random change in the
frequency of alleles in a gene pool.
ANSWER: genetic drift [or allelic drift before mentioned; prompt on "drift"]
One special case of this process was ultimately responsible for the development of Martha's Vineyard
Sign Language during the 17th century. The Wright-Fisher model mathematically describes this
effect. This effect is magnified during a rapid decrease in population called a population bottleneck,
and a special case of it that occurs when a small group populates a new area is known as the *founder
effect. It is most common for neutral genes; that is, they neither help nor hurt an organism. Unlike natural
selection, this process is random. For 10 points, name this effect which sees the change in a gene's
frequency in a population.
ANSWER: genetic drift (accept "founder effect" before mentioned)
One theory that applies this effect at a molecular level can be tested by measuring the dN/dS (d-n over d-s)
values of gene sequences. Sewall Wright demonstrated that the likelihood that an allele fixes itself in a
population experiencing only this effect is equal to that allele's initial frequency in the population. Kimura's
theory of neutral molecular evolution explains most variation as a result of this process. This mechanism is
most effective in small populations, such as those created by of the founder effect. For 10 points, name this
force of evolution that describes the random fluctuations in allelic frequencies.
ANSWER: genetic drift [accept neutral evolution or neutral theory before 'neutral' is read]
This phenomenon occurs twice as quickly in the Moran model as in the Wright-Fisher model. A high
frequency of Ellis-van Creveld syndrome among the Amish is caused by a special case of this phenomenon.
Most common for neutral genes, it violates one of the assumptions of the Hardy-Weinberg principle. When
a small group breaks off from a population, this phenomenon results in the founder effect. Its effect is
magnified following a population bottleneck, and unlike natural selection, it is random. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon, a change in allele frequency due to random sampling.
ANSWER: genetic drift [prompt on "founder effect" before it is mentioned]
The domesticated golden hamster has been subject to this principle since 1930, and Wright-Fisher is the
standard mathematical model of it. The high incidence of deafness on Martha's Vineyard is attributed to this
principle, which Motoo Kimura argued has a more significant role in evolution than natural selection. The
extremely low genetic variation among African cheetahs can be explained by the bottleneck type of this
principle, which also applies to the prevalence of polydactyly (lah-lee-DAAK-tih-lee) among Pennsylvania's
Old Order Amish whose founding population was quite small. Exacerbated by inbreeding, name this
concept, the change in gene frequencies in a small population due to random chance.
ANSWER: genetic drift [accept allelic drift; prompt on bottleneck effect before "bottleneck"; prompt on founder effect before "founding"]
One model of this phenomenon can be used to determine the time of coalescence, and is characterized
by a Markov chain with multinomial sampling which inevitably approaches fixation. This
phenomenon is the dominant driver of change according to the neutral theory posited by Motoo
Kimura. Described by the Wright-Fisher model, this phenomenon is the primary driver of another
process's (*) peripatric variant. The effects of this phenomenon can be exacerbated when a small group
establishes a new population in the founder effect or by natural disasters due to a population bottleneck. For
10 points, name this evolutionary mechanism where an allele frequency changes due to random sampling.
ANSWER: genetic drift [prompt on "drift", "mutation", or "random mutations"]
Motoo [moe-TOE-oh] Kimura's neutral theory states that this phenomenon is the main cause of
molecular evolution. In one type of this phenomenon, a small number of individuals start a new population;
that type is known as the founder effect and can result from a population bottleneck. Its effects are greater in
small populations, and it is one of the influences which can cause deviation from Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium. For 10 points, name this phenomenon involving chance variations in allele frequency.
ANSWER: genetic drift [or allelic drift]
These organisms maintain buoyancy through circulation of an ammonium chloride solution, and their
reproduction may occur through the injection of spermatangia directly into the appendages of the female.
This organism has among the largest eyes of any living species, and was not caught on video until 2006,
and its only known predator is the sperm whale. For 10 points, identify this eight-armed, ink-secreting
organism that is much larger than traditional varieties.
ANSWER: giant squid (prompt on "squid")
The protein DWARF1 encodes for a receptor of one of these hormones, while plants deficient in
phytochrome B tend to overexpress these hormones or their receptors. These hormones act by
stimulating the degradation of DELLA proteins, and proplastids produce and export the starting
material for them. They are synthesized from (*) ent-kaurene in the apical meristem, and they cause
sugars to be produced from starch by stimulating the production of alpha-amylase. Fungal infection
resulting in an excess of this hormone causes bakanae, or foolish seedling disease. For 10 points, name
these plant hormones that promote leaf growth and stem elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins
This class of hormones is synthesized via ent-kaurene. Lack of this diterpinoid acid can cause
dwarfism in some plants. In grapevines this hormone is responsible for the development of tendrils,
and it promotes femaleness in corn. It was first identified by Eiichi (*) Kurosawa, who was studying
"foolish seedling" disease in rice. For 10 points, name this plant hormone that promotes plant growth,
flowering, and stem elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins
Bernard O. Phinney of UCLA studied their effect on dwarf strains of corn and found that they had
no role in the development of roots, leaves, and flowers. They cause seedless fruits to grow to normal
size, bring buds out of winter dormancy, stimulate flowering in some plants, and promote seed
germination. Responsible for bolting in biennial plants, they were discovered when a farmer named Konishi
noted that bakanae disease in rice produced "foolish seedling." Isolated by Eiichi Kurosawa, For ten points,
name this class of over 100 plant hormones whose A-1 variety controls stem elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins
These compounds require SLY1 in order to degrade RGL2 proteins, while they rely on DELLA proteins for
signaling. Their major precursor is ent-kaurene, and they are all diterpenoids. In cereals, they stimulate the
production of alpha amylase, and in dioecious flowers they induce maleness. They affect the mature regions
of trees and shrubs and can induce cell division as well as cell elongation. In addition to rejuvenating dwarf
plants and delaying leaf aging, they can stimulate seed germination. FTP, identify these plant hormones best
known for their use in producing seedless grapes.
ANSWER: gibberellins (prompt on GAs)
These compounds are synthesized by attaching a lactone ring to a tetracyclic ent-kaurene system in the
mevalonate pathway. In Arabidopsis, their signaling pathway is regulated by RGA, a DELLA protein.
These diterpenoids help hydrolyze starch into glucose by increasing alpha-amylase production in cereal
germination, and in cabbages, they can induce bolting, the premature production of flowering stems. Also
responsible for seedless grapes, these hormones work with cytokinins to promote cell division in the stem.
For 10 points, name these plant hormones that stimulate flowering and stem elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins
This group of substances was first isolated after identification of a compound that produced the opposite
phenotype, fusaric acid. Their actions are inhibited by flurprimidol and ancymidol. Various oxoglutarate
dioxygenases catalyze the interconversion of different members of this group of compounds. These
compounds act by enhancing SCF ubiquitin ligase-dependent degradation of DELLA proteins, and their
biosynthesis involves the formation of ent-kaurene, which is exported from the proplastid. They stimulate
the production of alpha-amylase, promote flowering, and stimulate cell division. FTP, name this class of
plant hormones first isolated from a fungus that causes foolish seedling disease, and which cause stem
elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins
Flurprimidol and ancymidol are two chemicals that inhibit synthesis of these compounds, whose precursors
include ent-kaurene. PIF3/4 is a transcription factor whose activity is regulated by these compounds through
their promotion of ubiquitination of DELLA proteins. A bioassay for these compounds using barley
endosperm relies on their stimulation of hydrolytic enzymes in germinating cereal grains. Teijiro Yabuta
and Eiichi Kurosawa named and discovered these compounds during studies of foolish seedling disease. For
10 points, name this class of plant hormones that break dormancy and stimulate cell elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins
The synthesis of one of these can be prevented by 2-chloroethyl-trimethylammonium chloride, and involves
conversion to a hydroxy acid after activation of mevalonate by MVA kinase to form a diterpene precursor,
as detailed in papers by Bernard O. Phinney. In addition to the aforementioned ent-Kaurene, they include
those with a lactone ring, as well as one whose methyl ester was separated into free acids named A1, A2,
and A3 by Sumuki. They effect the attachment of ubiquitin to a DELLA protein, which is then destroyed by
proteasomes, thereby relieving the repression of genes, causing stimulated flowering, senescence,
conclusion of dormany, and seed germination. FTP name these plant hormones discovered in the study of
foolish seedling disease by Eichi Kurosawa, known to cause stem elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins
PBZ is an inhibitor of these compounds, which have been shown to trigger the activation of proteins like
SYL1 in Arabidopsis. Receptors of these compounds bind to SCF protein complexes which in turn cause
the destruction of DELLA proteins. They are synthesized from ent-kaurene and these diterpentinoid acids
are commonly sprayed on seedless grapes to increase size. They also trigger the end of bud dormancy and
the germination of seeds. Divided into GA, GB, and GC, for ten points, name these plant hormones which
were discovered by E. Kurosawa as the source of "foolish seedling disease" and like auxins contribute to
stem elongation.
ANSWER: Gibberellins
They essentially work by causing proteasomes to attack DELLA proteins, which normally bind transcription
factors that prevent their results. Their discovery can be linked to a 1926 paper by Eiichi Kurosawa on the
rice-killing bakanae or "foolish seedling" disease caused by fungi throughout Asia. When this chemical is
applied in low concentrations to dwarf beans, the regions between successive beans grow so rapidly that
they are confused for pole beans. For 10 points, name this plant hormone responsible for stem elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins [or gibberellic acid]
One pathway for the production of these compounds contains the intermediates methyl erythritol
phosphate, which is upstream of ent-Kaurene. Placobutrazol and ancymidol both work by inhibiting these
compounds, which operate by triggering the degradation of the DELLA repressors. They stimulate
production of alpha-amylase in aleurone cells and they are used in the production of Thomson Seedless
Grapes. All of them are diterpenes, and the first one was identified by Eiichi Kurosawa after studying
bakanae, a condition that causes foolish seedling disease in rice. For 10 points, name this class of plant
hormones that stimulates stem elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins [accept GA]
The biosynthesis of ent-kaurene represents the first committed step in the production of this compound, and
the proteosome-linked destruction of DELLA proteins must occur before it carries out its function. When it
is introduced into "dwarf" beans, they grow into grapevine-like "pole" beans. Its stimulation of starch
hydrolysis serves to induce seed germination, and another common function is the breaking of bud
dormancy. First isolated from a Japanese fungus responsible for the "foolish seedling" disease in rice, for
10 points, name this plant hormone which stimulates stem elongation.
ANSWER: gibberellins [accept gibberellic acid]
The sd-1 "green revolution" rice mutant has a defect in the production of these hormones. The
synthesis of these compounds requires the cyclization of geranylgeranyl disphosphate to kaurene.
These hormones facilitate the action of PIFs during the etiolation response by triggering the
degradation of DELLA proteins. They were originally discovered due to fungal infections in rice
causing chlorosis, a condition called (*) foolish seedling disease or bakanae. These hormones trigger the
synthesis of amylase in the aleurone layer when water is available, antagonizing the function of abciscic
acid. Spraying one of these hormones on grapes causes them to become seedless. For 10 points, name these
plant hormones responsible for seed germination.
ANSWER: gibberellins
Ancymidol and paclobutrazol are used to inhibit the synthesis of this class of compounds, and this class of
compounds is derived from an ent-Kaurene intermediate, which is synthesized from geranylgeryanyl
diphosphate produced by a terpenoid pathway. These hormones can be glycosylated in order to decrease
their activity, and they operate by acting on the DELLA proteins. They are often used in the growth of
seedless grapes, and they were originally discovered by scientists studying foolish seedling disease, or
Bakanae. FTP, name this class of plant hormone which is responsible for bolting and stem growth.
ANSWER: Gibberellins
A block in these compounds' biosynthetic pathway gives nana mutants their most obvious phenotypes, and
Spy mutants show the same phenotypes as individuals treated with high levels of these compounds. Those
individual with abnormal quantities of these diterpenoid compounds tend to have larger rosette sizes and
high internode length. These hormones stimulate alpha amylase secretion, and an excess of this hormone
causes rice plants to grow extremely tall and produce inviable offspring in the foolish seedling disease. For
10 points, name this class of plant hormones that promote stem elongation and are not auxins.
ANSWER: gibberellins
An oft-studied reflex in Aplysia californica occurs when the siphon and these organs are withdrawn in
response to a stimulus. They are similar in appearance to the pseudobranch, which is homologous to the ear
opening in vertebrates. Bony processes called rakers are responsible for retaining food particles in them.
They are covered by a membrane called the operculum, and in cartilaginous animals, they consist of a
series of slits. For 10 points, name these organs, used by fish to exchange gases with the environment.
ANSWER: gills
These organs are protected by namesake "rakers" which prevent food from entering them. Unusual
examples of these are found behind the legs of horseshoe crabs, and in some animals they are accessed
through spiracles. Asteroidea [aas-tur-oh-ee-DAY-uh]-class animals have simple versions of these called
papulae [PAA-pyoo-lay] just under their skin. These organs are supported by a cartilaginous [kar-tih-LAAjih-nuss] arch and protected by an operculum [oh-PUR-kyoo-lum], and their primary structures are lamellae
[LAA-mih-lay], which have very large surface areas. Name these organs which use a countercurrent system
to extract large amounts of oxygen from water, found in fish.
ANSWER: gills
Argulus and trichodina are both common parasites found on these organs, while in insects, the plastron can
often act as a certain type of one. They are protected by bony plates called the opercula while the rakers of
this organ are used to filter out food. In vertebrae they are located on the exterior of the pharynx and play a
key role in maintaining tonicity with the surrounding environment. Oxygen diffuses through these organs,
while nitrogen and carbon dioxide are expelled through them. Lampreys have seven of them while most
sharks have five of these. FTP, identify this common respiratory organ found in aquatic organisms.
ANSWER: Gills
The larval dragon fly contains a trachaea on the rectum which serves as this structure. Spiracles
often guide movement through this structure in some cartilagenous animals, and these structures are
often covered by a bony osculum. These structures make use of the (*) countercurrent exchange system
to transfer oxygen to the blood, and they are sometimes used to describe the pharyngeal slits that chordates
are born with. For 10 points, name these respiratory structures that enable fish to breathe.
ANSWER: gills
In 1999, Bruce Bagemihl published a study on the incidence of homosexuality among these creatures,
and in 1994 Robert E. Simmons and Lue Scheepers argued that this creature's most prominent
feature is a result of sexual selection. A 2007 paper by Hassanin used mitochondrial DNA to argue
that early in this creature's history, it split into two populations on either side of what is now (*) Lake
Chad. Miocene ancestors include Palaeotragus and Climacoceras, which, like this creature, had ossicones.
Their love for acacia trees is frequently used as evidence for the Lamarckian hypothesis. For 10 points,
name this African land mammal, an ungulate with a long neck.
ANSWER: giraffes [accept: Giraffa camelopardalis]
A severe, early-onset form of this disease is developed by half the children who suffer from
Sturge-Weber syndrome. Pigment cells can slough off in a rare form of this disease called pigment
dispersion syndrome. It's not dry mouth, but pilocarpine acts on a muscarinic acetylcholine receptor
to treat this disease. This disease can be surgically treated through a canaloplasty or a trabeculetomy.
Inuits have a severely increased risk of developing the (*) closed-angle type of this disease, whose
open-angle type is common in elderly people; in both cases, aqueous humor drainage is impaired, leading to
increased intraocular pressure and progressive vision loss via damage to the optic nerve. For 10 points, name
this disease that is the second leading cause of blindness, after cataracts.
ANSWER: glaucoma
One type of this cell is the target of infection of the JC virus, which in immunosuppressed individuals can
lead to a fatal disease known as PML. Tanycytes, Muller cells, and Bergmann cells are all epyndemal
varieties of this type of cell and are found in ventricular spaces. The "micro" variety of these cells function
as macrophages, and exists in perivascular and parenchymal types. The most abundant subtype of these
cells is further divided into radial, fibrous, and protoplasmic varieties all of which express the protein
GFAP, which forms their namesake filaments, while another subtype of these cells produce the myelin that
covers axons. Including oligodendrocytes and their most abundant variety, astrocytes, for ten points,
identify this class of non-neuronal cells which make up roughly half of the volume of the brain.
ANSWER: glial cells
A type of this kind of cell is suggested by researchers in Leipzig to be responsible for "funnelling"
light through the layers in the retina back to the photoreceptors. Those Muller cells also have the
ability to differentiate into other eye cells. Muller cells, along with Bergmann cells in the cerebellum,
are the radial type of these cells, while the (*) ependymal type of these cells produce cerebrospinal fluid.
Other classifications of these cells include satellite cells, oligodendrocytes, and Schwann cells, and their
primary function is the physical support of neurons. Consisting mostly of astrocytes, for 10 points, name
these cells commonly known as the "glue" of the nervous system.
ANSWER: macroglial cells [accept Muller before mentioned; prompt on "brain cell"; do not accept "neuron"]
Defects in or proliferation of one type of these cells lead to the formation of Rosenthal fibers. That
subtype of them expresses a namesake fibrillary acidic protein. Tumors in another subtype can be
characterized as pilocytic or fibrillary and can be treated with Temozolomide if it progresses.
Gemistocytes are a subtype of these cells. Tumors of another type have a characteristic fried egg
appearance, and that type is infected by the JC polyomavirus. One subtype of them forms a
syncytium and removes potassium from the intracellular space, while another type turns into glitter
cells upon phagocytosing a lot. Another type have a characteristic star shape and form the blood-brain
barrier, known as the astrocyte. Also including the myelin-producing oligodendrocyte, for 10 points, name
these cells, which support neurons in the nervous system and take their name from the word for "glue".
ANSWER: Glia (Accept "astrocytes" until "fried egg", anti-prompt after that on astrocytes, ependymal cells)
This hormone and adrenaline both bind to 7TM receptors, which increases cyclic AMP, which in turn
activates protein kinase A. This hormone stimulates a process involving malate that takes place largely in
the liver. The level of this hormone increases when somebody is hungry, especially during hypoglycemia.
Created in the alpha cells in the islets of Langerhans, this hormone is inhibited by insulin. Name this
chemical that stimulates the body to convert glycogen into glucose.
ANSWER: glucagon
When this hormone binds with a G-Protein in the cell membrane, it results in the activation of adenylate
cyclade, which in turn causes the production of cyclic AMP and ultimately, phosphorylase A. Because of
this hormone's ability to decrease renal vascular resistance, this hormone can be used to treat patients who
have overdosed on beta blockers. Produced in the alpha cells of the Islets of Langerhans, for ten points,
name this hormone from the Pancreas, which increases the amount of glucose in the blood, the opposite of
insulin.
ANSWER: Glucagon
A beta-blocker overdose can be treated by using an IV infusion of this hormone. A tumor producing
this hormone causes necrolytic migrating erythema, and such a tumor can be controlled with octreotide.
DPP-4 degrades a peptide named for this hormone; that peptide is secreted by L-cells in the intestine. This
hormone acts through a cAMP-mediated mechanism via a G-protein coupled receptor, and leads to the
activation of glycogen phosphorylase in the liver and the breakdown of glycogen. This hormone is secreted
by the alpha cells of the Islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. For 10 points, name this hormone that
opposes insulin by raising blood sugar levels.
ANSWER: glucagon
One enzyme in this pathway is inactivated by hydrazine sulfate, and mutation of the rate-controlling
enzyme in this process creates metabolic supermice. Genes involved in this process are upregulated
by the cooperation between HNF-4-alpha, PGC-1, and FOXO1. Both glucagon and cortisol
upregulate this process, which is inhibited by the biguanide AMP kinase inhibitor metformin. This
pathway is inhibited by fructose-2,6-bisphosphate, and two GTP are used by PEP carboxykinase in
the first of its (*) three bypass steps. This process, which occurs in the liver after 12 hours of fasting, uses
two pyruvate molecules as the input, reversing a different pathway. For 10 points, name this pathway which
synthesizes new glucose from smaller precursors.
ANSWER: gluconeogenesis
The first enzyme in this process uses a biotin prosthetic group to form an activated intermediate, which can
only be transported by being converted to one of two products, including the result of an aminotransferase,
aspartate. That intermediate then loses its newly acquired carboxyl group in a reaction that also produces a
GDP. This process forms the half of the Cori cycle that occurs in the liver, and it makes use of fructose
bisphosphatase, which is found on the same protein as a major enzyme in an opposite process. For 10
points, name this process in which PEPCK and pyruvate carboxylase begin the reverse of glycolysis to form
"new" glucose from non-carbohydrates.
ANSWER: gluconeogenesis
This process has an enzyme that converts bicarbonate to carbon dioxide and then binds and transfers
it as carboxyl; that enzyme has a biotinyl-lysine swinging arm motif. The Space of Disse separates
endothelial cells from the cells that host this process. This process makes up one phase of the
production in the muscles and processing elsewhere of lactate called the Cori cycle. This process begins
with the carboxylation of pyruvate to oxaloacetate. For 10 points, name this pathway that uses enzymes like
PEPCK in the liver and that takes non-carbohydrate energy sources and makes glucose.
ANSWER: gluconeogenesis [or gng]
Muscle and brain cells cannot carry out this pathway because they lack an enzyme found on the luminal side
of the endoplasmic reticulum in certain other cells. One step in this pathway involves the conversion of an
intermediate into fumarate, aspartate, or malate in order to transport it into the cytosol. This pathway uses
enzymes in the FBPase family to make energetically favorable the reverse of a reaction that uses PFK. One
reaction in this pathway requires the use of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase in the GTP-dependent
formation of PEP. The previous step requires the coenzyme biotin and forms oxaloacetate from pyruvate.
For 10 points, name this pathway carried out in the liver, which converts non-carbohydrate compounds into
new glucose.
ANSWER: gluconeogenesis
This molecule is transported against a sodium gradient by the first cotransporter ever discovered. It reacts
with hemoglobin to form HbA1c, and it is phosphorylated twice before it is cleaved by aldolase in a certain
catabolic pathway to form DHAP and G3P. That pathway converts this molecule to pyruvate, with a net
yield of 2 ATP. This molecule with formula C6H12O6 polymerizes in the liver to form glycogen. For 10
points, name this simple sugar that is broken down in glycolysis.
ANSWER: glucose or dextrose [prompt on "C6H12O6" before it is mentioned]
Salicin has a six-membered ring very similar to this molecule except that the first carbon is bonded to an
oxygen atom in 2-hydroxy-methyl-phenol instead of a hydroxy group. Chitin is a polymer of a type of this
molecule in which the second carbon is bonded to a NHCOCH3 group instead of an OH group. Cellulose is
a polymer of this molecule linked by beta(1,4) glycosidic bonds. Hexokinase prevents re-export of this
molecule, which is processed
by insulin and stored in the liver as glycogen. For 10 points, name this simple sugar with formula
C6H12O6.
ANSWER: glucose [or d-glucose; or dextrose; or grape sugar; or C6H12O6 before mentioned]
In the Cori cycle, this compound is formed in the liver. GLUT1 transports it into cells. This
pyranose (PIE-rah-nose) is phosphorylated by hexokinase in the first step of the EMP pathway.
Maltose consists of two monomers of it. This compound, which has only equatorial hydroxyl groups
in its (*) cyclic form, is modified to make the monomer of chitin (KITE-in). Glycogen acts as storage for
this compound. Insulin responds to high blood levels of it. This compound is metabolized into two
pyruvates, producing 2 ATP and 2 NADH, during glycolysis. For 10 points, name this six-carbon sugar.
ANSWER: glucose [or dextrose; or C 6-H 12-O 6]
This substance and mannose are produced from arabinose in Kiliani-Fischer synthesis, while it
becomes ascorbic acid in the Reichstein process. It becomes glycogen in the liver, and a different
form of it is utilized in PET scans. A hormone that increases it is produced in the (*) Islets of
Langerhans. This substance's production comes from two molecules of G3P in the Calvin Cycle. It
comprises the majority of the structure of cellulose and is broken down into pyruvate in the first step of
cellular respiration. For 10 points, name this sugar with formula C6H12O6 produced in photosynthesis.
ANSWER: glucose [accept dextrose; accept C6H12O6 before mentioned]
Fischer used the Killiani-Fischer synthesis to deduce the stereochemical structure of this
compound. The GLUT1 uniporter moves this compound into mammalian cells. Hexokinase usually
phosphorylates this substrate. This monomer forms alpha-linkages in starch. Beta cells release
insulin in response to a rise in the concentration of this compound in the blood. It is converted into
two pyruvate during (*) glycolysis and is the monomer in glycogen. For 10 points, name this product of
photosynthesis, a six-carbon sugar with formula C6H12O6.
ANSWER: glucose [or C6H12O6 until it is read]
Pyruvate carboxylase is an enzyme in a series of reactions that produces this compound. This compound is
broken up into two molecules of pyruvate in a process that generates a net 2 ATP molecules. Along with
galactose, it forms the disaccharide lactose. Its D isomer, which is the only one found in nature, is also
called dextrose. This compound is the monomer of starch, collagen, and glycogen. For 10 points, name this
6-carbon sugar with formula C6H12O6.
ANSWER: glucose [accept dextrose until it is mentioned]
Branching enzyme joins units of these molecules to form the alpha 1,6- linkages between them. This
substance cannot be produced in muscle, so lactate is transported to the liver to use in its eventual synthesis
in the Cori cycle. Type I diabetes is characterized by the high levels of this substance, a six carbon aldose
whose blood levels are raised by glucagon. For 10 points, name this chemical whose levels are lowered by
insulin, a monosaccharide with chemical formula C6H12O6.
ANSWER: D-glucose [or dextrose; prompt on grape sugar]
Modern industrial syntheses of vitamin C involve a fermentation process using this molecule as a
starting material. This molecule's less common L isomer cannot react with hexokinase; its D isomer
reacts with the enzyme to form a compound containing a phosphate on carbon number 6. The Cori
cycle involves the conversion of pyruvate into this molecule. It can also be used to form two
equivalents of pyruvate, the starting material of the citric acid cycle. A dimer containing two of these
molecules is called mannose while it also forms a long linear chain called glucagon. For 10 points, name
this monosaccharide with formula C6H12O6, often referred to as blood sugar.
ANSWER: glucose (prompt on "C6H12O6" since a couple of things have the same chemical formula)
This compound is used as precursor in the Reichstein process in which it undergoes hydrolysis into sorbital
with the ultimate goal of creating Vitamin C. Derivatives of this simple compound are represented by
Haworth projections and are able to form alpha or beta linkages at its anomeric carbon. This compound and
mannose are produced from the Kiliani-Fischer synthesis acting on arabinose. It participates in a feedback
system with the lac operon, whereby an environment with plenty of this molecule does not necessitate the
need to breakdown lactose. It is stored in the liver in the form of glycogen, and its production is stimulated
by the hormone glucagon. For 10 points, identify this simple sugar produced through the process of
photosynthesis with the chemical formula C6H12O6.
ANSWER: Glucose [or C6H12O6 before read]
A reduced form of this monomeric molecule is converted to ascorbic acid in the Reichstein Process. When
in its ring form, this substance has a hemiacetyl group at its anomeric carbon. The absence of this molecule
triggers the use of "ketone bodies" for energy in some organs. This molecule can cross the blood brain
barrier, and its interaction with CAP regulates the lac operon. Hexokinase cleaves this molecule in a certain
metabolic process, and this carbohydrate is stored in the liver as glycogen. For 10 points, name this simple
sugar that is the main product of photosynthesis and has chemical formula C6H12O6.
ANSWER: d-glucose [or dextrose; or l-glucose; accept C6H6 before mentioned]
The gene SLC2A9 encodes a transporter of this molecule, which is the starting material in the
Reichstein process. Unlike humans, most animals can synthesize vitamin C in a four step process
starting with it, and PET scans often use a fluorinated analog of this molecule. Together with
galactose, it makes up the dissacharide lactose, and numerous molecules of this hexose make up the storage
molecules cellulose and starch. For 10 points, name this sugar that is broken down into two molecules of
pyruvate in glycolysis.
ANSWER: glucose [or C6 H12 O6]
This compound along with water and sodium chloride are the ingredients in the traditional formulation
for the oral rehydration therapy used to treat diarrhea. Low levels of this molecule allow cAMP and CAP to
promote transcription of the lac operon. This compound is the primary substrate of hexokinase. Cellulose is
a polymer of this molecule. This sugar is converted into two pyruvates in glycolysis. Sucrose is a
combination of fructose with this sugar. For 10 points, name this most common sugar monosaccharide with
formula C6H12O6.
ANSWER: D-glucose
This compound is generated through the Cori cycle, and some mammals may synthesize vitamin C from this
molecule. It is phosphorylated by hexokinase in the first step of the Embden-Meyerhof pathway, and
glycerol and another molecule are inputs to its neogenesis, which occurs in the liver. Two net ATP
molecules and two NADH molecules are produced by its conversion to two molecules of pyruvate, and its
conversion to fatty acids is facilitated by insulin. For 10 points, name this six-carbon monosaccharide that
forms sucrose with fructose.
ANSWER: glucose
The small intestine has a transporter protein that allows sodium ions and this compound to enter its
cells. PEP carboxykinase is an enzyme that is part of a pathway that produces this compound.
Hexokinase uses this compound as a substrate. This compound makes up cellulose, (*) starch, and
glycogen polymers. It is the end product of photosynthesis, and it is broken down in glycolysis.
Hyperglycemia occurs if the level of this monosaccharide in the blood is too high. For 10 points, name this
carbohydrate, which has formula C6H12O6.
ANSWER: D-glucose [or dextrose]
Flourine-18 is attached to a derivative of this molecule in the most common PET tracer. PEP
carboxykinase is an enzyme key to a process that generates this molecule from smaller precursors. This
molecule is phosphorylated by hexokinase in the first step of a process that generates two net ATP by
splitting this molecule into two molecules of pyruvate. For 10 points, name this monosaccharide with
formula C 6-H 12-O 6, a sugar that is an important source of energy.
ANSWER: glucose [or dextrose]
In solution, this molecule assumes a pyranose structure though it exists in equilibrium with its cyclical
isomers. This molecule is converted to ascorbic acid or vitamin C in the Reichstein Process. A radioactive
analogue of this molecule called FDG is used in PET scans. The amount of this molecule present in the
bloodstream is increased by a hormone produced in the alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans and is
decreased by insulin. Polymers of this molecule include chitin, amylose, and cellulose. For 10 points, name
this molecule, which is the starting point of aerobic respiration with a chemical formula C6H12O6.
ANSWER: glucose [prompt on "C6H12O6" before mentioned]
This compound is converted to ascorbic acid in the Reichstein process. It is the input molecule in a process
that includes the regulatory enzymes hexo-kinase and phospho-fructo-kinase. Its sixteen structures were
studied by Emil Fischer. It is converted into two pyruvate molecules in glycolysis. The right-handed form of
this molecule is dextrose. Carbon dioxide and water combine with light energy to produce this molecule in
photosynthesis. For 10 points, name this molecule with formula C6H12O6, a simple sugar.
ANSWER: glucose [accept dextrose before mentioned; prompt on C6H12O6 before mentioned]
A family of channel proteins that transport mostly this chemical and its derivatives are the EAATs. The
action of molecule's dehydrogenase enzyme results in most of the ammonia eliminated by the urea cycle.
PCP works by agonizing this signal molecule by mimicking NMDA, which is itself the namesake of one
family of receptors for this molecule. Deamination of this compound yields the same product as the
operation of isocitrate dehydrogenase on D-isocitrate; that compound, the third from citrate in the Krebs
cycle, is an alpha-keto derivative of this acid. This amino acid with a carboxylic acid side chain has a name
abbreviated E. For 10 points, name this compound, the principle brain excitatory neurotransmitter.
ANSWER: glutamic acid [accept glutamate; accept E before it's mentioned]
This substance is the target of transporters coded for by the SLC1A family of genes, known as EAATs.
Though not kainic acid, this endogenous chemical binds to KARs, and its buildup in extracellular space
causes internal calcium 2+ buildup and cell death. Its binding to another protein channel causes EPSP
depolarization and induces long-term potentiation. Its N-acetyl form regulates carbamoyl phosphate
synthase and, indirectly, the urea cycle, while that aforementioned channel, antagonized by the drug PCP, is
the NMDA receptor. A precursor of it precedes succinyl CoA in the Krebs cycle; that precursor is an alpha
keto acid. Its replacement by valine at position 6 on the beta-globin chain causes sickle cell anemia. For 10
points, name this excitatory neurotransmitter and amino acid whose ionic form is a flavor enhancer.
ANSWER: glutamate [accept glutamic acid throughout; do not accept "glutamine"]
Since one enzyme that helps metabolize this molecule is coded for a gene located near DAX1, people with a
deficiency in that enzyme can exhibit adrenal hypoplasia congenita or Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
DHAP is dehydrogenated to a phosphate attached version of this molecule in an alternative to the malate-
aspartate shuttle for moving electrons into the interior of the mitochondria. MGL is an enzyme the cleaves a
variable substituent from this molecule as part of a process whose limiting step is HSL mediated hydrolysis.
This molecule is combined with an alkyl chain, an acetate, and a choline derivative to form platelet
activating factor. Stocks of bacteria are usually made using a mixture of this molecule and water and then
frozen. Molecules of fat consist of three fatty acids ester linked to this compound. For 10 points, name this
compound that makes up the backbone of phospholipids.
ANSWER: glycerol [or glycerine]
The tyrosine kinase expressed by the avian sarcoma virus undergoes myristoylation at one of these
residues. The conversion of tetrahydrofolic acid to N5, N10-methylene-THF releases water and this
product in the thymidylate synthase reaction. Strychnine antagonizes this compound by binding to
the same ligand-gated chloride channels. This compound has the largest allowable area out of any
Ramachandran plot. Proline, (*) hydroxyproline, and this amino acid recur in the primary sequence of
collagen. Along with GABA, this compound serves as an inhibitory central nervous system
neurotransmitter. This amino acid is not chiral because it has hydrogen as its side chain. For 10 points,
name this smallest and simplest amino acid.
ANSWER: glycine [or gly; or G]
This compound is synthesized in the liver by the reaction of CO2 and ammonia with a methylene
tentrahydrofolate derivative, and in porphyrin synthesis this compound reacts with succinyl-CoA to form
aminolevulinic acid. A disruption in its receptors causes hyperekplexia, and its function is also inhibited by
strychnine. Transamination of glyoxylate results in this compound, and in the spinal cord, it opposes
glutamate as an inhibitory neurotransmitter. Thirty-five percent of the collagen helix contains this amino
acid, although the entropy cost of including it in many structures is quite high. FTP, name this only achiral
amino acid with side chain H.
ANSWER: Glycine
It can be degraded to pyruvate via intermediary formation of serine via the action of serine
hydroxymethyltransferase, and its combination with succinyl-CoA allows for the production of the
porphyrins precursor d-aminolevulinic acid. It is needed as a co-agonist with glutamate for NMDA
receptors, and it is one of the major components of collagen along with the amino acid proline. The chief
inhibitory neurotransmitter of the spinal cord, FTP, names this smallest amino acid which is optically
inactive due to its single hydrogen side chain.
ANSWER: glycine
Strychnine works by inhibiting the receptor for this molecule, which is not needed in the human diet since
this molecule can be created and synthesized from the enzymes like serine hydroxymethyltransferase. This
molecule can be manufactured by reacting chloroacetic acid with ammonia, producing a compound that can
be referred to as 2-aminoethanoic acid. Making up about a third of collagen, this molecule is the only
achiral amino acid. This molecule has the formula NH2CH2COOH, for 10 points, name this simplest of the
twenty amino acids with a hydrogen side chain.
ANSWER: glycine
This compound is combined with methanol and Tris in a common transfer buffer used in Western
blots. A mutation in the alpha subunit of this compound's receptor is the cause of hyperekplexia. This
compound combines with cysteine and glutamate to form the antioxidant tripeptide glutathione. This
amino acid's receptors can be blocked by picrotoxin and strychnine. It's not serine, but this amino
acid acts as a co-agonist along with glutamate for (*) NMDA receptors, and in the brain stem and spinal
cord, it serves as the chief inhibitory neurotransmitter. This amino acid is found on approximately every
third residue of collagen. For 10 points, name this only achiral amino acid, which is characterized by a
hydrogen side chain.
ANSWER: glycine [prompt on Gly and G,, accept the pretentious answers of aminoacetic acid and aminoethanoic acid]
The condensation of this compound and succinyl-coA results in the synthesis of ALA, which is the
first step of heme synthesis. Every third residue in collagen features this amino acid, and the
interconversion between this compound and serine is performed by serine hydroxymethylase. The
presence of this amino acid is obligatory for the opening of channels of the NMDA receptors, and it
functions as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. Like proline, it is usually not
found in alpha helices because of its small size, and it is the only amino acid which does not exhibit
chirality. For 10 points, identify this simplest of the amino acids.
ANSWER: glycine
In addition to proline and hydroxyproline, the triple helix structure of collagen is primarily due to
this amino acid. Strychnine works by blocking receptors for this amino acid, which, like GABA, is a
common inhibitory neurotransmitter. Of the twenty amino acids commonly used to build proteins, it
is the only (*) achiral one. For 10 points, name this smallest amino acid, whose R chain is just a
hydrogen atom, given the one-letter designation G.
ANSWER: glycine [or Gly; prompt on G before given]
Castanospermine interferes with this substance's storage in livestock, and uridine-5-triphosphate provides
the energy for its formation. Pompe's disease is a genetic impairment in ability to use this molecule. After
being debranched, its monomers may be used to produce NADPH in the pentose phosphate pathway.
Depletion of the body's supplies of this chemical is responsible for the wall that marathon runners hit, its
breakdown is stimulated by glucagon, and its branched structure makes it more immediately usable than
amylose. For 10 points, what polysaccharide performs an energy-storage function analogous to starch in
animals?
ANSWER: glycogen
Phosphorylase kinase and phosphoprotein phosphatase, respectively, activate and repress
synthesis of this substance. Astrocytes are capable of synthesizing and storing this substance. In
Pompe's disease, it builds up in the lysosomes. McArdle's disease causes a mutation in a
phosphorylase acting on this compound. Debranching enzyme acts on this substrate, which normally
has only one reducing end because of its alpha (*) 1-6 linkages. The closest analog to this compound in
plants is amylopectin. Beta-adrenergic receptors respond to epinephrine by signaling the breakdown of this
substance to G6P. Synthesis of this polymer is activated by insulin. For 10 points, name this polymer of
glucose stored in the liver and muscle cells.
ANSWER: glycogen
Von Gierke's disease, which results in hyper uricemia and xanthoma formation, occurs due to the
accumulation of this substance. Insulin acts as an inhibitor to GSK3 which phosphorylates an enzyme
in its synthesis, while a unique enzyme necessary to its synthesize has a alpha-1,6 branch is simply
called "branching enzyme." The protein involved in its synthesis has a tyr-194 residue with catalytic
activity and forms an octamer by successive addition of UDP glucose molecules, and its breakdown sees the
cleavage of a 1,4-alpha glycosidic bond. For 10 points, identify this polymer which is the form used for
storing glucose in the liver.
ANSWER: glycogen
Patients with McArdle's disease lack the enzymes needed to break down this material. The synthesis of
this material makes use of a compound called UDPG along with an enzyme that creates branches along its
linear framework; thus this material contains both 1,4 and 1,6 alpha glycosidic bonds. Marathon runners
"hit the wall" when they deplete their supply of this material which is the animal analogue of plant starch.
For 10 points, name this polymer of glucose found in the human body which is broken down by the
hormone glucagon.
ANSWER: glycogen
The synthesis of this compound requires tyrosine-194 to bind to its single reducing end. The synthesis of
this compound uses UDP-conjugated monomers to form alpha-1,4-linkages, and a branching enzyme to
generate alpha-1,6 linkages. This compound is broken down in response to glucagon, and it provides
energy for about 6 hours during a fast. For 10 points, name this polymer of glucose, which is stored in the
liver and often called animal starch.
ANSWER: glycogen
Heptamegaly usually results from Cori's disease and Andersen's disease, both of which occur due to
dysfunctional enzymes involved in the synthesis of this compound. One enzyme involved with the
breakdown of this compound uses pyridoxal phosphate at catalytic sites and only acts on the alpha 14 bonds; 
a branching enzyme is required to eliminate alpha (*) 1-6 linkages and create a linear polymer.
During its synthesis, the action of uridyl transferase forms a pyrophosphate intermediate in addition to
UDP-glucose. In hepatocytes, a high level of insulin prevents the breakdown of this compound, a
degradation promoted by glucagon. For 10 points, name this animal analogue of starch.
ANSWER: Glycogen
A Glu-104-Asp mutation in one enzyme in this pathway causes a rare chronic hemolytic anemia and
cardiomyopathy. An isomerase in this pathway is one of the few catalytically perfect enzymes. The first
enzyme in this pathway is hexokinase. This process begins with an investment phase and ends with a
payoff phase, which uses substrate-level phosphorylation to generate a net of two ATP. For 10 points, name
this process that generates a pair of pyruvate molecules by splitting a monosaccharide.
ANSWER: glycolysis [or Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway]
One step in this process is facilitated by the alpha-beta barrel structure of the TIM enzyme, leading to the
formation of an enediol intermediate. The action of hexokinase begins this process by attaching a phosphate
group to its principle reactant, and in one common setting for this process, it is followed by a reaction that
oxidizes a product to an acetyl group. In another setting, that product is reduced to lactate or alcohol, while
when performed during aerobic cellular respiration, it precedes the Krebs cycle. Yielding two molecules
each of pyruvate and ATP, for 10 points, name this process, the decomposition of a glucose molecule.
ANSWER: glycolysis
Tumor cells primarily express a dimerized embryonic M2 form of this process's final enzyme, hypothesized
to be critical to the Warburg effect. In many plants, an enzyme using PPi as a phosphate donor makes the
rate-limiting step of this process reversible. That enzyme replaces phosphofructokinase-1, which, like its
final enzyme, requires a magnesium cofactor. In this process, PGAL is phosphorylated as NAD+ is reduced.
Its first step is catalyzed by hexokinase, and it occurs in the cytosol. Substrate-level phosphorylation yields
2 ATP in this process that precedes the Krebs cycle. For 10 points, name this ten-step pathway that cleaves
glucose into two molecules of pyruvate.
ANSWER: glycolysis [accept Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas or EMP pathway; prompt on cellular respiration; do not accept "Entner-Doudoroff pathway"]
The product of this pathway is acted upon by a complex which includes enzymes such as dihydrolipol
transacetylase, which is symbolized E2 ["e two"]. PFK-1 phosphorylates a terminal hydroxyl group in the
second of two "priming" steps of this process. Most enzymes in this pathway require magnesium cations,
and a five membered ring is made from a six membered ring in the second step of this process. Aldolases
yield the DHAP and G3P intermediates of this process. This process is divided into energy investment and
payoff phases, and 2 molecules each of ATP and NADH are given off by this process. For 10 points, name
this cellular pathway in which glucose is converted into pyruvate.
ANSWER: glycolysis
In an aldolase catalyzed step in this process, the kinetically perfect enzyme triosephosphate isomerase is
responsible for converting one of two products. Another enzyme involved in this process is hexokinase,
which has especially high activity in the Warburg Effect because it is organelle-bound. Phosphofructokinase
is a key regulator which converts the F6P intermediate, and other intermediates include PGAL, G3P, and
PEP. It provides energy for NADH and ATP production through the production of pyruvate from its
namesake breakdown of glucose. For 10 points, name this process usually followed by the Krebs Cycle, the
first step of respiration.
ANSWER: glycolysis
One step in this process cleaves a ketose to give dihydroxyacetone phosphate and GADP. This process
occurs in the muscles and its inverse occurs in the liver in the Cori cycle. An enzyme essential to this
process is allosterically regulated by AMP and fructose-2,6-bisphosphate; that enzyme is
phosphofructokinase. The products of this process can be fed into ethanol or lactic acid fermentation, or
into the Krebs cycle. For ten points, name this process that forms pyruvate from glucose.
ANSWER: glycolysis
One step in this pathway applies Le Chatelier's (shah-tuh-lee-AIRS) Principle by converting DHAP to
G3P via isomerase (iy-SOH-meh-rayse) and quickly removing G3P to keep the reaction from equilibrium.
In this pathway, the enzymes hexokinase (hecks-oh-KIE-nase) and phosphofructokinase
(fahs-foh-fruck-toh-KIE-nase) convert two ATP molecules to ADP, which phosphorylates
(fahs-FOR-ih-lates) a substrate molecule twice. This pathway reduces NAD+ ("N-A-D plus") to NADH,
and it also forms two pyruvate (pie-ROO-vate) molecules which are turned into acetyl CoA and passed
onto the Krebs cycle. For 10 points, name this energy-producing pathway which splits a glucose molecule
in two.
ANSWER: glycolysis (glie-KAH-lih-sis)
One enzyme in this pathway is activated by AMP ("A-M-P")and fructose-2, 6 bisphosphate
("two-six-biss-FAHS-fate), while another enzyme in this pathway is triose (TRY-ohs) phosphate
isomerase (i-SOM-er-ase). The first enzyme in this pathway is inhibited by its product and is known
as hexokinase (hex-oh-KYE-nase). This metabolic pathway starts with an investment phase and ends
with a payoff phase. It produces a net of 2 ATP ("A-T-P") molecules and two molecules of (*)
pyruvate (pie-ROO-vate). For 10 points, name this metabolic pathway that splits glucose.
ANSWER: glycolysis
In this process, the reversible lysis of a biphosphate pentose yields dihydroxyacetone phosphate and the
glyceraldehyde derivative PGAL, with which it rapidly interconverts. Its second step is an isomerization
yielding F6P, which then undergoes rate-limiting phosphate addition by phosphofructokinase. The product
of the first step of this process is a precursor to glycogen, and its final three-carbon product can be
fermented into lactate or decarboxylated to form acetyl-CoA. The products of this process are consumed by
the Krebs cycle. For 10 points, name this metabolic pathway which converts glucose into pyruvate, yielding
a net gain of two ATP molecules.
ANSWER: glycolysis [accept Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway; prompt on "respiration" or "cellular respiration" or "aerobic respiration"; prompt on "metabolism" or "catabolism"]
During this process, a double-bond is formed in a substrate because of the extraction of water by
enolase, leading to the formation of PEP. In the first step of this process, an enzyme named
hexokinase transfers sugar to a different molecule. A net gain of 2 (*) NADH occurs in the energy
payoff phase of this pathway. This process includes the activation of phosphofructokinase [pr. Fos-foefrook-toe-ki-nase], and yields two ATP molecules as well as two molecules of pyruvate. For ten points,
name this pathway that breaks down glucose outside of the mitochondria and precedes the Krebs cycle.
ANSWER: Glycolysis (prompt on "Cellular Respiration")
In this pathway, the enzyme triose phosphate isomerase converts di-hydroxy-acetone phosphate into
glycer-aldehyde-3-phosphate. At its start, hexokinase adds a phosphate group to this pathway's
reactant, and substrate-level phosphorylation leads to a net gain of 2 ATP molecules after its
investment and (*) payoff phases. The products of this pathway can be converted by Coenzyme A into
acetyl-CoA prior to their entry into the Krebs cycle. For ten points, name this process in which a molecule
of glucose is broken down into two molecules of pyruvate.
ANSWER: glycolysis (prompt on "respiration" or "(an)aerobic respiration")
A variation of this process in prokaryotes includes the enzymes lactonohyrolase and NADP+ oxoreductase
and is named for Entner and Duodoroff. The rapid acceleration of this process by M2-PK in cancer cells is
known as the Warburg effect, while one product of this pathway is moved into a downstream process via the
malate-aspartate shuttle. One enzyme is this pathway is regulated by both a liver promoter and a
neuroendocrine promoter that control the transcription of two different isoforms, while another one is
inhibited allosterically by alanine and ATP, and is responsible for transforming phosphenolpyruate to
pyruvate, which is the final molecule of this pathway. Divided into an "investment" and "payoff" phase, this
process creates a net total of 2ATP. FTP, name this pathway that contains pyruvate kinase, glucokinase, and
phosphofructokinase-1, and is responsible for splitting a glucose molecule.
ANSWER: glycolysis or the Embden-Meyerhoff pathway
In the first step of this process, hexokinase catalyzes the production of G6P; later, NAD+ ["N A D
plus"] is reduced to NADH. This process takes place in the cytosol, and does not require oxygen. Two
ATP are needed in order to start the (*) investment phase while, 4 ATP are produced in the payoff phase.
The Krebs cycle is often preceded by, for 10 points, what process that creates pyruvate by splitting glucose?
ANSWER: glycolysis (accept Embden-Myerhoff-Parnas pathway)
The rate-limiting step in this pathway is catalyzed by phosphofructokinase
(FOSS-fo-FROOK-toe-KYE-nase) and, like the first step, requires a magnesium cofactor. The sixth step of
this pathway transfers a phosphate group to G3P and attaches a hydrogen to NAD+ (N-A-D-plus), while
the seventh step transfers that phosphate group to ADP, recouping two of the initial ATP inputs. The last
step of this pathway also creates ATP for a net of two ATP per input glucose molecule. For 10 points, name
this pathway that breaks down glucose.
ANSWER: glycolysis
One variation of this process is known as the Leloir pathway. It ends with the transfer of a
phosphate group from PEP. Earlier in this process, dihydroxyacetone phosphate is converted to
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. This pathway, which usually begins with the (*) phosphorylation of the
starting material by the enzyme hexokinase, occurs in the cytosol. It is also known as the Embden-
Meyerhof pathway, and it yields a net total of two ATP molecules. For 10 points, name this series of
anaerobic reactions in which glucose is split into two molecules of pyruvate.
ANSWER: glycolysis [accept Embden-Meyerhof pathway early]
Tarui's disease is caused by a deficiency of an enzyme required for this process. Fluoride and
iodoacetate inhibit it. The TIM barrel protein motif was named for an enzyme in this pathway.
Warburg discovered that cancer cells exclusively make use of this pathway. This process'
rate-limiting step is activated by AMP, is inhibited by ATP, and is catalyzed by (*)
phosphofructokinase. Gluconeogenesis is roughly the reverse of this process. It is divided into an energy
investment and an energy payoff period. In this pathway's first reaction, hexokinase phosphorylates
glucose. For 10 points, name this process which occurs in the cytoplasm and forms pyruvate as the first
step in cellular respiration.
ANSWER: glycolysis [or the Entner-Doudoroff-Parnas pathway]
The end product of this pathway is decarboxylated by TPP and transferred onto a lipoic acid arm after
which it is released as a thioester, and the fact that cancer cells primarily utilize this pathway was observed
by Otto Warburg. A hexokinase performs the first committed step in this pathway by phosphorylating the
initial substrate. The production of DHAP and G3P in this pathway is catalyzed by an aldolase, while an
irreversible sees the phosphorylation of fructose-6-phosphate by phosphofructokinase. For 10 point, identify
this process which sees the production of 2 pyruvate molecules from 1 glucose molecule, and whose name
reflects the fact that glucose is broken down in it.
ANSWER: glycolysis [accept Embden-Meyerhoff pathway]
One of the intermediate products of this pathway is formed by an aldol cleavage and is PGAL, or GAP,
of which two are formed for each input molecule into this pathway. Hexokinase (hecks-oh-KIE-nays)
catalyzes the first step in this metabolic pathway. The anaerobic process of fermentation includes the
reoxidation of NADH and this pathway. This process produces 4 ATP molecules but uses 2 in the process
for a net production of 2 ATP and 2 NADH. For 10 points, name this process in which glucose is
metabolized to pyruvate (pie-ROO-vate).
ANSWER: glycolysis (glie-KAH-lih-sis)
One version of it named for Entner and Doudoroff occurs only in prokaryotes and utilizes different
dehydrase and aldolases. It utilizes enzymes such as Triosephosphate isomerase and Phosphoglycerate
mutase, and the Warburg effect attributes its high frequency in cancer cells to an excess of the first enzyme
used in it, hexokinase. The counterpart of gluconeogenesis, For 10 points, name this series of reactions that
precedes the Krebs cycle in aerobic respiration, resulting in the formation of ATP and pyruvate from the
catalysis of a glucose molecule.
ANSWER: glycolysis [accept Embden-Myerhoff-Parnas pathway]
Di-hydroxy-acetone phosphate is an intermediate in this process which is isomerized to
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Its penultimate step sees the production of PEP catalyzed by an enolase.
The activity of its first enzyme, hexokinase, is elevated in many cancers. A feedback loop with
phosphofructokinase is formed in this pathway, and it is also known as the Embden-Meyerhoff
pathway. For 10 points, identify this pathway which sees the conversion of glucose into two pyruvate
molecules and also the production of two ATP molecules.
ANSWER: glycolysis [accept Embden-Meyerhoff pathway until mentioned]
One entity named for this man is innervated by one-B afferents. He discovered a technique in which
silver chromate particles are fixed to a neuron membrane by reacting silver nitrate with potassium
dichromate. He named one reaction he discovered the "black reaction." That technique of staining nervous
tissue is now named for him, although it was refined by his fellow Nobel laureate, Santiago Ramon y Cajal.
This scientist names a sensory receptor organ located where skeletal muscle fibers enter tendons. He
discovered an entity that consists of flattened membrane disks called cisternae. This man names an object
that packages proteins inside a cell. For 10 points, name this Italian scientist who has a namesake "body,"
an organelle found in most eukaryotic cells.
ANSWER: Camillo Golgi
This scientist found that an organ within collagen fibers of the tendon mediates a muscular stretch
reflex. He found that at least two forms ofPlasmodium cause different types of malaria, and won his
Nobel Prize alongside Spaniard Santiago Ramon y (+) Cajal. While working at a mental hospital
near Pavia, he started using a weak silver nitrate dye for a "black reaction," making neuron
structure more visible, his namesake method of (*) staining. For 10 points, name this Italian physiologist
who also first observed a cisternae-laden, protein-packing organelle.
ANSWER: Camillo Golgi
Percolozoa are distinguished among protozoans by a lack of this organelle. This organelle contains
apoptosis-related proteins like GAAP and the Bcl-2 group, and one key process associated with it sees
xylose links formed between glycosaminoglycans. Pectins and sphingolipids are (*) produced in this
organelle, which is responsible for tagging lysosome-bound molecules with mannose-6-phosphate. The
COPII protein directs vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cis- side of this organelle, which is
formed by cisternae. For 10 points, name this organelle that synthesizes macromolecules and modifies
proteins, named for an Italian physiologist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi body]
In these organelles, a transferase facilitates the addition of serine residues to O-GalNac during the
addition of glycosaminoglycan [pr. Gly-co-sa-mi-no-gly-can] chains to a proteoglycan. These
structures are the sites of O-linked glycosylation and produce a large number of oligosaccharides. In
these organelles, the membranes at the opposite poles of certain (*) stacks are designated with the
words cis and trans. Those stacks consist of flattened sacs called cisternae. For ten points, name this
organelle which modifies the products of the endoplasmic reticulum for shipping and packaging, and is
named for an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi body (or Golgi apparatus; or Golgi complex)
This object is located on the trans side of the vesicular-tubular cluster, whose interface with it may be
described by the "homing in" hypothesis. On its opposite side, the targeting of its trans network is thought
to involve mannose-6-phosphate and other molecular tags. Molecules found in this organelle's lumens
include glycosidases and kinases, and its tasks include the phosphorylation or cleavage of certain molecules,
which are then transported to other organelles, or out of the cell via vesicles. Composed of a group of
membranous sacs called cisternae, identify this organelle involved in protein transport and packaging,
named after an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi body; or Golgi complex; etc.]
Enzymes in this structure are responsible for palmitoylation of the Ras superfamily, and this structure is also
responsible for O-linked glycosylation. This structure allows the production of glycosaminoglycans, which
help comprise the extracellular matrix. The acrosome is a derivative of this organelle. This organelle is
capable of targeting the lysosome via application of a mannose-6-phosphate tag to proteins at its "cis"
region. COPII-coated vesicles transport proteins from the ER to this structure, where they are targeted. For
10 points, name this organelle usually made up of flattened disks known as cisternae, responsible for protein
processing and packaging.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [Accept Golgi body and Golgi complex.]
Binding proteins known as v-SNAREs and t-SNAREs play an important role in this structure and it adds
mannose 6-phosphate to certain macromolecules. Proteoglycan is sulfated in these structures, which are
divided into types like regulated and continuous. Glycosylation is the major activity in these organelles, and
substances such as proteins and lipids enter them from the cis face and exit from the trans face. This
structure is found in both animals and plants, and consists of cisternae, serving as a processing center for
lipids and proteins produced by a cell. FTP, name this organelle named after an Italian scientist, whose
main function is the modification and shipping of proteins.
ANSWER: Golgi Apparatus/Body
Percolozoa are distinguished among protozoans by a lack of this organelle. These organelles'
functions include the production of chondroitin sulfate and the addition of sulfate groups to tyrosine.
The movement of molecules within this organelle can be modeled by the maturational model. This
organelle can be divided into three (*) sides, one of which is the "medi" side. This organelle contains
GAAP, a protein responsible for apoptosis. Vesicles transport proteins from the ER to this organelle, which
is made of flattened disks known as cisternae. FTP, name this organelle, whose main function is the
modification and shipping of proteins, named for an Italian physiologist.
ANSWER: Golgi bodies (accept Golgi apparatus)
In this location, compounds like O-N-acetylglucosamine are attached to sequences like asparagine-anything-
serine as part of glycosylation. This location is where signal patches on proteins are recognized, prompting
them to eventually be directed to the lysosome, possibly with the addition of mannose-6-phosphate. Proteins
headed for this location may be coated in COPII ("cop two") protein. The cis face of this organelle, which is
composed of cisternae, receives vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum. For 10 points, name this
eponymous "apparatus" which processes proteins before they are secreted.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi complex; or Golgi body]
A defective enzyme in this structure is the cause of I-cell disease. Transport from this structure is
regulated by GGA1, which binds to ADP ribosylation factor 1, while transport to this structure is
inhibited by brefeldin A. In sperm, this structure develops into another structure which uses
hyaluronidase and acrosin to facilitate sperm-egg binding. This precursor to the acrosome is the site
where addition of (*) N-acetylglucosamine to serine and threonine residues and other forms of O-linked
glycosylation takes place. This organelle receives COP2 coated vesicles at its cis face, and it consists of a
series of stacks termed cisternae. For 10 points, name this organelle which packages and distributes proteins
incoming from the endoplasmic reticulum and is named for its Italian discoverer.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or body, or bodies, or complex, as long as they say Golgi award them points]
In plants, stacks of these structures are sometimes referred to as a dictyosome. Lysosomes are
created in this structure, and they are named after the man who developed the "black reaction" to
stain nervous tissue. They contain flattened disks known as (*) cisternae and they have two ends known
as the cis and trans faces; the cis face typically receive protein vesicles sent from the rough endoplasmic
reticulum. For 10 points, name this cell organelle whose main function is to process and package
macromolecules.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi body; or Golgi complex, etc]
A defect in the phosphotransferase enzyme in this organelle results in inclusion-cell disease, and this
organelle is also affected by various disorders that affect glycosylation. A site of proteoglycan production,
this organelle transfers a sulfur from PAPS to target molecules and also manufactures sphingolipids and
pectins. Proteins bound for lysosomes are marked with mannose 6-phosphate by this organelle. Sometimes
called dictyosomes in plant cells, this organelle transports cisternae from its cis to its trans face. For ten
points, name this organelle that functions in packaging and processing proteins destined for secretion.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus or body or structure
The COG complex localizes to this organelle. An assay used to visualize the function of this organelle
uses labelled VSV glycoprotein. GRASP and Rab proteins a tether the subunits of this organelle
together, and Arf1 is required for transport within it. Microtubule inhibitors like nocodazole lead to
dispersal of this structure. Endo-H resistance is acquired by glycosylated molecules as they move
through this organelle due to the modification of sugars. O-linked glycosylation occurs in this
organelle, and transport to this organelle occurs via COP2-coated vesicles. The mannose-6-phosphate
receptor localizes to the trans portion of this structure. This organelle consists of a series of flattened stacks
called cisternae, and it receives cargo from the ER to transport to the outside of the cell. For 10 points,
name this organelle responsible for sorting proteins, named for an Italian.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus
This structure's interactions with other organelles are facilitated by SNARE, CopII, and clathrin coats.
Glycosyl-transferases assemble proteo-glycans in this organelle. Its function is modeled by the
maturational model, and it is composed of cisternae. Transport between its medi-, cis-, and trans- portions is
mediated by vesicles, which bring proteins from the ER for this organelle to tag with specialized sugars. For
10 points, name this organelle, composed of a stack of flattened sacs, that sorts and packages
macromolecules for transport throughout the cell.
ANSWER: Golgi body or apparatus [prompt on membrane-bound vesicles during first sentence]
This organelle is the site of pectin synthesis in plants. The GAAP protein is localized in this body, aiding
the cell in apoptosis control. This organelle interacts with vesicles tagged with the COPII protein. It adds
mannose-six-phosphate to items intended for the lysosome, and is made up of folds called cisternae. This
organelle's primary function is packaging proteins and lipids for transport to other parts of the cell. For 10
points, name this organelle that is named for an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi body [or Golgi apparatus]
This entity's functions include synthesizing sphingomyelin and adding sulfate groups to tyrosine. It creates
clathrin-coated vesicles that send proteins to other parts of the cell. This organelle has cis and trans faces,
and consists of stacked, flattened disks called cisternae. For 10 points, name this organelle, which is found
near the endoplasmic reticulum, packages and sorts newly created proteins, and is named after an Italian
scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or any reasonable synonyms for "apparatus," e.g. Golgi body or Golgi entity]
This organelle manufactures the polysaccharide pectin, which is used in plant cell walls. Vesicles bound for
this organelle are covered in Coat Protein II, and it adds mannose-6-phosphate signals to mark enzymes
which will be sent to lysosomes. In the maturation model, its cisternae move from the cis to the trans face
before being degraded into vesicles. Its primary role is to process and modify molecules it receives from the
ER. For 10 points, name this cellular organelle which is named for an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi Apparatus [or Body or Complex or Dictyosome]
Proteins targeted for either this structure or the plasma membrane are tagged with the amino acid sequence
Y-X-X-phi, where X is any residue and phi is any hydrophobic residue. One protein found here, GAAP,
was found in 2009 to reduce the frequency of oscillations of cytosolic calcium concentrations. In plants,
hemicelluloses and pectins are created here, and it is location of sphingomyelin synthesis from ceramide.
Sulfotransferases sulfate glycosaminoglycans and proteglycans in this structure. Vesicles marked with the
COPII ("cop-2") protein transport molecules from endoplasmic reticulum to its cis face. This organelle is
composed of flattened discs called cisternae. For 10 points, name this protein-modifying organelle named
for an Italian biologist.
ANSWER: Golgi body [or Golgi apparatus; or Golgi complex]
This organelle is responsible for the production of chondroitin sulfate, a group that binds to serine residues,
as it is the site of glycosaminoglycan synthesis. Retrograde transport from this organelle requires COPI
[cop-one] proteins, and the spiral-shaped protein dynamin pinches vesicles off of it. Called dictyosomes in
plants, they consist of stacks called cisternae. With a cis face opposite the endoplasmic reticulum and a
trans face open to the cytoplasm, for 10 points, name this site of macromolecule processing, an organelle
named for an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi body; or Golgi complex; prompt on dictyosomes]
This structure was first visualized using a namesake potassium dichromate and silver nitrate staining
technique. Transport to and from this structure is mediated by coat proteins and clathrin. This structure
adds mannose-6-phosphate to enzymes bound for lysosomes, and is composed of cis, medial, and trans
compartments. The vesicular-tubular cluster separates this organelle from the endoplasmic reticulum.
For 10 points, the modification and packaging of lipids and proteins occurs in what organelle, consisting
of flattened stacks called cisternae and named for an Italian scientist?
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi body]
Antibodies that localize to this organelle are associated with Sjogren's ("SHOW-grenz") syndrome,
and a deficiency of a phosphatase localized to it causes Lowe's syndrome. This organelle is the site
the sulfation of molecules like glycosaminoglycans and of sphingomyelin (*) synthesis. It receives
vesicles tagged with COPII ("cop two") proteins on its cis face. This organelle, which buds exocytotic
vesicles off its membrane, is made of stacks of flattened disks called cisternae. For 10 points, name this
organelle that packages, modifies, and sorts proteins.
ANSWER: Golgi body [or Golgi apparatus; or Golgi network; or Golgi complex]
This organelle is responsible for O-linked glycosylation of the proteoglycans used in the extracellular
matrix. The subject of the vesicular transport model, this organelle has a "cis" phase and a "trans" face and
is made up of a number of stacks called "cisternae." Its functions include modifying and sorting proteins
delivered in vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum. For 10 points, name this organelle named for an
Italian scientist, where various molecules are "packaged" for delivery.
ANSWER: the Golgi apparatus [or Golgi bodies]
In this organelle, COP2 facilitates the movement of glycoproteins from the cis terminus to the trans
terminus in a process called anterograde transport, while the COP1 vesicles control retrograde
transport. Cisternae within this organelle contain certain enzymes which carry out glycosylation on
various products of transcription, as well as serving as conduits through which newly-modified proteins
travel. For 10 points, name this organelle involved in the processing and packaging of molecules, named
after an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus/body/complex
Thing bound for this organelle are enclosed in COPI (COPE-one) or COPII (COPE-two).
Proteoglycans are formed here via glycosylation. It is divided into cis, medial, and trans
compartments, and in this organelle, mannose-6-phosphate is (*) added to proteins destined for the
lysosome. It receives proteins transported from the endoplasmic reticulum and modifies them before their
final destination. For 10 points, name this organelle that sorts and ships proteins, name for its Italian
discoverer.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi bodies]
These structures phosphorylated apolipoprotein, a substance that forms VLDL, a part of blood
serum. This organelle also adds mannose-6-phosphate to substances that are bound for the lysosome.
In plants, its functional equivalent is the (*) dictyosome, but that name can also refer to the stacks that
extend to this organelle's cis face, cisternae. Its main function is to receive certain compounds that are sent
from the rough endoplasmic reticulum and to send those via vesicles. Named for its Italian discoverer, for
10 points, identify these organelles that package and transport proteins.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi body or Golgi complex]
Sar1 ("sar one") binds to the membrane of this organelle, and according to a classical model, shuttle vectors
move between the "stable" components of this organelle. The somewhat lower pH of this organelle prevents
KDEL from acting as a retention sequence, creating a COP-I ("cop one") vesicle leaving this organelle.
Clathrin is produced at the trans end of this organelle, whose most common model states that its cisternae
"mature" as they move through it. Glycosylation of secreted proteins occurs in this organelle. For 10 points,
name this organelle which is responsible for packaging and sorting proteins into vesicles, named for an
Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [Accept Golgi body or Golgi complex.]
This organelle's luminal side is the active site of kinases which phosphorylate apolipoprotein B, while its
cytosolic face contains magnesium ion receptors. This organelle, the site of proteoglycan glycosylation and
GAG synthesis, receives clathrin-coated cargo proteins from endosomes and COPII ("cop-two")-coated
proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum. This organelle uses budding to secrete exocytotic vesicles, and it
is composed of flattened stacks of membranes known as cisternae. For 10 points, name this organelle that
packages macromolecules for secretion, discovered by an Italian physician.
ANSWER: Golgi body [or Golgi apparatus; or Golgi complex]
This structure's namesake anti apoptoic protein protects cells from apoptosis. 40 to 100 stacks of
membrane-bound structures known as cisternae are found in the average mammilian one of this
organelle. How this organelle disappears during the beginning of mitosis and reappears during(*)
telophase is still unexplained. This organelle with cis and trans phases receives proteins and other
macromolecules from the rough endoplasmic reticulum and packages them for transport to other parts of the
cell or for outside the cell. For 10 points, name this body, named after its discoverer, an Italian physician.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi body; or Golgi complex; prompt on "Golgi"]
This structure was originally thought to be an illusion caused by the black reaction, but its existence was
proven by an electron microscope. The GAAP protein located in this structure protects against apoptosis,
and its contents are transferred to its lumen. The COPII protein tags vesicles from another organelle which
enter the cis face of this structure, which is made up of stacks of flat membrane-covered sacs known as
cisternae. For 10 points, name this organelle that processes and packages proteins and lipids to be sent
throughout the cell, named for its Italian discoverer.
ANSWER: Golgi Apparatus [accept Golgi Body]
This organelle contains the GAAP protein, which plays a role in halting apoptosis. It can add a sugar tag
to target molecules for the lysosomes. This organelle is composed of stacked cisternae. Its basic function is
to process and package newly synthesized proteins and lipids. For 10 points, name this cell organelle that is
attached to the endoplasmic reticulum, which is named for an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: the Golgi apparatus [accept "body" or "complex" or other synonyms for "apparatus"]
Membrane proteins with a tyrosine and hydrophobic amino acid sequence are associated with this cellular
structure. The drug brefeldin A blocks transport to it by interfering with COPII vesicle formation. This site
of heterococcolith formation and sphingolipid synthesis is also important in the production of cell wall
polysaccharides, such as pectins. Known as a dictyosome in plants, it consists of stacks known as cisternae
and possesses cis/trans polarity. For 10 points, identify this organelle that modifies, stores, and transports
products of the endoplasmic reticulum and is named for an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus/body/complex/etc
This is the site of phosphorylation for a molecule responsible for moving cholesterol to tissues, known
as Apolipoprotein B-100. Molecules are sulfanated when they pass through lumen in these organelles.
Transport to this organelle in fungi is inhibited by Brefeldin A. Objects being transported from this
organelle are coated with a protein that binds to ARF, called (*) COPI. This organelle tags molecules
with mannose-6-phosphate if they are to be carried to the lysosome. This organelle, which is made up of
stacks of cisternae, has cis and trans networks. For 10 points, name this organelle that packages proteins in
the cell before sending them off, an apparatus named for an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi body [or Golgi complex; or Golgi apparatus]
This organelle is comprised of 40 to 100 membrane-bound stacks known as dictyosomes. It is the site of
sulfation of molecules such as glycosominoglycans via sulphotranferase as well as the site of proteoglycan
synthesis. This organelle is home to enzymes which modify proteins synthesized by the ER by adding
carbohydrates and phosphates to the peptides. Vesicles enter this organelle's cis side and depart from the
trans side by budding off. For ten points, name this organelle which packages and processes cellular
products, named after an Italian biologist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [or Golgi body, etc.]
One important function of this organelle is the post-translational modification of protein cores to make
GAG complexes. This organelle can target molecules for the lysosomes by adding a
mannose-six-phosphate tag. This organelle, which is composed of stacked cisternae, has the primay
function of processing and packaging proteins and lipids. For 10 points, name this cell organelle named for
an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi apparatus [accept "body" or "complex" or equivalents for "apparatus"]
Her research was questioned by Christophe Boesch, who recorded lower levels of violence in the Tai Forest
after this woman had chronicled a "war" between the Kahama and Kasakela groups in the 1970s. Through
her studies of such individuals as Flo, Frodo, and David Graybeard, the first to accept her presence, she
observed family relationships and termite-fishing sticks, the first instances of tool-making in non-human
primates. FTP, identify this biologist who worked for 45 years in Tanzania's Gombe Stream National Park
studying chimpanzees.
ANSWER: Jane Goodall
This academic figure was the subject of a controversial Gary Larson cartoon that called her a "tramp".
This author's book In the Shadow of Man describes her early years at Gombe Stream Reserve after being
chosen to study alongside Louis Leakey. For 10 points, name this conservationist, known as the world's
foremost expert on chimpanzees.
ANSWER: Dame Jane Morris Goodall
This thinker's magnum opus described how evolution occurs at multiple levels and how the three core
commitments of Darwinism are agency, efficacy, and scope. One work by this author criticized the twin
studies of Edwin Burt as well as the work The Bell Curve by arguing against a universal measure of
intelligence. This scientist's most famous theory argued that species spend most of their histories in stasis,
and was described as an alternative to phyletic gradualism. For 10 points, name this author of The Structure
of Evolutionary Theory and The Mismeasure of Man, who formulated the theory of punctuated equilibrium
with Niles Eldredge.
ANSWER: Stephen Jay Gould
Graminski and Lerner's melanophore screen is used to screen these proteins for drug targets, while other
assays for that purpose include Arena pharmaceuticals' CART. Examples of them include Frizzled and
Smoothened, and opsins have a structure similar to them. Axel and Buck determined that types of these
proteins are responsible for sensing odorant molecules. These proteins interact with and activate Gustdusin
and Transducin. Phosphorylation of these proteins leads to arrest In binding, which causes clathrin to drag
them out of the cell membrane. Upon ligand binding, these proteins split their partners into the alpha and
beta-gamma subunits, leading to increasing cAMP or IP3 levels. For 10 points, name these 7-pass
transmembrane receptors, named their activation of G proteins.
ANSWER: GPCRs [or G-protein coupled receptors; or Serpentine receptors; accept G proteins until "Frizzled"; prompt after]
In a 1975 article, Harper critiqued a recent competitior of this theory, claiming that it presented a contrary
rather than a contradictory case. Sometimes characterized by its critics as the "synthetic theory," one critic
of this idea took his inspiration from Richard Goldschmidt's concept of the "hopeful monster." Robert
Ricklefs proposed a mathematical model of this theory that uses an exponential equation in situations where
timescales are small compared to the speciation time, and those who argue against this theory claim that the
fossil record lacks a sufficient number of transitional forms to support it. A theory that contradicts this one
has been proposed by Niles Eldredge and Steven Gould. For ten points, identify this theory of evolution
which is opposed to punctuated equilibrium.
ANSWER: phyletic gradualism
The whip and tongue method of this procedure is done to increase surface area when starting with thin
pieces and is similar to the four flap, or banana, method. When this happens naturally, it is called
inosculation, and one of the parts that goes into this is the scion [SIE-on]. In addition to its use with plants,
this procedure is also used on human bone or skin, repairing certain fractures or burns. In plants, it is
important to keep the vascular cambium [KAM-beeum] of the scion in contact with the vascular cambium
of the rootstock. Name this method of physically combining two plants.
ANSWER: Grafting (do not accept "budding")
Sometimes a basic solution of fuchsin is used in this technique's last part because some organisms do not
respond well to the usage of safranin. The lipid layer is usually destroyed in the decoloriztion step of this
technique, and is usually a mixture of acetone and ethanol. Its second step involves the use of iodine as a
mordant to fix the dye. Its first and most important step sometimes uses methylene blue instead of the usual
crystal-violet dye. FTP, identify this staining technique, named for its Danish creator, that tests for the
presence of peptidoglycan in bacterial cells.
ANSWER: Gram stain
The Quellung test can further identify subclasses of one clade distinguished by this assay by observing a
"halo" caused by capsular swelling. A positive result occurs when CV-iodine complexes are retained after
dessication by alcohol. One clade of organisms distinguished by this assay has teichoic acids and molecule-
specific porins in its outer surface. Bacteria with two membranes stain pink with fuschin or safranin in this
test, while bacteria with thick peptidoglycan cell walls retain crystal violet and come up positive. For 10
points, name this test that differentiates between two different broad classes of bacteria.
ANSWER: Gramstain [or Gram test]
It doesn't work well for mycobacteria , ricketessia, or spirochetes. Urine specimens are often
distorted by antimicrobial therapy; certain organisms are especially susceptible to changes in results
on this procedure. Metheylene blue and fuchsin are sometimes used as alternatives to the main
ingredients. When rinsing off the slide, it is important to wash off the crystal violet and not the
culture. For ten points, name this microbiologic test, which works because the cell walls of certain bacteria
are dehydrated by ethanol and acetone, leading them to be classified as positive and negative.
ANSWER: Gram stain
Organisms with a periplasmic space are unable to take up one chemical used in this procedure, which is
sometimes replaced with the Ziehl-Neelsen stain for acid-fast organsims. This process can use carbol
fuschin in its last step instead of safranin. This process uses iodine as a mordant to trap the crystal violet
primary dye. Those that are positive for this test appear purple and have peptidoglycan in their cell walls.
For 10 points, name this procedure used to divide bacteria into namesake positive and negative types.
ANSWER: Gram staining
Alternatives to this procedure include the potassium hydroxide string test, and a process that creates a
yellow solution by stimulating the release of 4-nitroaniline, the aminopeptidase test. It is partially used to
determine the amount of techoic acid present in a sample, and the Zheil-Neelsen procedure can be used
when this is inconclusive. Results of this process are not conclusive for Rickettsia, spirochetes, or a genus of
agents whose members cause leprosy and tetanus. It typically employs an iodine mordant, and methylene
blue is used as a primary agent for organisms that do not respond well to crystal violet. It differentiates
organisms by the amount of peptidoglycan present in their cell walls. For 10 points, name this stain for
which bacteria can be either negative or positive.
ANSWER: Gram stain
This procedure is performed on synovial fluid after tapping a joint. An alternative to this procedure using
carbol fuschin and methylene blue is used to visualize Nocardia, Actinomyces, and Mycobacterium
species, and is known as the acid-fast stain. This procedure's final step uses safranin, and in this procedure
iodine is used as a trapping agent. For 10 points, name this stain that attaches to peptidoglycan, which sorts
bacteria into positive and negative categories.
ANSWER: gram stain
Sakazaki compared the efficiency of this technique to a related one involving yellow or colorless
paper. The form of this technique widely used today involves the Hucker modification, and Ryu
developed a related technique using KOH or H2SO4. (*) Iodine serves as a mordant in this procedure,
and an anionic compound, nigrosin, can be used in place of this technique to increase background contrast.
The final step of this procedure involves the application of safranin or basic fuchsin, which binds to
organisms not already reacted with crystal violet. FTP, identify this visualization technique which colors
positive bacteria purple based on cell wall composition, a certain stain named for its Danish discoverer.
ANSWER: Gram staining
In one of these ecosystems, David Tilman found a positive correlation between alpha diversity and
community stability. These terrestrial ecosystems expanded during the Miocene epoch. From studies
of one of these ecosystems, McNaughton formulated a form of the intermediate disturbance
hypothesis stating that herbivory can lead to increased primary productivity. Forbs are common
organisms in these ecosystems, which are often characterized by mollisols with agriculturally-valuable
A-horizons. The grazing optimization hypothesis was developed in one of these ecosystems, whose animals
include pronghorn and wildebeest. For 10 points, name these ecosystems exemplified by the Great Plains
and Serengeti, characterized by few trees and a whole lot of grass.
ANSWER: grasslands [or subtypes, such as savannas, prairies, shrublands, steppes, Pampas, or puna; or Great Plains or Serengeti until they are read]
Children and young adults with this disease are often treated with Propylthiouracil and
Methimazole. IH7 and rapamycin have been shown to prevent IL-16 and RANTES expression,
respectively, caused by IGF-IR in this disease. On mainland Europe, this disease is often known after
the man that described a (*) "Merseburg triad" that includes heart palpitations. This disease, sometimes
known as Basedow's disease, is believed to be caused by antibodies that activate TSH receptors, and it is
most commonly treated with radioiodine therapy. For 10 points, name this autoimmune disease with
symptoms such as bulging eyes and goiter, which results from an overactive thyroid.
ANSWER: Graves' disease [also accept Basedow's disease until mentioned; prompt on hyperthyroidism]
In crayfish, glands named for this color are essentially kidneys. Spherical colonies of Volvox usually
have this color, which is responded to by M-type cone cells. A molecule named for this color has beta
sheets arranged into a barrel configuration and was originally isolated from Aequorea victoria, a jellyfish.
A pigment of this color contains a magnesium atom embedded in a porphyrin ring. For 10 points, name this
color emitted by a certain fluorescent protein, which is also the color of chlorophyll.
ANSWER: green
Replacing residues 147 and 204 of this protein with cysteine makes it an effective sensor of a
compartment's glutathione redox potential. This molecule contains a posttranslationally-formed bond
between glycine-67 and serine-65 to form a five-membered ring with tyrosine-66. That structure is located
inside this molecule's beta-barrel, which protects the central feature from water. It is commonly used as a
reporter gene by fusing it to the gene of interest, which allows one to localize the fusion protein. Osamu
Shimomura isolated it from Aequorea victoria, a jellyfish. For 10 points, name this protein often used in
biological research that emits a certain color light when excited.
ANSWER: green fluorescent protein [or GFP]
Linking these proteins with a calmodulin binding domain spacer creates an indicator for calcium
ions. It is a companion protein to aequorin and can be employed as a fusion tag for protein detection.
Its utility is the result of a modified (*) imidazolidin and antioxidants such as vitamin E derivatives can
protect against photo-bleaching of this protein's chromophore. For 10 points, name this protein obtained
from the jellyfish Aequorea victoria that posses an internal fluorophore, which emits light at a characteristic
wavelength.
ANSWER: green fluorescent protein (or GFP)
The A206K mutation of this protein breaks its tendency to dimerize. Pedelacq and Cabantous developed a
hyperfolding mutant of this protein, which builds on an earlier F64L mutant. Lictman and Staines used
several variants of it to distinguish groups of neurons in one system, and another set of mutations causes it
to become sensitive to pH changes, creating the super-ecliptic pHluorins. Its function is reliant on a F-S-Y
loop embedded within a beta-barrel. Two variants of it are used in a common FRET system; those are the
cyan and yellow varieties. Chalfie, Tsien, and Shimamura won the Nobel prize for characterizing, FTP,
what protein used as a reporter and originally found in jellyfish, that glows a particular color?
ANSWER: Green Fluorescent Protein or GFP
A monomeric version of this protein is created via an alanine to lysine mutation at an interface,
and Thastrup developed an faster-folding version of this protein via the F64L mutation. Attaching
this protein to a protein from the vesicular stomatitis virus is used to assay transport through the
Golgi apparatus. This protein contains HBI covalently attached to a cyclized serine-65, tyrosine-66,
and glycine-67 motif, which is buried within a (*) beta barrel. It contains excitation peaks at 475 and 395
nanometers. This protein was originally extracted from Aqueora Victoria, a species of jellyfish, and
mutants of this protein change its emission spectrum. For 10 points, name this protein, a common reporter
that glows a particular color.
ANSWER: GFP [or green fluorescent protein]
Jaffrey and Page developed an RNA mimic of this protein called the 24-2 aptamer. It's not ubiqtuitin
or anything Gal4-related, but a split version of this protein is be used for bimolecular
complementation assay as a replacement for FRET systems. This protein contains an HBI molecule
that ionizes to a phenolate upon correct cyclization of the serine-65-tyrosine-66-glycine-67 motif. The
calcium-binding protein Aqueorin associates with it in vivo. This protein contains a beta-barrel motif
surrounding its active site. Assays with this protein commonly use a confocal microscope. This protein was
discovered by Shimamura in jellyfish, and was refined by Tsien, who mutated it into several different
colors. For 10 points, identify this useful reporter protein that glows its namesake color.
ANSWER: GFP or Green fluorescent protein
Hox B8 knockout mice were found to engage in this activity twice as often as their control littermates.
In the mouse, ritualized steps in this activity were first discovered by Frances Stilwell and include
"parallel," "circling," and "shimmy" movements. In lemurs and impala, this activity is accomplished with a
"dental comb," and in birds, it is known as "preening." Human disorders of this activity, including
trichotillomania (TRY-ko-TILL-oh-MAY-nee-ah), are often classified as part of the obsessive-compulsive
spectrum. The "allo" form of this activity is a common social bonding device. For 10 points, name this
behavior in which an animal gets parasites, dirt, and other unwanted things out of its or another's hair, fur,
or skin.
ANSWER: grooming [or autogrooming; or allogrooming; or social grooming; prompt on preening before it is read; prompt on answers that reasonably describe grooming]
When produced by the submaxillary glands and Brunner's glands, one class of these entities acts on
mesenchymal, glial, and epithelial cells, while a related alpha variant produced by carcinomas can induce a
transform phenotype in non-neoplastic cells. Varieties such as track A and track B have been identified as
proto-oncogenes and act on nerve cells. Another type derived from platelets is composed of two different
protein chains that form AA, AB, and BB dimers. Mutations in the receptor for the fibroblast variety result
in achondroplasia, a bone development disorder. For 10 points, erythropoietin and the insulin-like
somatomedin C belong to what class of proteins that bind to cell surface receptors and trigger cellular
proliferation and differentiation?
ANSWER: growth factors
COPII vesicles form when Sec12 attaches this molecule to Sar1. Initiation factors eIF2 and eIF5 are
inactive while this molecule is bound to it, while it spontaneously binds to the active form of Ras, which
slowly hydrolyzes this molecule to return to an inactive form. In the Krebs Cycle, one molecule of it results
from the hydrolysis of succinyl CoA. For 10 points, name this molecule that consists of three phosphate
groups and a purine nucleoside that is not adenosine, often hydrolyzed by the alpha domain of G proteins.
ANSWER: GTP or guanosine triphosphate
In bacteria this molecule can bind to the prokaryotic elongation factor thermo unstable which in turn binds
with aminoacylated tRNAs. It binds to the alpha subunit of transducin and triggers the activation of
phosphodiesterase in retinal cones, and the primary effector of proteins that utilize this molecule is adenylyl
cyclase. Two of these molecules attach to alpha and beta tubulin heterodimers during microtubule
nucleation and a MAP kinase cascade is triggered when this molecule is phosphorylated by the protein Ras.
It can be produced from succinate by succinyl-CoA synthetase in the Krebs cycle. For 10 points, what is this
molecule that binds to G proteins and is dephosphorylated by DNA polymerase to produce a base pair with
adenine?
ANSWER: GTP [or Guanosine triphosphate]
cAMP (CAMP) and a cyclic nucleotide with this nucleobase are important secondary messengers. A
nucleoside triphosphate with this nucleobase is one of the outputs of the citric acid cycle; that triphosphate
is converted to ATP by NDK. This purine has an oxygen attached to its pyrimidine ring. Three hydrogen
bonds connect this nucleobase to cytosine. For 10 points, name this nucleobase represented with a G.
ANSWER: guanine [or G until it is read]
It has been observed that the toxin coronatine when secreted from certain species of bacteria impairs the
operation of these structures, preventing their response to further pathogens. These structures activate by
using a proton pump to expel hydrogen ions, creating an electrical potential which causes the uptake of
potassium ions. This in turn results in the uptake of water into these cells, increasing their turgor pressure
and causing them to separate from their neighbor. In CAM plants, these cells only activate at night to reduce
water loss through transpiration. FTP, name these sclerenchyma cells present on plant leaves that also
regulate carbon dioxide uptake by opening and closing the stomata that they flank.
ANSWER: Guard cells (accept stomata before "cell" is read)
Extinct groups of this type of plant include the class Cordaitopsida and the division Bennetitophyta.
Characterized by the presence of mega- and micro-strobili, members of this group can have up to twenty
cotyledons. Pollen grains from these plants typically have more than two cells and land directly on the
ovule, which only has one integument. Subdivisions of this type of plant include the cycads and one that one
has one living species, biloba. For 10 points, name this type of seed plant that include gingkos and conifers,
whose name means "naked seed" and is often contrasted with the angiosperms.
ANSWER: gymnosperms
Though not a kingdom or a domain, this taxon contains a division that includes only one species, biloba.
That species produces ovules that smell like rancid butter and is known as a "living fossil" due to its lack of
living relatives. This group includes Gnetophyta, Ginkgophyta, and Cycadophyta, as well as plants which
feature needlelike leaves and cones. For 10 points, name this plant taxon containing the conifers, often
contrasted with the angiosperms.
ANSWER: gymnosperms
One phylum in this clade consists of a single extant species with X and Y sex chromosomes
determining its microsporangiate and megasporangiate forms. Another phylum in this clade
produces male gametophytes in pollen strobili, and its ovules form on modified branches that form a
seed (*) cone. Those two phyla contain Gingko biloba and conifers, respectively. This clade takes its name
from the Greek for "naked seed." For 10 points, name this taxonomic group of seed-bearing plants that,
unlike angiosperms, do not produce flowers.
ANSWER: gymnosperms
One example of this class of organisms contains a neurotoxin called BMAA in their seeds. These organisms
rely on entry of whole pollen grains through the micropyle into the ovule coat, and they developed in the
late Carboniferous. Examples of these organisms include cycads, as well as conifers like fir and pine. For
ten points, name this group of plants with namesake "naked seeds," characterized by their lack of flowers.
ANSWER: gymnosperms (Accept cyanobacteria before "seeds" is read.)
One member of the "pro" named predecessors to this group was the fern like, spore-bearing
Archaeopteris. One division of this group has members resembling a cross between a fern and a palm
known as cycads. Another division of this group, which includes the gingko biloba, often exhibits (*)
cones and needles. The seeds of this group of plants are not enclosed, thus giving them a name meaning
"naked seeds." For 10 points, name this group of plants contrasted with the flowering plants or
angiosperms.
ANSWER: gymnosperms
The Namib desert is home to the Welwitschia genus in this class of organisms, which also includes an
organism that produces the decongestant ephedrine. Another genus in this group is unique in having vessel
elements in its xylem. The genus Archaeopteris was the evolutionary ancestor of this present-day group of
organisms, which include the phylum Gnetophyta and another with only one species, Ginkgo biloba. These
plants generally have sporangia packed in strobili, and their seeds are not enclosed in ovaries. For ten
points, name this group of plants that include the sequoia and other conifer trees, contrasted with
angiosperms.
ANSWER: gymnosperms
Fetuses possess a type of this called lanugo. This develops from a structure with a root sheath and
important stages in its growth are catagen and anagen. Like skin, the MC1R gene is important in
determing one property of it and (*) DHT can cause a decrease in the amount present. The agouti gene is
important in its coloration in some animals and different forms of melanin color it in people. Like nails, this
material is made from keratin. This grows from follicles. For 10 points, name this material, a unique
characteristic of mammals, which in humans is most prominently seen on the head.
ANSWER: hair [or fur]
The first form of this biological material to develop is lanugo, which typically gives way to vellus
after birth. The arrector pili, smooth muscles cells associated with it, contract in response to cold or
fright. It consists of three concentric layers known as the medulla, cortex, and cuticle, the latter two
of which are made of hard (*) keratin. This material is found on the skin of all mammals. For 10 points,
give this material that is found in such places as armpits, beards, and eyelashes.
ANSWER: hair
A portion of these structures is subdivided into the cuticle and cortex; another portion consists of a bulb
whose cells are the most rapidly dividing of the human body. The papilla, sebaceous gland, and shaft are
three anatomical features of these structures, which is made up of a hard protein known as keratin and can
renew without scarring. One hundred thousand of their constituent follicles are found on the scalp. For 10
points, identify these anatomical protrusions commonly found on the face and atop the head.
ANSWER: hairs
Dupuytren's disease and De Quervain's disease both affect this structure, at whose distal ends eponychium
can be found. Guyon's canal is formed by two of its bones, the pisiform and hamate. The strongest ligament
here is the volar plate, and extensor tendons branch out from the central slip in this structure. The
lumbricals and interossei form the intrinsic muscles that allow for much of the articulation of its bones and
tendons. The median nerve innervates the thenar muscles, which allows for the opposition of one of its
segments. Five metacarpophalangeal and nine interphalangeal joints are found here. Containing the carpals,
metacarpals, and phalanages, this is, for 10 points, what useful structure found at the distal end of your
forearms?
ANSWER: hand (prompt on "wrist" or "fingers" or related answers)
This principle was independently developed by William Castle. One phenomenon which would cause
this principle not to apply is avoided by self-incompatibility in plants; that phenomenon, which favors
homozygosity, is assortative mating. Deviation from it can be caused by meiotic drive, non-random mating,
genetic drift, or mutations. For 10 points, name this principle which states that allele and genotype
frequencies remain constant in the absence of disturbing influences.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium
The curved line in a de Finetti diagram can be used to display this condition. This condition is used as the
null hypothesis in Tajima's D test. Fisher's exact test can also be used to determine whether or not this state
is actually true given a population's genotypic ratios. A lack of migration, diploidy, and an infinitely large
population size are among the seven assumptions that must be fulfilled for this condition to occur. Of the
two equations that govern this state, one equation describes genotypic frequency, while the other describes
phenotypic frequency. Those two equations are p + q = 1 and p2 + 2pq + q2 =1. Name this idealized state in
which evolution does not occur.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium [accept equivalents for "equilibrium" like "model" or "law"]
The Sewall Wright effect often occurs when this law does not hold. One of its namesakes disliked applied
mathematics and would later work with Littlewood on Diophantine analysis and tutor Ramanujan. He
developed this rule concurrently with a German physician. The disagreement between this law and reality
provided support for natural selection, because it holds in the absence of migration, mutation, selective
mating. FTP, name this doubly-eponymous law of population genetics employing the equation p plus q
equals one.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg Law or Equilibrium or Rule or Equation, accept equivalents
One of this concept's namesakes names an inequality that is the more general form of Carleman's
inequality. A diagram that depicts the results of this principle depicts it as a curved segment on an
equilateral triangle named for de Finetti. This principle yields an equation stated as "one equals p-squared
 plus two-p-q plus q-squared," and it only holds when disturbing influences like gene flow and non-
random mating are not present. For 10 points, name this principle that states that allele and genotype
frequencies in a population remain constant, a doubly-eponymous principle from population biology.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium/Principle/whatever
This law was first discovered in 1908 by a German physician who pioneered the analysis of ascertainment
bias in biology, due to his work studying twins. Another scientist, who described this theory as "very
simple", independently introduced it in order to disprove an argument by Udny Yule against Mendelian
inheritance. Deviations from it are quantified as the inbreeding coefficient. Assuming no selection or
mutation and purely random mating, name this principle of Mendelian genetics derived from a binomial
expansion.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg principle [or Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium]
The general form of this rule can be derived by imagining a nodal hypercube in which each gridline
represents one of the coefficients and the associated node contains the products of the coefficients
corresponding to the gridlines it intersects, then realizing that such product is simply a multinomial
expansion with exponent equal to the homology number. An analogue of Simpson's paradox to
systems obeying this statement is a sub-population-structure-caused reduction in the hybridization
frequency called the Wahlund effect. A graphical representation of the two-dimensional case of this
law can be obtained by invoking Vivian's theorem on an equilateral triangle whose corners represent
the possible configurations; such a plot is called a (*) De Finetti triangle. One minus the ratio of the
observed hybridization frequency over the value predicted by this model gives the inbreeding coefficient.
For 10 points, name this principle, according to which genotypic and allelic frequencies remain constant in
a large population.
ANSWER: the Hardy-Weinberg principle [accept Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium]
This scientific model was explicated in a paper responding to biologists such as Udny Yule and
was written by a mathematician. Assumptions behind this model include the nonexistence of meiotic
drive, non-random mating, and random (*) genetic drift. This model is represented by the equation
p-squared plus 2 p q plus q-squared equals 1. For 10 points, name this genetic model proposing an
equilibrium of allele frequencies named for an Englishman and a German.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium
The Wahlund effect implies that this condition does not hold overall, since the emergence of subpopulations
suppresses heterozygotes. It may be generalized using a multinomial expansion to an arbitrary power,
though working with its simplest case requires squaring a binomial whose terms sum to one. The occurrence
of inbreeding, as well as small sample size, assortative mating, mutation, or natural selection, cause
deviations from its predictions. FTP, name this null hypothesis that predicts that, across generations, allele
frequencies will remain the same.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium
It can be graphically represented on the De Finetti diagram by a curved line. The F and P coefficients
account for things like the Wahlund effect and imperfect panmixia. Karl Pearson confirmed it for one
specific case, and his eponymous chi-squared test is commonly used to determine whether data matches this
result. A small population may exhibit deviations from this result because of inbreeding and drift. In the
simplest scenario it can be stated that p squared, q squared, and 2pq are the frequencies for each genotype.
For 10 points, name this doubly-eponymous principle in population genetics which states that allele
frequencies typically stay constant.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg principle, equilibrium, or law (prompt on abbreviations, prompt on "genotype" before "curved line" is read)
The effect of divergence on this equation can be measured using the Wahlund effect. One aspect of
deviation in it can be measured using F-statistics while a general test for deviation is often done using
Pearson's chi-squared test. In its simplest scenario, it is written in the form of a binomial expansion of the
second power and in its simplest case, notes that the sums of frequencies add up to one. Assumptions made
by it include random mating, an infinitely large population and no distinctive advantage between different
traits. FTP, identify this biological equation used to determine if a population is in genetic equilibrium.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg Equation/Law/Principle/Equilibrium
De Finetti's diagram contains a curved line representing this condition's namesake frequency. This
condition only occurs in the presence of random mating and no mutations, and it is mathematically
represented by the equation p squared plus two p q plus q squared equals one. For 10 points, name this
condition from population genetics in which allele and genotype frequencies in a stable population tend
remain to constant, named for two scientists.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium [accept words like "principle" or "hypothesis" for "equilibrium"; accept names in either order]
This concept was first discovered by a German physician in 1908, but only became widely known when
Reginald Punnett introduced a problem to a British mathematician, who thought its solution, this principle,
to be very simple. Significance tests for deviation from it are generally carried out through Pearson's chisquared test, and it can be adjusted for polyploidy systems. The deviating factors this principle cites are
gene flow, random genetic drift, mutations, limited population size, nonrandom mating, and natural
selection. FTP, name this principle from genetics, which says that allele and genotype frequencies will
remain constant unless disturbed?
ANSWER: Hardy Weinberg Principle
The de Finetti diagram, which consists partially of an equilateral triangle, can be used to map a special case
of this. The Wright-Fisher model is derived from the law that governs it, although unlike it, it assumes one
of its parameters to be finite. For this to exist, the linkage disequilibrium must be zero, and in a special case
of it, the inbreeding coefficient is equivalent to the more generally used chi-squared test for this. For 10
points, what is this condition that will always be reached after one generation given some assumptions,
including no genetic drift, mutation, or selection, and random mating, that holds allele and genotype
frequencies constant?
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium [prompt on "HWE" or "HWP", accept Hardy-Weinberg principle or law; accept Hardy-Weinberg-Castle]
This concept's namesake curve can be graphed using Viviani's Theorem on a ternary plot with side length
1. That curve forms a parabola connecting the two base vertices of a de Finetti diagram. Generalizing this
statement requires a binomial raised to the power c, where c is the ploidy. In this model's simplest case, the
allele frequencies p and q sum to 1, and this law requires that its population is large, randomly mates, and
does not mutate. For 10 points, name this doubly-eponymous law in population genetics which describes a
population whose allele and genotype frequencies remain constant in its namesake equilibrium.
ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium [or Hardy-Weinberg model, principle, or any word, really]
In one nucleus that receives signals for this sense, octopus cells generate temporally precise
signals which are then relayed by the lateral lemniscus and the inferior colliculus. This sense makes
use of the ILD and ITD, which is processed at the medial and lateral superior olive. The primary
cortex of this sense is located in Broadmann Areas 41 and 42 within the superior temporal gyrus and
is (*) tonotopically arranged, like the hair cells that cause displacement of the basilar membrane in the
organ of Corti. This sense is carried by cranial nerve eight, which fires in response to changes in pressure
created by the displacement of the tympanic membrane. For 10 points, name this sense, whose signals are
carried from the cochlea by the auditory nerve.
ANSWER: hearing [or audition; accept equivalents]
The volley principle and phase locking are phenomena involved in this perception. Two opposing theories
of this sense focus on location and frequency of neuronal response, respectively; the latter is the place code.
The round and oval windows are involved in transmitting and transducing its stimuli. This sense uses the
precedence effect and detects time differences to conduct scene analysis and localization. This sense is
primarily processed in the temporal lobe, and stimuli of this sense is transduced by the organ of Corti,
amplified by the ossicles, and transmitted by the tympanic membrane's vibrations. For 10 points, name this
sense that perceives sound using the ears.
ANSWER: hearing [or audition]
In a developing human embryo, the junction between this organ and the sinus venosus is the crista
terminalis. A high concentration of PAI-1 in the blood can indicate a high risk of disease in this organ. A
mutation in MYH7 causes a disease of this organ which typically manifests as sudden death in athletic
college students. Striated muscle cells in this organ are separated by intercalcated discs. The bundle of His
can be found in this organ, and they serve as a midpoint between the AV node and Purkinje fibers. In
humans, this organ has two atria, two ventricles, and an aorta. Name this organ that pumps blood throughout
the circulatory system.
ANSWER: heart
The cells of this organ transform AICA ribonucleotide to ZMP using adenosine kinase. Like the brain,
this organ can use ketone bodies if fatty acids are not available. Its cells are connected by gap junctions
within intercalated disks. The sac enclosing this organ has fibrous and serous layers. This organ is
synchronized via the S-A node transmitting signals to the A-V node, and it consists of two atria on top of
two ventricles. For 10 points, name this organ that pumps blood.
ANSWER: heart
The ANP hormone produced in this organ inhibits the production of sodium, while the Wolff-ParkinsonWhite syndrome is a malfunction of this organ. Impulses from the Bundle of His are carried by Purkinje
fibers in this organ, and the aorta originates here. The mitral valve separates the left atrium and ventricle of,
for 10 points, which organ made of cardiac muscle that pumps blood through the body?
ANSWER: heart
The output of this structure is directly related to "VO-2 max" and may be used to help identify the root
cause of ischemia in a patient. Shunts in this structure, such as the foramen ovale, may lead to pathological
flow of matter through it. The QRS complex is produced by the action of the SA node within this organ.
That node generates a pacemaker potential, which can be measured with an EKG, using which
abnormalities like tachycardia may be detected. Blood flows through the tricuspid valve in this organ
before entering the pulmonary circuit via the right ventricle. For 10 points, name this organ that is
connected to the aorta and pumps blood.
ANSWER: heart
In response to high blood pressure, this organ releases a natriuretic peptide to lower adipose tissue,
sodium, and water. In fetuses, this organ contains an opening known as the foramen ovale. Intercalated
disks and calcium-induced calcium release are properties of a cell unique to this organ. The letters P, Q, R,
S, and T denote stages of action potentials in this organ, which go through the bundle branches to the
Purkinje fibers after originating in the SA node. This organ contains four valves and sends deoxygenated
blood through the pulmonary artery. For 10 points, name this organ with atria and ventricles, which pumps
blood to the rhythm of a beat.
ANSWER: heart
This organ's chordae tendineae connect its papillary muscles to other structures in it, and its cells are
connected by junctional complexes called intercalated disks. This organ contains the bundle of His, and a
group of co-presenting malformations in this organ is called the tetralogy of Fallott. Two conical
appendages on the top of this organ are called auricles. Its inner walls contain Purkinje fibers, which help it
contract in an organized manner. The sinoatrial node is this organ's pacemaker tissue and is located in its
right atrium. For 10 points, name this four-chambered organ that pumps blood throughout the body.
ANSWER: heart
In fish, this organ carries out its primary function through the conus. The most popular measure of
this organ's function contains a QRS complex. VSDs and ASDs are congenital defects in this organ.
The innermost layer of tissue of this organ contains Purkinje fibers. This organ is surrounded by a
double-walled, fluid filled sac. The (*) superior vena cava ends in this organ's right atrium. The primary
function of this organ is regulated by pacemakers. For 10 points, name this organ responsible for circulating
blood through the body and susceptible to a namesake "attack."
ANSWER: heart
In the fetus, this organ contains the foramen ovale and the crista terminalis. This organ contains gap
junctions called intercalated discs. Papillary muscles in this organ help to tighten chordae tendineae. This
organ contains the Bundle of His and Purkinje fibers, which help conduct signals from the SA and VA
nodes. This organ is fed by the coronary arteries and is separated into chambers called atria and ventricles.
For 10 points, name this organ that pumps blood throughout the body.
ANSWER: the heart
Part of this organ is provided blood by the circumflex artery, and developmental structures located within it
include the crista terminalis and fossa ovalis. The papillary muscles in this organ can tighten the chordae
tendineae. Purkinje fibers, the bundle of His, the AV node, and the SA node comprise its conduction
pathway, and it is divided into upper and lower compartments called atria and ventricles. For 10 points,
name this muscular organ which pumps blood throughout the body.
ANSWER: Heart
This organ is affected by Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. In crocodilians, the foramen of Panizza joins
two of its parts, and in infants, it features a foramen ovale that later closes. Its papillary muscles tighten the
chordae tendineae, and two of its structures are sometimes called auricles. The QRS complex results from
the action of this organ's bundle of His, Purkinje fibers, and SA node. It is located in a two-walled sac
called the pericardium and its electrical potential can be measured with an EKG. In humans, it consists of
two atria and two ventricles. For 10 points, name this muscular organ that pumps blood.
ANSWER: heart
One test of this organ outputs peaks called QRS complexes between a P-wave and a T-wave. Some of its
collagen-heavy chordae tendineae (COR-die ten-DEE-nay-eye) connect to its tricuspid valve. This organ's
sinoatrial (SIGH-no-AY-tree-ul) node generates signals for its Purkinje fibers, which conduct electrical
impulses through it. One of its two atriums connects to the left ventricle, where fluid is pushed through to
the aorta. For 10 points, name this organ revived by a defibrillator, which pumps blood.
ANSWER: the heart
This organ possesses a dense fibroelastic connective tissue skeleton composed of annuli fibrosi and
fibrous trigones. Muscle cells within this organ are connected by gap junctions known as intercalated
discs. The bundle of His and associated (*) Purkinje fibers are located in this organ, and those structures
conduct impulses from the SA and VA nodes located in this organ. Semilunar valves connect it to the
pulmonary artery and the aorta, and mitral and tricuspid values separate its ventricle and atrium. For 10
points, name this four-chambered, blood-pumping organ.
ANSWER: heart
One device measuring this structure's function uses twelve "leads" to output QRS complexes on 1millimeter graph paper. This structure's tissue contains intercalated discs, and majority-collagen structures
called chordae tendineae connect its tricuspid valve and papillary muscles. The Bundle of His and sinoatrial
node send electrical signals to its Purkinje fibers. This organ has a mitral valve, and its dividers, or septa,
separate the atria and ventricles, resulting in four chambers. For 10 points, name this organ below the aorta,
which contracts in order to pump blood.
ANSWER: heart
Diseases of this organ were extensively described in a longitudinal study named for Framingham,
Massachusetts. Andreas Vesalius controversially claimed that part of this organ was not permeable,
eventually vindicating himself by discovering the (+) mitral valve. Robert Jarvik designed the first
working (*) artificial one of these organs, and Marius and Christiaan Barnard oversaw the first successful
transplant of one. For 10 points, name this human organ that William Harvey discovered pumps blood.
ANSWER: the human heart
One measure of activity in this organ is the QRS complex, which is larger than the P wave because of the
mass disparity between the sub-sections of this organ that are connected to a "semilunar" structure and
ones that receive the "superior" and "inferior" vena cava. A systolic and diastolic pressure are associated
with this organ, which contains the bundles of His, the tricuspid valve, and a region known as the
pacemaker. For 10 points, two ventricles and atria are located in the human version of which organ that
pumps blood to the body?
ANSWER: heart
The bundle of His connects to this organ's Purkinje fibers, which cause contractions called systoles.
Robert Jarvik developed the first artificial version of it. This organ, composed of muscle called (*)
myocardium, contains a tricuspid valve that maintains one-way flow to its right ventricle. Pacemakers may
be implanted in this organ to ensure its regular beating. The aorta is a large artery emanating from, for 10
points, what organ that pumps blood?
ANSWER: heart
This organ contains the pectinate muscles. Like the thigh, it contains a depression called the fossa ovalis.
which is what remains from the foramen ovale in embryos. This also contains papillary muscles, which can
be damaged by ischemia. This is also the location of Purkinje fibers or Bundle of His, which are generally
less important than its sinoatrial node. Its function is aided by the mitral, tricuspid, and aortic valves. Name
this organ with two atria and two ventricles that pumps blood to the rest of the body.
ANSWER: heart
These events are stratified by risk in the Killip classification. Damage from these events are usually
assessed using a Thallium-201 scan, and they are often diagnosed by noting an elevated CK-MB and
troponin level. They are treated by catheterization followed by anti-platelet medications. They can be
sorted by whether they cause an ST-segment elevation on an EKG, and they usually present after occlusion
of a vessel, resulting in ischemia and chest pain that can radiate down the arm. Prevented by taking aspirin
daily, for 10 points, name these medical events that result from death of heart tissue, also known as
myocardial infarctions.
ANSWER: heart attacks [or myocardial infarction before mentioned; or MI before "myocardial infarction is read"]
This procedure was performed with a living organ in 2006 at Bad Oeynhausen. It comes in orthotopic
and heterotopic varieties, and typically involves injecting a certain organ with potassium chloride. It was
first successfully performed in the United States in 1967 at Maimonides Medical Center, and it was first
successfully performed in the same year by Christiaan Barnard. For 10 points, name this surgical procedure
which may be performed on patients with heart failure.
ANSWER: heart transplant
Molecules in this family are typically cleaved at a glycine around position 250, resulting in a C-terminal
domain that has no known use. The signaling pathway of one molecule in this family involves a complex
consisting of the proteins Fused, Costal-2, and Cubitus interruptus, and members of this family often attach
to the membrane proteins Patched and Smoothened. Neural tube differentiation is controlled by a ventral-
dorsal gradient of one protein in this family. For 10 points, identify this family of signaling proteins named
after a certain animal, whose three mammalian members are desert, Indian, and Sonic.
ANSWER: hedgehog or Hh (do not accept or prompt on "Sonic Hedgehog" as we need the family and the signaling pathway is relevant to Drosophila Hedgehog, not Sonic hedgehog)
One of these is a homohexamer structured to have a hole in its center, and it hydrolyzes ATP which
shifts the structure of wh	at it binds to. That specific kind is diametric and is structured in 6 bundles.
They can activate primase, and they come in rho and DNAb families, along with superfamilies based
on motifs found in their structures. (*) 5'-3' kinds require a covalent bond to single strands, and all of
them move along a phosphodiester backbone of a nucleic acid. FTP name this class of enzymes that
separate nucleic acid strands before replication and are named for DNAs structure.
ANSWER: Helicase
The binding domain of one type of this molecule in the virus that causes hepatitis C has a highly
conserved TATPP sequence. A mutation in the RecQ family of these is the culprit in Werner's
syndrome. One family of these in Staphylococcus aureus can be both magnesium- and manganese-
dependent. In Drosophila, an analog of the human DDX type of these called Abstrakt is crucial for
central nervous system development. The hexameric B type in E. coli uses covalent interactions with
a beta (*) clamp-loading complex to coordinate its activities on the lagging and leading strands of the
molecule it affects. These enzymes bind to AT-rich sites in order to break hydrogen bonds in those affected
molecules to begin replication. For 10 points, name these enzymes that "unzip" strands of DNA or RNA.
ANSWER: helicases [accept RNA helicases before "sequence"]
One class of these enzymes is classified by a DEAD box motif within a Walker B domain, and the
Drosophila protein Twister is a homolog of another one of these enzymes found in yeast, Ski2. Another one
of them responsible for initiating repairs is RecQ, while Werner's syndrome is caused by a mutation in
another one of them. Other examples of these enzymes include the E. coli DnaB and the gp4 protein
encoded by the T7 phage. Many of these enzymes appear as a ring-shaped hexamer that also contains an N-
terminal primase domain. During replication, they hydrolyze ATP to move the replication fork forward.
FTP, name these proteins that unwind DNA.
ANSWER: helicase (accept RNA or DNA Helicase)
Mcm6 inhibits recruitment of one of these protein, MCM2-7, by ORC/Ccd6, but Cdt1 can overcome
that inhibitory activity. They aren't CDCs, but Meier-Gorlin syndrome results from disorders in one
complex that these proteins bind to. A human disease that causes premature aging arises from
mutations of WRNp, which is one of these proteins. That protein is similar to the recQ variety of
these in E. coli and causes Werner syndrome. DEAD box proteins are types of these that act on RNA.
In prokaryotes. DNAa recruits (*) dnaB, one of these, when it attaches to DNA at AT rich ori sites. These
enzymes break hydrogen bonds in nucleic acids, and are used in the beginning of replication or
transcription. For 10 points, name these enzymes that unzip DNA.
ANSWER: helicase
This organism dodges the immune system by expressing Lewis blood group antigens, and the most
common strains are J99 and 26685. Virulent strains encode a toxin that binds to VIP54 and creates large
vacuoles, known as VacA. They encode a Type IV secretory system in the CagA pathogenicity island,
which also activates the SH2 kinase. A urease breath test can be used to detect this microaerophile, and the
inflammatory response to it induces the secretion of gastrin from G cells. Treating infection with this
organism involves two antibiotics and a proton pump inhibitor, and it was studied by Barry Marshall, who
notably drank a solution of it to prove that it causes gastritis. For 10 points, name this bacterium
responsible for many ulcers.
ANSWER: Helicobacter pylori
This organism is targeted by clarithromycin, amoxicillin, and rabreprazole in the "triple therapy" drug
regimen. This organism's version of High Temperature Requirement A can cleave cadherins. Its LPS
mimics Lewis Antigens. This organism produces VacA and it exports CagA into targeted areas. This
organism's urease was once believed to be a product of the human body. This organism hangs out in
mucus. The 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology went to Barry Marshall, who drank a culture of this Gramnegative bacterium. For 10 points, name this organism that lives in the acidic environment of the stomach
and causes most ulcers.
ANSWER: Helicobacter pylori [accept "triple therapy" before mentioned]
Retinoic acid modulates interleukin-5 receptor expression, which selectively inhibits differentiation of
progenitor cells in this process. During fetal development, the extramedullary type of this process begins as
yolk sac cells migrate to the liver, and growth factors that mediate this process include the colony
stimulating factors filgrastim, sargramostim, and erythropoietin. Pluripotent stem cells are the progenitors of
the myeloid and lymphoid lines while a third pathway results in the creation of megakaryocytes. In adults
this process predominately occurs in the thymus and the red bone marrow. For 10 points, what is this set of
processes and pathways that results in the terminal differentiation of progenitor cells into platelets,
erythrocytes, lymphocytes, and other blood cells?
ANSWER: hematopoiesis
This protein's structure can be made more rigid with 2,3-diphosphoglycerate. Fetal versions of this protein
contain a serine-143 instead of a histidine-143 that increases this protein's efficiency. Breaking the valinetyrosine bond in this protein's Helix E and Helix F regions causes a conformation change. This protein's
diminished function in acidic conditions is known as the Bohr effect. This protein is made up of four
subunits, at the center of which is a porphyrin ring with an iron cation. A problem with this protein is its
greater affinity for carbon monoxide than for oxygen. For 10 points, name this protein found in red blood
cells.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
The man who discovered its 3D structure wrote an article about how his advisor hammered nails into a
broomstick entitled "I wish I had made you angry earlier" about how Pauling and Corey's elucidation of
alpha keratin's strain-free structure led to the discovery of this substance's confirmation. Its prosthetic group
is formed by glycine and succinyl-CoA reacting to form D-aminolevulinic acid, as shown in the structure
elucidated by Max Perutsz. Christian Bohr's eponymous effect describes its affinity for its substrate
changing as a function of pH, and 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate allosterically lowers its substrate affinity.
Containing an iron ion bound to four nitrogens in a porphyrin ring, for 10 points name this polypeptide
responsible for transporting oxygen in the blood.
ANSWER: Hemoglobin
This protein is quantified using Drabkin's reagent. Its Lepore form is associated with strokes and its Barts
form contains only gamma subunits. Similar to a related monomeric protein found in muscle, this protein's
subunits switch between the T state and R state upon substrate binding in a cooperative manner. Its
carbamino form is formed by CO2 binding to its N-terminus. A glutamic acid to valine substitution in the
beta chain of this protein causes sickle-cell anemia. For 10 points, name this iron-containing protein found
in red blood cells which is responsible for carrying oxygen.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
This protein's affinity for certain substrates is decreased by 2,3-biphospho-glycerate, a result exacerbated
by acidic environments in effect named for Bohr. The Gower type of this protein is found in embryos. A
mutation in this protein occurs when glutamic acid is replaced by valine. This protein's structure consists of
a porphyrin ring with a central metal atom. The mutation of this protein causes sickle-cell anemia. For 10
points, name this iron-containing protein found in red blood cells that carries oxygen throughout the body.
ANSWER: hemoglobin [do not accept "myoglobin"]
The Lepore form of this protein is linked to silent strokes. This protein is improperly oxidized in
children who ingest nitrates. The Bart form of this molecule is present in hydrops fetalis. This
protein switches its subunits between the taut form and relaxed form in response to the allosteric
regulator 2,3-BPG. In the Bohr effect, this molecule shifts its binding curve to the right in an (*)
acidic environment. CO2 can bind to its N-terminus, and a mutation in this tetrameric protein's beta chain
causes it to aggregate. That mutation is a glutamate to valine substitution, which causes sickle cell anemia.
This protein contains a porphyrin prosthetic group with a central iron atom. For 10 points, name this
oxygen-carrying protein that gives blood its color.
ANSWER: hemoglobin [or Hb]
The percentage of this substance that is glycated can be found with the A1C test. The affinity of this
substance for a certain molecule can be found by plotting that molecule's partial pressure and
saturation to form a dissociation curve. A drop in the affinity of this substance due to a decrease in
pH is called the Bohr shift. This substance's cofactor is composed of a cyclic ring called (*) porphyrin.
A mutation involving valine causes the formation of this protein's "S" type, leading to increased resistance
to malaria but also susceptibility to sickle-cell anemia. For ten points, name this iron-rich protein which
carries oxygen on red blood cells.
ANSWER: hemoglobin (accept Hb or Hgb)
This protein has an abnormally high pKa value when an ion pair is generated between a histidine and an
aspartic acid residue, which occurs when the proton concentration around this protein is high. The central
structure of this protein is stabilized by a histidine residue in its F alpha helix chain, and BPG interacts with
this protein to stabilize its T state. This protein functions as an alpha two, beta two tetramer in adult
humans, and heterozygotes for a condition afflicting this proteins have an advantage in malaria ridden areas.
This protein has four porphyrin rings, each of which contains a Fe2+ ("f-e-2 plus") ion. For 10 points,
name this protein which can carry both carbon monoxide and oxygen.
ANSWER: hemoglobin [accept Hb]
Gower and Portland are embryonic types of this molecule and the Bart form results in its namesake H
disease, which is a type of thalassemia. The change between its tense and relaxed structure results from a 15
degree rotation between its two alpha-beta dimers. Its ability to neutralize hydrogen ions is described by the
Haldane effect, while the impact of pH on it is described by the Bohr effect. Impacted by 2,3-DPG, a
variant of this protein has a valine substituted for a glutamic acid. For 10 points, name this iron-containing
component of red blood cells that carry oxygen.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
Errors in the pathway that creates this protein cause porphyria. One product of the breakdown
of this protein is bilirubin. The more efficient "f" variety of this protein is only found naturally in (*)
fetuses and infants. A reduced amount of this protein causes thalassemia, and an abnormal variant of this
protein causes sickle cell anemia. For 10 points, name this iron-containing protein found in red blood cells
that transports oxygen through the body.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
This protein's components are encoded by a group of duplicated genes under sway of a Locus Control
Region. This protein switches between taut and relaxed forms in a type of cooperativity. A glutamic acid to
valine mutation in this protein causes the cells carrying it to take on a curved shape. This protein contains a
porphyrin (POR-fuh-rin) ring with a central iron atom. For 10 points, name this protein, found in red blood
cells, that carries oxygen.
ANSWER: hemoglobin [or Hb]
Thalassemia (thal-lah-SEE-me-ah) occur when this protein's components are expressed in
abnormal ratios. 2,3-BPG ("B-P-G") is a regulator of this molecule, whose fetal form contains
gamma chains. A glutamate to valine mutation in its beta chain causes a notable disease. It has a
sigmoidal binding curve and four subunits. Its cofactor is a porphyrin (POOR-fih-rihn) molecule
with a central (*) iron atom. For 10 points, name this protein that is mutated in sickle cell anemia, the
oxygen-carrying molecule in the blood.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
This molecule's most notable function sees the four polypeptide chains which compose it rearrange. A
reduced production of this protein's alpha or beta side chains leads to Thalassemia, a defect in the synthesis
of this protein. The Bohr Effect states that the binding affinity of this protein is inversely related to both the
concentration and the acidity of carbon dioxide, and an iron atom lies in the center of this protein's
porphyrin ring. A mutation in the gene for this protein can cause sickle cell anemia. For 10 points, name this
protein found in red blood cells that is used to transport oxygen throughout the body.
ANSWER: Hemoglobin
Max Perutz showed that this molecule is formed of four polypeptide chains that rearrange during its
most important function. The recessive disease Thalassemia results in a defective version of the alpha
or beta version of this molecule. The Bohr effect deals with the results of CO-2 levels on this protein,
and a point mutation from glutamate to valine on this protein's beta chain causes sickle cell anemia.
For 10 points, name this oxygen-carrying protein in red blood cells.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
One property exhibited by this molecule is the Haldane effect, and the A1C type of this molecule is used
in monitoring the blood sugar levels of diabetics. One similarly named molecule performs a function
similar to that of this protein in the muscles, rather than in the location associated with this protein, and
variants of this protein are responsible for sickle-cell anemia. For 10 points, name this protein that, as its
name suggests, binds and transports oxygen in red blood cells.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
This molecule has Portland and Gower types found in embryos, and the Bohr effect can be seen when it is
in unusually acidic environments. A genetic mutation that replaces a glutamate with valine in part of this
molecule causes a disease that makes carriers resistant to malaria. This protein contains an iron ion
coordinated with four nitrogen atoms in a porphyrin ring, and that beta chain defect causes deformed
erythrocytes in sickle-cell anemia. For 10 points, name this oxygen-binding protein found in red blood cells.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
The affinity of this protein for its substrate is decreased by 2,3-bisphospho-glycerate. The binding of
substrate to one of its subunits causes a conformational change that enables the substrate to quickly bind its
three other subunits. Its affinity for a competitive inhibitor is described by the Haldane effect, and deltaALA synthase catalyzes the rate-limiting step of the biosynthesis of its metal cofactor. That cofactor
consists of a porphyrin ring coordinated to an atom of iron, and a Glu6Val mutation in this protein is
responsible for Sickle Cell anemia. For 10 points, identify this protein found in red blood cells that helps
transport oxygen.
ANSWER: Hemoglobin [accept Hb]
Max Perutz proposed the mechanism for the action of this protein regulated by the compound 2-3 BPG.
According to the Bohr effect, the properties of this protein changes according to the pH. The central active
site of this protein contains a ring structure called a porphyrin which has a central iron atom. Carbon
monoxide is toxic because of its ability to bind to this protein. A mutation in the gene for this protein found
in erythrocytes (UR-ith-rah-sites) causes sickle cell anemia. For 10 points, name this protein found in red
blood cells used to transport oxygen.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
Thalassemia is caused by a reduced rate of synthesis of one subunit of this molecule. A mutation in this
protein's gene causes glutamic acid to be replaced with valine, resulting in a disease which may give a
heterozygous advantage over malaria. Bilirubin is a compound released by the breakdown of this molecule's
prosthetic group. That group is surrounded by a porphyrin ring. Its center contains an iron atom and it
consists of two sets of globulin subunits, alpha and beta. For ten points, name this protein which is found in
red blood cells and carries oxygen from the lungs to other cells of the body.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
Unlike in adults, in fetuses this molecule does not bind to 2,3-diphosphoglycerate, or DPG, due to its lack
of beta subunits, and this molecule is subject to the Bohr effect and the Haldane effect. People with
thalassemia produce an abnormal form of this protein which is broken down to produce biliverdin and
bilirubin in succession, and this protein contains an iron atom in the center of each of its four porphyrin
rings. For 10 points, name this oxygen transport protein found in red blood cells.
ANSWER: Hemoglobin
One model that explains the allosteric change in this protein is the Monod, Wyman, and Changeux model.
The Koshland, Nemethy, and Filmer model states that one subunit's change in the structure of this protein
promotes conformotional state changes in adjacent subunits. This molecule fluctuates between T and R
states. 2,3-bi-phosphoglycerate and inositol hexa-phosphate act to promote the disassociation between this
protein and the molecule that it most commonly binds to. The fact that the aforementioned disassociation is
promoted when this protein is at low pHs is called the Bohr effect. The carbamation of its N-terminal amino
groups allows this protein to carry carbon dioxide. For 10 points, name this iron-containing protein found in
red blood cells, responsible for carrying oxygen.
ANSWER: hemoglobin [accept Hb; or Hgb]
Because specific variants of this protein are often named after the geographic location in which they are
discovered, its variants include Yakima and Kansas, each of which lacks a hydrogen bond that stabilizes
one of its two stable quaternary states. Though the Adair and Hill equations are generally used for any
enzyme, they were developed in studies of this protein. Max Perutz discovered the structure of this protein.
A glutamate to valine mutation in this protein leads to its S variant, found in sickle-cell anemia. This protein
has a higher affinity for carbon monoxide than its more biologically necessary substrate. For 10 points,
name this protein that binds to up to four oxygen molecules and carries it through the bloodstream.
ANSWER: hemoglobin [or Hb]
2,3-BPG stabilizes the T state of this protein. A lower pH, or higher carbon dioxide concentration, shifts
this protein's sigmoidal substrate-binding curve to the right. It also exhibits cooperative binding. One
histidine and four pyrrole (PEER-ohl) nitrogens coordinate the iron at this protein's center, though the sixth
ligand can be either carbon monoxide or oxygen gas. For 10 points, name this protein that carries oxygen in
red blood cells.
ANSWER: hemoglobin [or Hb]
BPG allosterically induces this protein to unbind from its primary ligand, which is incorporated into one of
four octahedral complexes, and which has a sigmoidal binding curve due to cooperative binding, as
observed by the elder Bohr. The unusual pigmentation of jaundice patients is due to bilirubin, produced
when this protein is catabolized. A pathological glutamic acid-to-valine point mutation in the sixth residue
of this protein's porphyrin-containing beta-globin will cause it to form fibers; when that happens, the cells
that transport it are deformed into a sickle shape, resulting in a form of anemia. For 10 points, name this
iron-containing protein that carries oxygen in the blood.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
The conformational change from the T to R state of this protein increases its binding affinity for its ligand.
BPG, hydrogen ions, and carbon dioxide stabilize the T state, and the Hill equation gives a sigmoidal curve
with slope of about 3 to model the binding affinity. This protein contains a porphyrin ring, and a rare
misshape of this protein leads to sickle-cell anemia. Positive cooperation is exhibited by the four subunits
of, for 10 points, what iron-containing protein that transports oxygen in the blood from the lungs to body
tissues?
ANSWER: hemoglobin
When a cell containing this substance dies, part of this substance is reused via transferrin and part is
excreted into the bile through bilirubin. Carbon monoxide is toxic primarily because it binds more easily to
this substance than what normally binds to this substance. This substance consists of a central group
surrounded by four iron-containing groups, giving this molecule a red color. Name this protein that allows
oxygen to be carried in red blood cells.
ANSWER: hemoglobin (or Hb)
An observed mutation seen in it has glutamic acid replaced by valine. A protein similar to it has been found
in ascidians and is named vanabin. Typically seen in an F variety in the fetus that uses a gamma subunit, its
affinity to carbon dioxide is described by the Haldane effect. A defect in its synthesis is called Thalassemia
and is caused by reduced production of its alpha or beta side chains. Composed of 4 groups each weighing
about 17,000 Daltons with a central porphyrin, it has a similar "myo" variety that differs in oxygen bonding.
FTP, identify this iron containing protein found in red blood cells.
ANSWER: Hemoglobin (I guess on the first clue you can accept "gene for hemoglobin")
The "Barts" variant is a result of gene deletion in infants, and usually results in death from hydrops fetalis.
When it breaks down, its parts are salvaged by transferrins and reprocessed to form bilirubin. Like
chlorophyll, this protein is a chelate. The A type is normal and the F type is found in developing fetuses,
while another type found almost exclusively in groups of African descent contains a mutation in the beta
chain. That type, called S, causes sickle-cell anemia. Found in erythrocytes and synthesized in the bone
marrow, it consists of four heme subunits, each bound to one atom of iron. For 10 points, name this oxygencarrying protein that gives blood its red color.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
This protein's namesake prosthetic group is synthesized in a pathway that includes 5-aminolevulinic acid as
an intermediate. 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate alters its binding ability, but has less interaction with a version of
this protein using zeta and epsilon chains. That form is found in the embryo, and separate versions of this
protein are expressed in the fetus and in adults. When the glutamic acid at position six of this protein is
changed to a valine, a disorder that results in increased malarial resistance occurs. This protein is a tetramer,
and defects in this protein yield thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. For 10 points, name this protein in red
blood cells that transports oxygen.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
This molecule's activity is regulated by 2, 3 bisphosphoglycerate levels. Plasmepsins are protein produced
by Plasmodium that degrade this molecule. The ability of this molecule to bind to its most common
substrate decreases with pH levels according to the Bohr effect. A certain genetic disorder is caused by the
replacement of glutamic acid with valine in this protein. The alpha form of this protein was translocated
onto chromosome 16, and its beta forms are located on chromosome 11. Conditions affecting this tetrameric
protein include thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. For 10 points, name this protein abundant in red blood
cells that carried oxygen.
ANSWER: hemoglobin [or hb]
The Bohr effect shows that this protein has lower efficacy at a lower pH. People who live at high altitudes
tend to have a lower concentration of this protein. This protein's central group, which is surrounded by a
porphyrin ring, is known as a heme group as it contains an iron cation in its center. Genetic mutations of this
protein give rise to sickle cell anemia. For 10 points, name this protein that increases the dissolved oxygen
capacity in blood.
ANSWER: Hemoglobin
This protein is salvaged from special cells that carry it by transferrins and is often processed by the body
into bilirubin. Another structurally similar relative, found in muscle tissue, to this protein is known as
myoglobin. Found in biconcave disk shaped cells without a nucleus, the substitution of valine for glutamic
acid in the production of this protein causes sickle cell anemia. This protein is a metalloprotein, with an iron
cofactor. For 10 points, name this protein found in red blood cells that is used to transfer oxygen in the
body.
ANSWER: hemoglobin
NovoSeven is a new treatment for this disease, and patients have a prolonged PTT but normal PT. The A
form of this disease can be mistaken for von Willebrand disease, while the much rarer B form is also
known as Christmas disease. It most commonly results from mutations in factor eight, which is on the X
chromosome, and complications include bleeding into joints. For 10 points, name this group of diseases
resulting from the inability to clot blood.
ANSWER: hemophilia
This disease affects the same process as the autosomal condition Von Willebrand disease. Treatment of this
condition may sometimes involve the recombinant drug NovoSeven when replacement therapy fails, and
often desmopressin is used to treat symptoms. One type of this condition is sometimes referred to as
Christmas disease. FTP, identify this disease well-known for its prevalence in European royalty due to
inbreeding, in which clotting factors eight or nine are absent, leading to easy and profuse bleeding.
ANSWER: Hemophilia
Mild forms of this disease are treated with desmopression, and in emergencies cryoprecipitate is often
given. One gene implicated in this disease has repeats in introns 1 and 22, which makes it susceptible to
inversion. This disease can be confused with von Willebrand disease or a deficiency of Vitamin K. This
disorder is most commonly caused by a lack of either factor IX or factor VIII. For 10 points, name this
medical condition characterized by difficulty of the victim to form blood clots.
ANSWER: hemophilia [accept von Willebrand disease until "introns"]
Two members of this family cause an infant disease also known as sixth disease, roseola. Another member
of this family causes benign lymph node tumors in Castleman's disease, though it was first identified as the
causative agent of blotchy lesions often found on the face of AIDS patients. Besides Kaposi's Sarcomaassociated, another member of its gamma subfamily causes Burkett's Lymphoma, while members of its
alpha subfamily lie dormant in nerves between outbreaks. For 10 points, name this virus family including
the Epstein-Barr virus and the chicken pox-causing Varicella zoster, whose types 1 and 2, or "simplex,"
cause cold sores and their namesake STD.
ANSWER: Herpesviridae [or Herpes viruses]
This virus disables interferon regulatory factors using the protein ICP0, and it can cause "whitlow"
infections on fingertips. A potentially dangerous experimental treatment for this virus uses
antagomir to reactivate this virus in the sacral or trigeminal ganglia, where it enters a latent state to
(*) "hide" from the immune system. Aciclovir treats this disease, which belongs to a family that also
includes the causative agents of Kaposi's sarcoma, Epstein-Barr, and chicken pox. For 10 points, identify
this widespread virus that causes cold sores and genital lesions.
ANSWER: herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 (accept anything mentioning Herpesviridae, really)
The protein ICP4 keeps type 1 of this class of biological entities in a dormant state, and it uses glycoprotein
C to bind to host membranes. Docosanol is an experimental compound that prevents membrane fusion of
this entity, which suppresses apoptosis using its LAT transcript. Its thymidine kinase is the target of the drug
acyclovir, and Burkitt's Lymphoma one class of this virus attacking B cells. In addition to the Epstein-Barr
class, another class of this virus family is varicella-zoster which leads to chicken pox. For 10 points, name
this group of double-stranded DNA viruses that also cause Kaposi's sarcoma, shingles, and cold sores.
ANSWER: Herpesviruses [prompt on Epstein-Barr until mentioned]
In June 2012, a single-molecule version of this experiment was published that determined the precise time
needed for ejection, and it was this study that prompted Linus Pauling to begin work on nucleic acids. The
results of this experiment depended on "osterizing" the culture samples, which required the use of a Waring
blender to separate "ghosts" from cells. The main components under study were labeled with radioactive
sulfur-35 and phosphorus-32, allowing the polymers making up T2 to be distinguished. After centrifugation,
this experiment determined that viral DNA-but not bacteriophage capsids-had entered the bacterial cells.
Published just a year before Watson and Crick's double helix model, name this doubly eponymous genetics
experiment that proved DNA rather than protein was the hereditary material.
ANSWER: Hershey-Chase experiment [or Chase-Hershey experiment]
One type of osmotically inactivated species in this experiment was visible under electron micrographs as
tadpole-shaped "ghosts." In this experiment, centrifugation to separate virus capsids from bacteria showed
that sulphur-35 had remained in the capsids while phosphorus-32 had been injected into the bacteria. This
experiment showed that protein from the T2 phage had not been incorporated into the bacteria. For 10
points, name this experiment in which two scientists used bacteriophages to support the hypothesis that
DNA is the genetic material.
ANSWER: Hershey-Chase experiment
One example of this phenomenon has been observed for all three loci of the major histocompatibility
complex in humans. Another example of this phenomenon is the gay uncle theory, as well as one at
the HLA-DRB1 locus that confers hepatitis C resistance. One such allele, causing cystic fibrosis in
homozygotes, is thought to exhibit this phenomenon by providing cholera resistance for individuals with
one copy of the allele. For ten points, identify this phenomenon, most commonly associated with the
persistence of sickle cell anemia as the mutant type helps against malaria, in which individuals benefit from
having a single deleterious allele.
ANSWER: heterozygote advantage or overdominance
A physiological state associated with this part of the brain during slow-wave sleep is known as large
irregular activity. The dentate gyrus is often considered part of this structure, which borders the
choroid fissure of the lateral ventricle, and forms the medial margin of the cortical mantle. Consisting
mainly of gray matter, this part of the limbic system is involved in motivation and emotion. For 10
points, name this brain structure that plays a central role in memory processes, and has the shape in
cross section of a sea horse.
ANSWER: hippocampus
Oscillations in its EEG activity occurring at 6 to 7 hertz were termed as theta rhythms and are related to
voluntary movements. The observation of synaptic connections in this structure include ones between
pyramidal cells of the CA3 to the dentate granule cells called the "mossy fibers" and its CA3 and CA1
regions are associated with long term potentiation. H.M. was a famous patient known for the removal of this
structure, damage of which leads to amnesia. For 10 points, identify this structure in the brain responsible
for memory formation, whose name is Greek for "seahorse."
ANSWER: hippocampus
"Thorny excrescences" in this structure are formed by a mossy fiber pathway and some pyramidal cells in it
give off Schaffer axon collaterals. A route from fibers in the entorhinal cortex to parts of this structure is
known as the perforant pathway and it is the beginning and end of the Papez circuit. The hilus is a part of its
dentate gyrus and the fields CA1, CA2, and CA3 are part of the Horns of Amun in this structure.
Anterograde amnesia is often associated with damage to this structure. For 10 points, name this region of
the brain, associated with short term memory and named for a resemblance to a seashores.
ANSWER: Hippocampus
Sharp wave ripple activity is thought to originate in this structure and propagate to the subiculum.
In rodents, place cells are found in this structure, which receives input from the entorhinal cortex.
This structure was removed as a treatment for epilepsy in the patient H.M. Long-term potentiation
and depression are commonly investigated in the perforant path in this structure's dentate gyrus or
in the Schaffer collateral synapses, which are located between the CA1 and CA3 regions of this
structure. Like the (*) amygdala and hypothalamus, this structure is part of the limbic system. This
structure is necessary for the formation of new memories, since damage to it can cause anterograde amnesia.
For 10 points, name this region of the brain's temporal lobe that is named for its seahorse-like shape.
ANSWER: hippocampus
This structure is the end and essentially the start of the Papez circuit. Match-Mismatch comparisons
are carried out by this by two of its parts linked by Schaffer collaterals, the CA1 and CA3 areas. In
was in this structure that an exceptionally lasting increase of the amplitude of (*) EPSPs between two
cells due to stimulating them together was discovered. That process usually requires the glutamate receptor
NMDA. In addition to being the site of long term potentiation and place cells, it contains Ammon's horn
and a site that is known for high rates of neurogenesis. It is used in forming spatial maps. Damage to this
component of the brain can cause anterograde amnesia because it is needed to store memories. For 10
points, name this member of the limbic system with a name meaning "seahorse."
ANSWER: hippocampus
One insect analogue of this structure is the Drosophila mushroom body. The perforate pathway of
this organ connects it to its main input center; that center is composed of hexagonal grid cells and is
the entorhinal cortex. Polymorphic molecular and granular cells make up a portion of this structure
in which neurogenesis plays a role in the regulation of stress and depression. AHS, which affects this
organ, is highly correlated with (*) temporal lobe epilepsy. This is one of two theta rhythm sources; its
theta rhythm is prominent during REM. This limbic organ's degradation is highly correlated to the onset of
Alzheimer's disease. For 10 points, identify this part of a brain that plays a major role in the conversion of
short-term memories into long-term ones.
ANSWER: the hippocampus [prompt on the brain or limbic system until "limbic"]
This anatomical structure contains the Schaffer collateral fibers and dentate gyrus and is responsible for the
stronger of the two theta rhythms in an EEG. It became the focus of a debate over evolution during the
1860s between Richard Owen and Thomas Henry Huxley. Experiments on mice have associated this
structure with grid and place cells, and this region of the brain has been shown to be active during
navigation. This region is also believed to be associated with short-term memory because it is the first brain
region impacted by Alzheimer's disease. Name this structure whose shape resembles a seahorse.
ANSWER: hippocampus (prompt on "brain")
Woolley and McEwen linked estradiol administration to an increase in this structure's dendritic spines
and excitatory synapses. The entorhinal cortex sends information to this structure via a bundle of axons
called the perforant path. O'Keefe showed that place cells in this structure selectively respond to particular
locations in an environment. This structure consists of two sheets called the dentate gyrus and Ammon's
horn. Damage to this structure results in retrograde amnesia. For 10 points, name this region of the brain
which is pivotal in short term memory processes, named for its resemblance to a seahorse.
ANSWER: hippocampus
A 1998 study by Dr. Peter Eriksson used the marker bromodeoxyuridine to demonstrate that neurogenesis
takes place in the dentate gyrus region of this structure. The granule cells of the dentate gyrus project to the
large pyramidal cells of this structure's Ammon's Horn via the mossy fiber system. Damage to this region
may result in anterograde amnesia, and it is typically one of the first areas damaged by Alzheimer's disease.
A recent study found that this region has grown larger in cab drivers who have navigated London for
decades, since this area is involved in spatial navigation and memory formation. For 10 points, name this
part of the brain which derives its name from the Greek for "seahorse."
ANSWER: hippocampus
This structure is the chief source of mammalian theta rhythms. The alveus portion of it forms a superficial
layer between its CA region and the fimbria, and this structure is attached to the bottom of the amygdala.
Antidepressants typically target this structure's dentate gyrus, which has a very high rate of neurogenesis.
Damage to it results in anterograde amnesia, as this structure is necessary for the formation of new
memories and general storage of long-term memories. For 10 points, name this part of the limbic system
located in the medial temporal lobe, with a Greek name meaning "seahorse".
ANSWER: hippocampus [prompt on "limbic system" until "alveus"; then do not accept it]
Neurons in the tuberomammillary nucleus release this molecule during periods of wakefulness, but
not during REM or non-REM sleep, suggesting that it maintains behavioral arousal. Ranitidine
blocks its type 2 receptors. Along with gastrin, this molecule stimulates hydrochloric acid release
from the stomach's parietal cells when it is itself released from enterochromaffin-like cells. This
molecule is also secreted by certain (*) granulocytes that also release heparin. Those cells, which
degranulate in response to antigen-triggered cross-linking of IgE, are mast cells. This molecule's type 1
receptor is blocked by Claritin and Benadryl. For 10 points, identify this molecule produced by
decarboxylating histidine, which triggers the inflammatory response seen in allergies.
ANSWER: histamine [accept HA]
This group of chemicals is degraded in the body by diamine [dee-ah-MEEN] oxidase [OKS-ih-dase]. In the
body, they are created by enterochromaffin [en-tear-oh-kroe-MAFFin]- like cells, and they are also created
along with heparin [HEP-uh-rin] in mast cells. These are released when othermolecules bond to IgE [I G E]
antibodies, and these activate the unmyelinated [un-MY-uh-lin-ate-id] C-fiber neurons to cause pruritis
[prur-IE-tis], which is commonly known as an itch. Other symptoms of the release of these chemicals are
arrhythmia [ay-RITH-mee-uh], wheezing, and nasal congestion. Name these chemicals associated with
anaphylaxis [an-ah-fi-LAKS-is] and other allergic reactions.
ANSWER: histamines
Imidazole acetaldehyde is formed when this molecule is inactivated by oxidative deamination of its amino
group. The tuberomammillary nucleus contains cells that produce this compound, also synthesized in ECL
cells to increase gastric acid secretion. When sensitized to IgE, basophils and mast cells, which produce this
molecule, degranulate it. During asthma or anaphylaxis, examples of Type 1 hypersensitivity, this substance
is released in the inflammatory response. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter whose receptors are
targeted by allergy medicines, derived from histidine.
ANSWER: histamine
Cimetidine and famotidine are antagonists of this compound, released by neurons found primarily in
the tuberomammillary nucleus of the hypothalamus. The second of this compound's four GPCRs
causes vasodilation and gastric acid secretion upon binding. This compound is degraded by diamine
oxidase or its namesake N-methyltransferase. It's not serotonin, but (*) enterochromaffin-like cells
secrete this compound, which binds to receptors on parietal cells of the stomach. This compound is formed
from the decarboxylation of a similarly named amino acid with an imidazole ring. The binding of IgE
causes
the release of this compound from mast cells and basophils. For 10 points, name this compound involved in
the inflammatory response that is often released in allergic reactions.
ANSWER: histamine
One residue of this amino acid in the eukaryotic elongation factor 2 is modified to form dipthamide,
so named because diptheria attaches ADP-ribose to that special residue. Bacterial two component
signal transduction systems primarily auto-phosphorylate this amino acid on the sensor-kinase
protein. SThe catalytic triad of serine proteases consists of serine, aspartic acid, and this amino acid.
One of the most common type of (*) zinc finger motifs are defined by having two conserved cysteines and
two copies of this amino acid. The side chain of this amino acid has a pKa of about 6. For 10 points, name
this amino acid with a imidazole side chain and whose single letter code is H.
ANSWER: histidine [prompt on H; prompt on His]
This molecule's 3-methyl derivative is prevalent in actin and myosin and is used as a marker to detect
starvation. A thiamine deficiency can cause an excess of ammonia to be produced as a result of the
metabolism of this compound, of which wbuZ is a side product and urocanic acid is a main product. The
Ames test is used to detect disruption of the synthesis of this molecule, which, along with beta-alanine, is a
component of the dipeptide carnosine. Along with cysteine, tyrosine, and arginine, it is an essential amino
acid in children but not in adults, and its side chain has a pKa of about 6.5. Coordinated to iron in
hemoglobin, for 10 points, name this amino acid with a positively charged imidazole side chain and is
abbreviated His.
ANSWER: histidine
In plants, two-component systems rely on a kinase that phosphorylates this amino acid. A polymer
of this amino acid is an epitope tag used to purify recombinant proteins on nickel columns. A strain
of salmonella that is unable to synthesize this amino acid is used to detect carcinogens in the Ames
test. This amino acid's side chain is partially deprotonated at biological pH and consists of an
imidazole ring. Like cysteine, metal prosthetic groups on enzymes are often coordinated to this
amino acid. A decarboxylated form of this amino acid is stored in (*) mast cells. That decarboxylated
form of it is released during allergic reactions. For 10 points, name this essential amino acid with a basic
aromatic side chain, symbolized H, which is the precursor of histamine.
ANSWER: histidine [or His; accept H before mention; do NOT accept "histamine"]
This substance is modified to form diphthamide, which is found in eukaryotic elongation factor 2 and
is ADP-ribosylated by the diphtheria toxin. Addition of guanine is required prior to addition of this
compound to its tRNA. RNAse A has these at positions (*) 12 and 119, and two of these and two
cysteines are coordinated in most zinc finger motifs. They are commonly found with serine and aspartate in
catalytic triads, and bacteria that are unable to synthesize this amino acid are used in the Ames test. For 10
points, name this amino acid whose side chain includes an imidazole group and which is decarboxylated to
make histamine.
ANSWER: histidine [accept His or H]
Phosphorylation of a serine residue of one variety of these structures helps the cell pinpoint the
location of DNA damage. Important modifiers of these structures include factors like CREB binding
protein and p300. Lysine residues on the N-terminal domains of these proteins are (*) acetylated and
various other residues are methylated to turn transcription on and off, respectively. The "linking" type of
them connects the entry and exit sites of an octameric assembly of the "core" type; that assembly is called
the nucleosome. For 10 points, name these spool-like proteins around which DNA wraps to form chromatin.
ANSWER: histones
A 2010 study showed that G9a, which methylates one of these proteins, is downregulated after cocaine use.
In 1990 the Grunstein lab at UCLA caused yeast mating efficiency to decrease by replacing a lysine at
position 16 of one of these proteins with either arginine, glycine, or glutamine. That study showed that
mutations in SIR3 could partially allow mutated forms of these proteins to repress the transcription of
HML-alpha and HMR-alpha. The lysines on the tails of these proteins are reversibly acetylated by proteins
such as GCN5. An octamer consisting of two each of the 2A, 2B, 3, and 4 members of this family of
proteins forms the protein core of a nucleosome. For 10 points, name this family of proteins around which
DNA is packed in chromatin.
ANSWER: histones
The presence of these proteins in apoptotic blebs may be responsible for the development of autoantibodies
in Lupus, and variants of them include CenpA and 2AX, the later of which is an indication of repair. In
Drosophila the Suppressor of Variegation proteins are partly responsible for modifying these proteins, and
the Polycomb and Trithorax proteins have opposing effects on the clustering of these proteins. The PRMN4
pathway also acts on these proteins, and Jenuwen and Allis postulated the idea of a code of them, in which a
combinatorial set of modification of them is an indication of gene expression in particular regions. They can
be palmitoylated, phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, but more often they are acetylated and methylated in order
to form open and closed chromatin, respectively. Present in an octomeric form known as a nucleosome, for
10 points, name these highly positively charged proteins, which are responsible for binding to DNA.
ANSWER: Histones
These proteins are bound by proteins containing bromodomains and chromodomains, and CENP-A is a
variant of these proteins found near centromeres. These proteins, which are heavy in lysine and arginine
residues, are methylated, acetylated, and phosphorylated in order to control gene expression. An octamer of
these proteins forms a nucleosome, and moving these proteins together helps form condensed chromatin.
For 10 points, name these proteins that DNA wraps around in the nucleus.
ANSWER: histones [or nucleosomes until it is read]
Type five of this protein is found in bird red blood cells and resembles the type one. Types three and four of
these proteins are arginine-rich, while types one, two A, and two B are lysine-rich. Folds of this protein
contain a triple helix structure. These proteins have an N-terminus which is altered in different ways to
impact chromatin structure, and those alterations may impact transcription. Identify these proteins which
spool DNA into nucleosomes.
ANSWER: histones
Valproic acid, a molecule found in epilepsy and bipolar medications like Depakene and Stavzor, works by
inhibiting the molecule that removes acetyl groups from these structures. The epigenetic code, which is
considered higher than the genetic code, contains the code for these structures. These structures are divided
into core and linker types, the linker type containing the H1 variant which aids in the folding of chromatin.
For 10 points, name these proteins which play an important role in gene regulation by having DNA wind
around them that are located in the nucleolus.
ANSWER: histones
Two classes of these proteins are hypoacylated in X-chromosome heterochromatin to cause its inactivation.
The structures built by these proteins adapt to a "Zig-zag" model and are 30 nanometers in diameter. A-T
base pairs are preferentially located in the inner minor grove on these structures. The abundance of
positively charged amino acids facilitates these protein's functions. The initial effect of these highly
conserved proteins can be visualized as "beads on a string," and DNA coils around these proteins to form
nucleosomes. For 10 points, name these proteins which, along with the DNA wrapped around them,
comprise chromatin.
ANSWER: histones [accept specific types like H1 or H2 or H3 or H4]
They can be phosphorylated at serines, ubiquitinized at lysines, and methylated at arginines, the last
of which prevents acetylation of N-termini. In nucleated red blood cells of birds, the 5 class replaces
the 1 class, the only one to differ widely in sequence among organisms. Rich in positive basic residues,
they form pairs of 2A, 2B, 3, and 4 classes together in octamers, binding 147 base pairs of DNA wrapped
twice around them. Containing C-terminal tails required for chromatin condensation, For ten points, name
these nucleosomal proteins acting as beads on a DNA string.
ANSWER: histone
When folded chains formed from these proteins are elongated rather than globular, a "handshake"
motif forms. Butyric acid inhibits enzymes like KAT which modify these proteins' lysine residues and
allow the binding of a conserved bundle of four alpha helices called a (*) bromodomain. In sperm cells
these are replaced by arginine-rich protamines. Ordered zigzags form when "linker" versions of these
proteins form stems. These highly basic proteins can have their tail residues acetylated to regulate
transcription. They come in five varieties and they make up a nucleosome. For 10 points, name these
proteins designated H1 through H5 that act as a spool which DNA winds around to form chromatin.
ANSWER: histones
Cathepsin L has been shown to be responsible for proteolytically processing the N-terminal tail of
one type of these structures. The PRMT4 pathway governs the activation and inactivation of these
proteins while modification of the tails of these proteins is hypothesized to follow their namesake (*)
"code." They are rich in both lysine and arginine residues and can bind with each other to form a molecular
"handshake motif." The 1 and 5 varieties of these proteins are known as Linkers while 2 through 4 are
called the Core type for their role in forming the base of the nucleosome. Discovered by Albrecht Kossel,
FTP, name these proteins, designated H1 through H5, which act as the spindles around which DNA bundles
into chromatin fibers.
ANSWER: histones
Rett syndrome has been associated with hypermodification of certain classes of these proteins. During
spermatogenesis, they are replaced by the arginine-rich protamines, which are necessary for sperm head
condensation. The largest of these, class 1, links octameric units of the other four classes. These proteins are
rich in positively charged amino acids such as lysine, which is often modified in them by acetyl groups.
Four types of these form part of a unit spanning 146 base pairs called a nucleosome, which is key for the
supercoiling of DNA. For 10 points, name these proteins around which DNA wraps to form chromatin.
ANSWER: histones
The N-terminus of these proteins is composed of many lysine and other positively charged basic residues,
and the genes that code for these proteins are thought to have very few introns. These proteins are arranged
in either a zig-zag or spherical arrangement to form the thirty nanometer fibers, which is eventually densely
packed in heterochromatin. These proteins are very highly evolutionarily conserved, and in their most
notable role, these proteins function as an octomer and form a structure often described as "beads on a
string." Those beads are called nucleosomes. For 10 points, name these proteins around which DNA is
wound.
ANSWER: histones
This organism's Vif protein triggers degradation of a deaminase that allows it to multiply, and one of
its structural elements is the Gag polyprotein. Tat, rev, and vpr serve as transactivators in this
organism. This virus infects dendritic cells by cointegrating with the protein DC-SIGN, and the (*)
gp120 protein allows it to fuse to the membranes of target cells. Drugs like ritanovir and azidothymidine are
used to combat this pathogen as part of highly active antiretroviral therapy. This virus infects CD4expressing T cells, destroying them and weakening the immune system. For 10 points, identify this virus
that causes AIDS.
ANSWER: Human immunodeficiency virus [do not accept "AIDS"]
During early infection by this microbe, lymph nodes may swell because it replicates extensively in
dendritic (den-DRITT-ick) cells. This virus is treated by HAART ("HEART") drugs like lopinavir
(low-pin-AV-eer), and many strains of this virus have become resistant to AZT (A-Z-T). The condition
caused by this microbe occurs after CD4 white cell count drops below 200. This virus is transmitted through
bodily fluids, most commonly blood and sexual secretions. For 10 points, name this retrovirus that causes
AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or Human Immunodeficiency Virus; do not accept "Acquired Immune Deficienc Syndrome"; do not accept "AIDS"]
This virus uses the proteins gp41 and gp120 to enter cells, and Kaposi's sarcoma, a type of skin cancer, is a
sign of its progression. It sharply reduces an infected person's count of CD4+ helper T cells. AZT is
shorthand for an anti-retroviral drug treatment of it, and its ongoing pandemic started in 1981. For 10
points, name this sexually-transmitted infection, a virus that usually leads to AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV or Human Immunodeficiency Virus
In absence of CDK9, transcription in this pathogen will terminate prematurely. This pathogen is targeted by
drugs such as saquinavir and ritonavir. In addition to those protease inhibitors, this pathogen is also targeted
by azidothymidine, which works by blocking an enzyme that facilitates replication of this pathogen's
genome by synthesizing DNA from an RNA template. This virus, which uses reverse transcriptase, attacks
and destroys CD4 T-cells, causing its victims to die of other diseases due to a weakened immune system.
For 10 points, name this sexually transmitted virus that causes AIDS.
ANSWER: Human Immunodeficiency Virus [prompt on answers such as "the AIDS virus" or "the virus that causes Acquired ImmunoDeficiency Syndrome"]
This agent's env gene produces a glycoprotein precursor to gp41, which aids its entry into a host cell
in a process countered by fusion inhibitor drugs. Signs of the disease caused by this virus include an
opportunistic form of pneumonia and the rare skin cancer (*) Kaposi's sarcoma. The protein gp120 on
its surface binds to CD4 receptors, allowing this lentivirus to enter the helper-T cells that it attacks and
leading to a loss of cell-mediated immunity. AZT is one drug used in highly active antiretroviral therapy
against it. For 10 points, name this virus which uses reverse transcriptase to attack the immune system,
eventually leading to AIDS.
ANSWER: Human Immunodeficiency Virus or HIV
This pathogens' tropism is determined by the Trofile assay, and the four stem-loop structure of this
pathogen's genome is called the psi packaging element. Lamivudine and nevirapine are used to treat
infections by this pathogen. This pathogen's spike proteins are made up of gp120 and gp41. Like
many lentiviruses, this virus has a protein coat made of p24. This virus enters host cells via (*) CCR5
and CD4. Zidovudine mitigates the spread of this virus by inhibiting its reverse transcriptase, and is also
called AZT. This virus infects Helper T cells of the immune system. For 10 points, name this retrovirus that
causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or human immunodeficiency virus; don't accept or prompt on AIDS]
This virus uses the small protein VPU to promote the proteolysis of antigens as they are made. Resistance to
this virus is conferred by a 32-base-pair deletion that prevents the expression of the chemokine receptor
CCR5. The fusogen Gp41 is exposed when Gp120 on the surface of this virus's capsid binds to a cell. One
drug used to treat infection with this virus is AZT, which combats the reverse transcriptase this virus uses to
infect host cells. For 10 points, name this lentivirus that reduces the number of CD4-plus helper T cells and
causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or human immunodeficiency virus; do not accept "AIDS"]
A protein of this pathogen binds to the Rev response element and regulates splicing. This pathogen contains
the packaging signal psi at the five-prime end of its long terminal repeats. The surface of this pathogen's
envelope contains gp120, which is involved in cell entry. This lenti-virus can be treated with the drug AZT,
which is a reverse-transcriptase inhibitor. This retrovirus invades the helper T cells of the immune system.
For 10 points, name this virus that causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or human immunodeficiency virus]
This agent's long terminal repeats contain between one to three binding sites for NF kappa B, which is
released when its membrane fuses with the host cell's membrane. The env gene in this agent codes for
gp160, which is later cleaved by furin. The V3 loop of this agent's gp120 protein binds to CXCR4
receptors to enter its target cells, but this virus more commonly enters cells using CCR5 receptors. The
replication of this virus is inhibited by a thymidine analogue called AZT, which interrupts the activity of
reverse transcriptase. This virus infects CD4+ ["C-D-4-Positive"] helper T cells, which weakens the
immune system of the host. For 10 points, name this retrovirus that causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or Human Immunodeficiency Virus; do not accept or prompt on "AIDS"]
This pathogen's genome forms four stem loops, known as the psi packaging signal. Raltregavir
targets this organism's integrase, and it also produces the tat, rev, and vpr transactivators. Its coat is
made from p24. Its genome encodes for a combined gag-pol protein that is cleaved into several
proteins, and its env protein is cleaved into gp41 and gp120. This virus enters cells through the CCR5
and (*) CD4 receptors. Treatments for infection with it include protease inhibitors and Zidovudine, which
is also known as AZT. This virus infects helper T-cells and its genome also encodes for a protein that
creates DNA from its RNA genome, called reverse transcriptase. For 10 points, name this retrovirus which
causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or Human Immunodeficiency Virus]
AZT was the first drug used to inhibit the replication of this lentivirus. Its macrophage-tropic "1"
strain hurts the host indirectly by attacking CD4-plus "helper" T-cells, which usually protect against
diseases like (*) Kaposi's sarcoma. First discovered in 1981, it can be transmitted by reusing needles or
through unprotected sex. For 10 points, name this as-yet uncured retrovirus that causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV or H(uman) I(mmunodeficiency) V(irus) (prompt on "AIDS" or "acquired immune deficiency syndrome" before "lentivirus" is read)
Diagnosis of this virus early in infection can be carried out by looking for the p24 protein on its capsid.
Gene expression of this virus is regulated with its tat protein. This virus is the cause for the recent rise in
the number of cases of Kaposi's sarcoma. The high mutation rates associated with this virus are mostly due
to the low fidelity of its reverse transcriptase. This virus infects several white blood cells, especially helper
T cells. For 10 points, name this retrovirus, which causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or Human Immunodeficiency Virus]
A protein of this virus binds to the trans-activation response element. The capsid of this virus is made up of
p24, which is encoded by the gag gene. A test called the Trofile assay is used to determine which
chemokine receptor, CCR5 or CXCR4, this virus is utilizing. Glycosylation of gp120 can hide its epitopes
from recognition. This virus can be treated with AZT, which is a reverse transcriptase inhibitor. Diagnosed
using an ELISA and Western blot, this virus infects CD4 cells. For 10 points, name this retrovirus that
destroys the immune system and causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or human immunodeficiency virus]
This infectious agent's env protein exhibits variability that leads to three groups of its "one" variety, M, N,
and O. This virus's outer lipid membrane is punctured by gp41 proteins, which are bound to another
protein that binds to the CD4 receptors on cells it attacks; that is a glycoprotein known as gp120. Its capsid
contains two strands of RNA, each of which is paired with a reverse transcriptase enzyme. For 10 points,
name this virus that attacks Helper T cells, and eventually causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV or Human Immunodeficiency Virus [prompt on "AIDS Virus"; do not prompt on "AIDS"]
The Psi element of this agent is responsible for the packaging of its genome and interacts with the Gag and
Rev proteins in this agent. Individuals possessing a homozygous 32 base pair deletion in the CCR5
chemokine receptor are resistant to infections by the R5 strain of this organism. The V3 loop of a
glycoprotein present in them confers tropism characteristic of different strains of this agent, and it infects
cells possessing a CD4 receptor such as helper-T cells and macrophages. The most common drugs that fight
this agent are nucleoside analogues which inhibit the function of reverse transcriptase, an early example of
which was AZT. For 10 points, identify this infectious agent which causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or human immunodeficiency virus]
Partial protection from this virus can be conferred when the delta 32 mutation occurs on
chromosome 3, altering the gene that codes for CCR5. gp120 and gp41 are found on this virus's
envelope, enabling it to bind to CD4 receptors on the surface of some (*) T cells. Symptoms of
opportunistic infections that follow this virus include Kaposi's sarcoma. For 10 points, identify this
retrovirus that attacks cells of the immune system and causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or human immunodeficiency virus; do not accept or prompt on "AIDS" or "acquired immunodeficiency syndrome"]
AZT was the first drug used to inhibit the replication of this lentivirus. Its macrophage-tropic "1"
strain hurts the host indirectly by attacking CD4-plus "helper" T-cells, which usually protect against
diseases like (*) Kaposi's sarcoma. First discovered in 1981, it can be transmitted by reusing needles or
through unprotected sex. For 10 points, name this as-yet uncured retrovirus that causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV or H(uman) I(mmunodeficiency) V(irus) (prompt on "AIDS" or "acquired immune deficiency syndrome" before "lentivirus" is read)
The envelope of this virus contains gp120. This virus can use CCR5 or CXCR4 for entry into cells. One
drug important to fighting this virus is AZT, which is a protease inhibitor. Infection with this virus can lead
to opportunistic Kaposi's sarcoma. This virus infects cells with CD4, namely helper T cells. It can take 10
years for this virus to cause the disorder that it is associated with. For 10 points, name this virus that causes
AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV
This agent contains the gag and rev polypeptides, and its exterior expresses the gp120 glycoprotein.
Chemokine antagonist treatment for this condition was devised by Robert Gallo, a ranking expert on it.
This agent's progress is often shown by non-hereditary skin lesions from Kaposi's sarcoma.
Azidothymine, or AZT, was an early treatment for this virus which attacks the body's T-cells. For 10
points, name this virus which damages the immune system, whose symptoms can progress to AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or Human Immunodeficiency Virus]
Its NCp7 protein acts as a chaperone for RNA molecules. A fusin co-receptor is usually present on the
surface of cells infected by it, and the infection is initiated by the binding of gp120 to CD4 proteins on
certain cells. Patients infected with it can die of a rare cancer named Kaposi's sarcoma, and symptoms for it
include swelling of lymph nodes. Classified as lentivirus, it uses reverse transcriptase to integrate its
genome into the host cell. For 10 points, identify this virus that causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or Human Immunodeficiency Virus]
This pathogen uses a protein called gp120 to bind to CD4 molecules. Individuals with abnormal
variations in the human leukocyte antigen G gene have a greater resistance to this virus. This pathogen
interacts with chemokine receptors to fuse with host cells. The replication of this pathogen encourages
mutations, making it hard to treat. The simian variety of this pathogen may have been transmitted to
humans through chimpanzee meat. The first reports on diseases caused by this pathogen were published by
the Centers for Disease Control in 1981. Those reports discussed outbreaks of a rare form of pneumonia
and Kaposi's sarcoma, both caused by the progression of this virus. For ten points, name this retrovirus that
causes AIDS.
ANSWER: Human Immunodeficiency Virus
This agent's genome includes a poly-T SLIP element needed for crucial changes in reading frame. It
uses Vif to arrest the cell cycle at G2/M, and Gag is used to make structural elements. This agent can
evade the immune system thanks to variable cleavage of a surface protein that helps recognize and
dock its target cells; that protein is called (*) gp120. Azidothymidine, a classic drug to treat infections by
this pathogen, is a reverse transcriptase inhibitor that prevents it from replicating and further destroying
those target CD4 T-cells. For 10 points, name this pathogen whose destruction of the immune system leads
to AIDS.
ANSWER: human immunodeficiency virus [do not accept or prompt on "acquired immune deficiency syndrome"]
The major structural proteins of these entities use the PTAP motif to recruit the ESCRT-1 ("escort-one")
complex and the LYPxL motif to recruit the ALIX protein in order to facilitate the budding process. In
addition to possessing the Gag polyprotein, these entities produce the Vif protein which counteracts the
effects of the cytidine deaminase APOBEC3G. They are unable to infect individuals who possess a
homozygous 32 base pair deletion in the CCR5 protein. The glycoprotein gp120 found on them allows them
to dock onto CD4 receptors, and azidothymidine is a reverse transcriptase inhibitor that is used to treat
infections by this agent. For 10 points, name this retrovirus that mostly infects immune cells and which
causes AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or human immunodeficiency virus]
The Long terminal agent comprises the tails of part of this agent. This agent also uses the Psi element
to work the Rev protein. A certain protein is punctured on this agent's lipid membrane. It is able to
infect by using gp41 and gp120 to bind onto CD4 cells. The drug (*) AZT combats its two RNA strands
equipped with reverse transcriptase, an enzyme that allows it to enter and infect cells. For 10 points, name
this retrovirus that lowers the number of an organism's T-cells and eventually leading to AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV [or Human immunodeficiency virus; do not accept AIDS]
This agent's Tat protein interacts with the CXCR4 receptor, and its binding ability may be affected by
EGCG, found in green tea. It has Pol, Gag, and Env genes, and its envelope incorporates gp120. Antibody
tests for this pathogen have a 3-week window period, and treatments for it include nucleoside analogues like
azidothymidine or AZT. Infection with this retrovirus causes an increase in cytotoxic T-cells and a
reduction in CD4+ helper T-cell count. First discovered in 1981, this virus can be transmitted through
breastmilk, semen, and blood. For 10 points, name this virus which causes AIDS.
ANSWER: Human Immunodeficiency Virus [do not accept "AIDS"]
It can infect dendritic cells via the DC-SIGN recptor and infection can be suppressed in vitro by the binding
of ligands such as RANTES or SDF-1. The Tat gene produces proteins which bind to the TAR element and
the binding of the RRE element to rev facilitates replication. Strains enter via the CCR5 or CXCR4
receptors and three gp41 molecules with a gp120 make up the Env cap of this virus. It consists of a capsid
surrounding the p24 protein in a circular shape and it contains gag and pol genes. For 10 points, name this
lentivirus which infects CD4+ helper T cells and leads to AIDS.
ANSWER: Human Immunodeficiency Virus or HIV
A scientist with this last name was a crystallographer who discovered the structure of vitamin B12. A
man with this last name studied action potentials in squid giant axons with Andrew Huxley. Besides
Dorothy Crowfoot and Alan Lloyd, another man with this surname names a disease characterized by CD30
and CD15 positive Reed-Sternberg cells, that is characterized by a mixed infiltrate of blood cells. For the
point, give this surname possessed by an English physician who names a type of lymphoma.
ANSWER: Hodgkin [do not accept "Hodgkin's"]
Johann Joseph Wilhelm Lux developed an adaptation of this method which is sometimes used as a
vaccine. Sucussing is an important step in treatment by this method, which was studied by Samuel
Hahneman. The cures in this method are used against "miasms", (*) which underlie disease, rather than
the disease itself, and they operate according to the "Law of Similars." For ten points, identify this pseudomedicine in which substances that loosely correspond to body parts are used to treat disease.
ANSWER: homeopathy
This practice was popularized in the United States by John Franklin Gray. A consortium dedicated to
this practice was founded in Nuremberg during the Nazi regime, where it briefly gained support through
men such as Rudolf Hess. This medical practice was founded by Samuel Hahnemann, who described
miasms as the cause of problems in the body. Using this practice, one administers a highly dilute dose of a
substance that causes a disease in order to cure it. For ten points, name this pseudoscientific alternative
medicine practice based on the maxim of "like cures like."
ANSWER: homeopathy
The term for this was coined by Walter Bradford Cannon, and it consists of both positive and negative
feedback mechanisms. The Gaia hypothesis discusses the interaction of the various Earth systems in regards
to this. The structural type of it is often used in the relationship between an individual termite and the
colony as a whole. An example of its application is a person sweating on a hot day to cool down the body
and this was examined when researchers subjected patients to 20 hour work-sleep cycles, de-synchronizing
the body clock with the "day" clock. FTP, give this term, literally translated as "stand equally" that is the
maintenance of the body temperature, oxygen level, and water levels, notably exhibited by warm-blooded
animals.
ANSWER: Homeostasis
Mechanisms that enable this ability usually involve negative feedback. The "plateau" named for this ability
consists of the conditions under which life can be sustained. One example of this ability is that the human
body's temperature is usually 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit. Name this ability for a living organism to maintain
stable living conditions in its environment.
ANSWER: homeostasis
Jared Diamond's first book argued that Pan troglodytes should be made a member of this group, while
another member was named for a fossil called the Heidelberg jaw. In 2004, a new dwarf species in this
group was discovered on Flores Island and nicknamed the "hobbit". This classification does not currently
include the sediba discovered in 2008 at Malapa, though it may be an ancestor of this group. Ernst Mayr
proposed reassigning the australopithecines (aus-truh-loh-PITH-uh-seenz) to this genus, whose last species
to go extinct in Europe was the Neanderthals. With several significant examples discovered by the Leakey
family, name this genus that inclues habilis and erectus as well as the sapiens species, modern humans.
ANSWER: Homo
Many fossils of this species were discovered near Acheulean (ack-OOL-ee-en) industry tools at Ternifine in
Algeria. Another member of this species was identified by Davidson Black after its tooth was found at
Zhoukoudian (zoo-KOH-dee-ann), though that fossil was destroyed during World War II. Eugene Dubois
(doo-BWAY) found the first known fossil of this species on an Indonesian island. This species flourished
from 1.7 million to two hundred thousand years ago. This extinct hominid's fossils include Peking Man and
Java Man. For 10 points, identify this species, which was named for its upright walk.
ANSWER: homo erectus
Major discoveries of fossils from this species have occurred at Zhoukoudian Cave. Their distinctive features
included a projecting nuchal torus and a thick cranial bone, and they were the first species to use bifaces
such as Acheulian handaxes. The Nariokotome boy is the most complete skeleton of this species to be
discovered. This species exhibited a cranial capacity of 900 to 1200 cubic centimeters, and were the first
hominids to leave the African continent. Eugene Dubois discovered the first fossils of this species, Java
Man. For 10 points, name this species which evolved from homo habilis and whose name is Latin for
"upright man."
ANSWER: Homo erectus
This species created oval and pear-shaped handaxes indicative of the fact that it was the first species to be
grouped with the Acheulean stone tool industry. One site yielding fossils of this species was excavated by
Franz Weidenreich and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin. The ergaster species, exemplified by Turkana Boy, is
also known as the "African" type of this species. Eugene Dubois made an 1891 find in Indonesia of fossils
of this species, which is thought to have arisen about 1.8 million years ago as a descendant of Homo habilis.
For 10 points, name this species, exemplified by the fossil finds of Java Man and Peking Man, whose Latin
name means "upright man."
ANSWER: Homo erectus [or H. erectus; prompt on Homo; accept Pithecanthropus erectus or P. erectus]
A 2010 book by Richard Wrangham argues that a certain behavioral innovation led to the rise of
this species, citing its considerably smaller and simpler digestive tract. This species made extensive
use of the Acheulean artifacts and may have experienced a case of island dwarfism leading to the
evolution of Homo floresiensis, or "Hobbit man." Richard Leakey's 1984 discovery of (*) "Turkana
Boy" ignited an extended debate over this species' connection with Homo ergaster. Eugene Dubois
discovered its first known specimen in 1891. Living 1.3 to 1.8 million years ago, this species mastered fire
and was the first hominid to appear outside of Africa. Peking Man and Java Man are examples of, for 10
points, what hominid whose name means "upright man?"
ANSWER: Homo erectus [or H. erectus; accept Homo ergaster before mentioned due to the unresolved conflation; prompt on "upright man" before mentioned]
These organisms are affected by the Israel Acute Paralysis Virus, which is transmitted by the Varroa mite.
Some of them perform a figure-eight action known as the waggle dance. These organisms are in genus Apis.
Their population in North America and Europe has drastically declined due to Colony Collapse disorder.
An "Africanized" version of these organisms is known for aggressively defending their turf. For 10 points,
name these insects that produce a sweet substance coveted by bears.
ANSWER: honeybees [or Apis before read; prompt on bees]
This scientist was burned by the line "if I have seen a little further it is by standing on the shoulders of
giants" in his correspondence with Isaac Newton. After the Great Fire of London, this man worked as Chief
Surveyor in the rebuilding process. This man's detailed illustrations of small insects in his book
Micrographia accompanied his observation of cork using a microscope. For 10 points, name this English
scientist who first used the word "cell" and devised a namesake law describing displacement in springs.
ANSWER: Robert Hooke
A fossil with fermented grapes in its stomach of an early genus of these animals was found in the
Messel Oil Shales. Darwin was astonished to discover a tooth from this extant animal group along
with fossils of Toxodon, noting that Pliocene conditions must have been very different to cause their
local extinction. George Gaylord Simpson drew them in a branching evolutionary tree, in contrast to
their erroneous (*) anagenetic portrayal. Gould argued that passive diffusion could explain their trend
toward increased body size; he also described their inaccurate textbook portrayal in "The Case of the
Creeping Fox Terrier Clone," which deals with the genus Eohippus. For 10 points, name these
perissodactyls, whose extant species are all members of the genus Equus.
ANSWER: horses [accept equids or equines or word forms; accept hippomorphs or word forms; antiprompt on zebras, donkeys, asses, onagers or other specific equines; prompt on less specific taxonomic answers such as perissodactyls; prompt on ungulates or hoofed mammals]
The key structural feature of these genes is shared by NANOG, and POU proteins contain both that
feature and a homologous POU domain. The expression of these genes are regulated by polycomb and
trithorax, and many of them are induced by the retinoic acid receptor. Duplication of these genes was a
major factor in the evolution of vertebrates, and important ones include Ubx and Scr. In humans they are
arranged in four clusters, and are arranged in spatial order of expression. All of them code for a conserved
sixty amino acid helix-turn-helix domain. Mutations in these genes cause things like antennas to grow on
the head and limbs to be improperly placed. For 10 points, name these genes that are responsible for laying
out the body plan of an organism.
ANSWER: hox genes or homeobox genes [or homeodomain genes]
An intergenic, long non-coding RNA that directs PRC2-catalyzed condensation of chromatin, called
HOTAIR, is expressed from the same cluster as these genes. One set of these is activated by TET2induced hydroxylation of methylcytosines, and they are also activated by the retinoic acid receptor.
In the brain, these genes are responsible for the specification of rhombomere identity. In humans
there are 4 clusters of 13 of each of these arranged collinearly, and they are expressed in the order
they are arranged in the cluster. They bind to a TAAT consensus sequence via a conserved 60-amino
acid helix-turn-helix domain. In (*) Drosophila, they are activated by gap and pair-rule genes. Mutations
in them cause body segments to appear in the wrong place or antennae to appear on the head. For 10 points,
name these genes that control body organization during development.
ANSWER: Hox genes or Homeobox genes
This pathogen leads to an increase in protein p16 but inactivates it. Research on this pathogen led to the
2008 Nobel Prize in Medicine for Harald zur Hausen and two of its more than one hundred types cause flat
warts on the hands and plantar warts on the feet. Genes E6/E7 of types sixteen and eighteen of this virus
promote deadly tumor growth in infected epithelial tissue. The vaccines against it are called quadrivalent
because they protect against four types of this virus, which is considered by the CDC to be the most
common sexually transmitted disease. Name this virus targeted by the vaccines Gardasil and Cervarix which
causes cervical cancer.
ANSWER: HPV [or human papilloma virus; prompt on papillomavirus]
Patients with mutations in EVER1 or EVER2 are unusually susceptible to this virus. This virus' L1
protein mediates attachment to GAGs, and one disease caused by this virus is diagnosed by finding
koilocytes. HeLa cells contain DNA from this virus. One protein produced by this virus forms a complex to
form E6AP and suppress p53. Another protein produced by this virus causes the host cell to switch to the S
phase by binding to pRB, which causes the release of E2F. Those two proteins are E6 and E7. A disease
caused by this virus can be diagnosed with a pap smear. Gardasil is a vaccine against this virus which only
infects basement epithelium cells. For 10 points, name this virus that causes genital warts and cervical
cancer.
ANSWER: human papilloma virus [or HPV]
The transcripts of the episomal form of this virus are unstable because they contain a series of uracil
residues in their poly-(A) tail, and one version of it causes epidermodysplasia verruciformis. Classification
is based on sequence homology in the L1 gene, while its E6 and E7 proteins bind to Rb protein and p53.
High concentrations of alpha-defensins are one method of combating this virus, and of the 96 known types,
types 6, 11, 16, and 18 are targeted by a quadrivalent vaccine developed by Merck. Usually infecting
cutaneous tissue, FTP, name this virus class targeted by Gardasil, which causes warts and cervical cancer.
ANSWER: Human Papillomavirus ("HPV" is fine)
This virus contains several CTCF insulator sites in its genome, which prevents heterochromatin
spreading along it. This virus evades immune recognition by secreting ICP-47 which interferes with
the function of MHC-I. This virus' glycoprotein C binds to heparan sulfate and its glycoprotein D
binds to cellular receptors. Whitlows often caused by this virus, which when in circular form
expresses the Latency-Associated Transcript. This virus encodes an enzyme that phosphorylated
naked thymine, and that enzyme specifically acts on drugs like valacyclovir and acyclovir, causing chain
termination. In addition to causing conjunctivitis and aseptic meningitis, this virus usually lies latent in the
trigeminal or sacral gangi and causes outbreaks of red lesions in response to stress. For 10 points, name this
DNA virus that causes both genital lesions and cold sores.
ANSWER: HSV or Herpes Simplex Virus
A rare form of encephalitis caused by this virus is typically localized to the temporal lobes
and, when untreated, is 70% fatal. Like VZV, this virus causes Cowdry type A inclusion bodies.
This virus has glycoprotein C and glycoprotein D on its surface, which it uses to bind to entry
receptors. Giant cells appearing on a Tzanck smear are characteristic of infection with it, which
causes whitlows on the hands. This virus, whose genome codes for latency-associated transcript
and whose replication is inhibited by valacyclovir and acyclovir, typically infects the sacral
ganglion or the trigeminal ganglion, and typically lies dormant until periods of stress. For 10
points, name this virus responsible for oral and genital lesions commonly called cold sores.
ANSWER: herpes simplex virus [or HSV-1 or HSV-2]
The data from this effort is stored in the Ensembl database. This effort used BAC libraries
followed by the creation of shotgun clones, which were then aligned into contigs. The Sanger Institute
participated in this effort, and it was directed by Francis Collins. Much of the samples used in this
project came a from single man in Buffalo. Craig (*) Venter's company competed with this effort,
which initially stated that humans have around thirty thousand genes. For 10 points, name this public
project which mapped the human DNA sequence.
ANSWER: Human Genome Project [or HGP]
One of the goals of this project was to classify SNPs ("snips"), and this program relied on the freezing
and subsequent thawing of E. coli bacteria, which were used as storage in this program. Milestones in the
course of this endeavor included the sequencing of model organisms such as C. elegans and Drosophila.
For 10 points, identify this scientific endeavor that sought to completely sequence the genetic makeup of
Homo sapiens.
ANSWER: Human Genome Project [or HGP]
White blood cells from 4 anonymous donors were used, although one of them, RP11 from Buffalo,
New York, was used much more than the others. A rival project, privately funded by Celera, used the
riskier but quicker shotgun method, leading to competition with the publicly-funded project. The
International HapMap Project is working to further the data produced by this project by studying
patterns of single nucleotide polymorphism groups, or (*) haplotypes. It was begun in 1990 and led by
James D. Watson. By 2003, most of its sequencing work was complete, except for the highly repetitive
centromeres and telomeres. FTP, name this international scientific research project which aims to
understand the genetic makeup of humans.
ANSWER: Human Genome Project
Among the sites of this project include the Whitehead Institute and Washington University in St. Louis.
This effort used a technique developed by Frederick Sanger, and assembled the readout into contigs. This
effort was coordinated from the NHGRI, which at the time was headed by Francis Collins. This effort was
competed against by Celera, headed by Craig Venter. For 10 points, name this public effort to map the
DNA sequence of Homo sapiens.
ANSWER: Human Genome Project [or HGP]
The subjects of this experiment were broken down into BACs. Stock in this experiment fell when it was
declared that its results could not be patented. One participant in this effort gained an advantage by using
the shotgun technique and by incorporating the publicly available data of the side led by Francis Collins.
The public side of this project used donated white blood cells, while Celera is rumored to have used Craig
Venter's. For 10 points, name this effort to sequence homo sapien DNA.
ANSWER: Human Genome Project [or HGP]
Charles DeLisi instigated this project. The International HapMap project, which studies SNPs,
proceeded after this other project was completed. Francis (+) Collins headed up the final stages of
this project. A coincident private venture launched by Celera used the shotgun method to achieve
this project's ends and was attempted by Craig (*) Venter. This collaboration between the Department
of Energy and the National Institutes of Health produced a rough draft in 2000. For 10 points, name this
project to completely sequence the DNA in human cells.
ANSWER: Human Genome Project [or HGP]
This compound is mediated by others like IGF-1 and other somatomedins, and the level of IGF-1 can be
used to measure the amount of this hormone in the body. Homologous to prolactin, it increases the uptake
of sulfur by chondrocytes, and like glucagon, stimulates the breakdown of glycogen in the liver. The high
blood sugar result of this is similar to diabetes mellitus. The highest levels of this hormone occur during
sleep, and it is inhibited by somatostatin. When found in animals it is known as somatotrophin, and extreme
hyposecretion of it can cause progeria while hypersecretion can cause acromegly and gigantism. For 10
points, name this hormone perhaps more infamous for its role in increasing muscle mass.
ANSWER: Human Growth Hormone [or HGH or GH; accept somatotrophin before mention]
The main treatment for Prader-Willi syndrome is injecting this protein. The secretagogue receptor for this
protein binds ghrelin, which activately stimulates secretion of it. An "insulin-like" compound is secreted by
the liver in response to activation by this protein. This hormone is secreted by somatotropic cells in the
absence of somatostatin. A deficiency in this protein can be diagnosed by measuring the size of patient's
hands on an X-ray, and is common in Turner syndrome patients. Secreted by the anterior pituitary, this
hormone is produced in excess by patients suffering from acromegaly. For 10 points, name this hormone
which promotes people getting taller.
ANSWER: human growth hormone [or HGH]
This compound is often used to treat patients with Prader-Willi syndrome. A mutation in the
receptor for this hormone can cause a disorder which also causes a mysterious resistance to diabetes
and cancer, Laron syndrome. Production of IGF-1 is stimulated by this hormone through the JAKSTAT pathway, and this hormone's release can be stimulated by (*) ghrelin. Pituitary adenomas often
cause an excess of this somatostatin opposed hormone which in adults can cause a thickening of the bones
and skin called acromegaly. In children, incorrect amounts of this hormone can result in gigantism and
dwarfism. For 10 points identify this anabolic hormone often used for doping due to its stimulation of cell
production.
ANSWER: Human Growth Hormone [Accept HGH, Somatotropin, or Somatropin]
Fractures in this bone commonly occur in either its surgical neck or along a spiral groove in its
body, which contains the deep brachial (BRAH-key-uhl) artery. One side of this bone forms a joint in
the glenoid fossa (GLEE-noyd FAH-suh), while the other side contains the lateral and medical
epicondyle (eh-pih-CON-die-uhl). This bone forms a ball-and-socket joint with the (*) scapula, and
also forms a joint with both the radius and ulna. The bicep and tricep muscles run along this bone. For 10
points, name this bone found in the upper arm.
ANSWER: humerus
Types of this kind of bird with specialized bills for feeding are the sicklebills and thornbills. They have a
grooved tongue with the outer half forked, and like woodpeckers this wraps around their skulls. Like swifts
and nightjars, these birds often go into torpor to save energy, and since that occurs throughout the year, it is
known as noctivation. Their gorgets produce iridescence by reflecting light through microscopic discs with
air bubbles inside. Some, such as the Sword-billed species, evolved in conjunction with tubular flowers.
Many species have display flights utilizing their exceptional flying abilities. For 10 points, name this
extremely small, colorful type of bird.
ANSWER: Hummingbirds
Due to the founder effect, this disease has a higher frequency among Dutch Afrikaners. It results
from an error located on the short arm of chromosome 4, the trinucleotide repeat CAG, and is
characterized by buildup of the protein mHTT. [*] Symptoms of this autosomal dominant genetic
disorder include erratic movement known as chorea; unlike Alzheimer's, it causes subcortical dementia and
usually manifests as people reach middle age. For 10 points, name this hereditary neurodegenerative
disease.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [accept Huntington's chorea before mention]
Treatment of this disease using intrabody therapy is being investigated, and tetrabenazine can be used to
alleviate its most distinctive symptom. This disorder particularly affects the substantia nigra and striatum,
and the protein BDNF may be underexpressed in patients with this disorder. The age of onset of this disease
is related to a mutation in the namesake Htt gene that increases the number of CAG repeats on chromosome
4. For 10 points, name this degenerative disease characterized by dystonia and the namesake jerking
motions.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [or Huntington's chorea]
One model of this disease is the R-six-slash-two mouse, which was used to demonstrate that SIRT1
has a protective effect against it. Mutations in junctophilin-3 cause a disease similar to this. The
protein central to this disease is responsible for cargo-loading autophagocytic vesicles and interacts
with various HAP and HIP proteins. The protein central to this disease is SUMO-ylated by the Rhes
protein, leading to death of GABA-ergic cells in the striatum. This disease is caused by the expansion
of CAG-repeats in the N-terminus of a namesake gene, resulting in that gene having a longer polyglutamine track than normal. This disease demonstrates genetic anticipation, is autosomal dominant, and
commonly results in death 20 years after onset. This disease is characterized by jerky movements called
chorea. For 10 points, name this genetic neuro-degenerative disease.
ANSWER: Huntington's Disease
Mouse models of this disease include R6/2 and BACHD, which were used to test the V(L)12.3
intrabody to treat it. A group of diseases similar to this one are caused by mutations in
junctophilin-3. The mechanism of this disorder is similar to the one that causes Kennedy disease or
Machado-Joseph disease. The affected protein in this disease is SUMOylated by Rhes, which is
mainly expressed in the striatum. This disease shows anticipation, in which successive (*) generations
are affected at an earlier age due to further expansion of a poly-glutamine tract. Symptoms of this disease
include the inability to swallow and uncoordinated, dancelike movements called chorea. For 10 points,
name this autosomal dominant neurological disease named for an American physician.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease
The main diagnostic symptom of this disease also characterizes a disorder that is one of the Jones criteria
and is associated with streptococci infections, called Sydenham disorder. This disease causes depletion of
CREB binding protein, and the main protein involved in this disease interacts with HIP1, a clathrin-binding
protein. It chiefly occurs due to the presence of an excess of 36 contiguous glutamine residues in a polyQ
sequence near the amino terminus of said protein. The mutation of a namesake gene on chromosome 4
results in, for 10 points, what autosomal dominant disease that causes involuntary muscle movements and
progressive cognitive degeneration due to the aggregation of a misfolded protein in the central nervous
system.
ANSWER: Huntington's chorea [prompt on "chorea"]
This disease's Westphal (WEST-fall) variant is characterized by unusually young onset of symptoms. This
genetically dominant disease is caused by a mutation leading to repeats on the polyQ ("PAUL"-ee CUE)
region of three bases, CAG (C-A-G). Symptoms of this disease include dementia and most notably
uncontrollable jerking and writhing movements that give this disease its alternate name of its namesake's
"chorea" (kor-EE-uh). For 10 points, name this neurodegenerative disorder named for a British physician.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [or Huntington's chorea before mentioned]
The orphan drug tetrabenazine can be used to control this disorder, which can be
pathologically classified using the Vonsattel grading system. Nancy Wexler discovered the cause
of this disease by linkage analysis. The protein mutated in this disorder is SUMOylated by the
Rhes protein and binds to HIP1 to mediate clathrin-driven endocytosis. This disease is
characterized by selective loss of GABAergic neurons in the striatum. This disease is caused by
an expansion of CAG repeats on chromosome four and is inherited in an autosomal dominant
fashion. For 10 points, name this neurological genetic disease which usually manifests by age 40
and causes jerky, uncontrolled movements.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease
Tetrabenazine was recently approved to treat this disease, functioning by inhibiting VMAT-2. While this
disease's mechanism is not fully understood, it is known to result in nuclear inclusion bodies, which may
explain the toxicity caused by its characteristic protein misfolding. On a larger scale, it damages the
striatum in the brain, likely responsible for its symptoms of chorea. Marked by a long CAG repeat on
chromosome 4 resulting in a mutant namesake protein, identify this neurodegenerative autosomal dominant
disease whose onset comes around age 40.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [or Huntington's chorea]
This disorder is manifested by the malfunction of a protein up-regulator of BDNF; that namesake
protein of this disorder becomes unstable if it contains more than about forty terminal residues. This
disease is caused by mutations in a gene formerly known as IT15 and ending in several repeats of a
glutamine codon; the length of that (*) tri-nucleotide repeat on the short arm of chromosome four
determines the severity of this disorder. Generally setting in during early adulthood, this disease has various
unpredictably psychological symptoms, sometimes including compulsive gambling, but reliably produces
shaking, or chorea. FTP, name this disease perhaps best known for being autosomal dominant; a
neurogenetic disorder named for its American describer.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [or Huntington's chorea]
Inclusion bodies formed from misfolded segments of a protein are involved in this condition and
disaggregate in the presence of Rhes. This condition's Westphal variant is characterized by especially young
onset. The polyQ region in a gene on the short arm of chromosome four develops due to CAG repeats in
this condition. It primarily affects the caudate nuclei and putamen in the basal ganglia, and it is inherited in
a dominant fashion. Patients display jerky motions called chorea. For 10 points, name this
neurodegenerative disease named for an English physician.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [or Huntington's chorea; or HD]
Recent research has shown that the protein central to this disease is sumoylated by Rhes, leading to
increased cytotoxicity. One drug approved for treating this disease is tetrabenazine. Like Parkinson's
disease, this disease sees atrophy and neuron death in the striatum. The genetic basis of this disease is an
increase in the polyQ track of a gene located on chromosome four, causing more CAG repeats. The
symptoms of this disease include dystonia and chorea. For 10 points, name this neurodegenerative disease
caused by an autosomal dominant mutation which usually does not manifest until the victim is forty years
old.
ANSWER: Huntington's Disease
Low levels of CREB binding protein characterize this disease, whose namesake protein is thought to
be related to embryo survival and anti-apoptotic function. It sees the destruction of certain
GABAergic receptors and presents atypically early in its Westphal variant. Purkinje cells in the
cerebellum and striata of the (*) basal ganglia are also destroyed in this disorder, whose onset and
rapidity of progression are governed by the number of CAG repeats on chromosome 4. That polyQ
sequence results in cognitive degeneration and loss of muscle control. For 10 points, name this autosomal
dominant illness that causes jerky movements dubbed its "chorea," known for its characteristic onset during
middle age.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [or Huntington's chorea]
The Rhes (RESS) protein may be a major cause of this disease, whose Westphal variant has very early
onset. It is characterized by extra glutamine (GLUE-tah-mean) residues in the PolyQ sequence of
chromosome four, leading to thirty-six repeats of the nucletotide CAG, which forms a mutated protein
named for this disease. In this disease, atrophy of the striatum (stry-EY-tum) causes jerky movements
called chorea (koh-REE-ah). For 10 points, name this hereditary neurodegenerative disorder that usually
onsets around age forty.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [accept chorea before mentioned]
Some symptoms of this disease can be treated with drugs like tetrabenazine (teh-truh-BEN-uh-zeen).
Long stretches of glutamine contribute to the destruction of the basal ganglia (gang-LEE-uh) by this
disorder, which is inherited with a dominant gene. The age of onset of this disease is affected by the
severity of a defect on chromosome (chrome-uh-some) four that causes the abnormally high 36 to 120
repeats of the DNA sequence CAG. For 10 points, name this fatal neurodegenerative genetic disorder that
does not typically manifest until middle age.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [or Huntington's chorea]
The most famous symptom of this disease also appears in the rheumatic fever-associated gravidarum and
Sydenham's diseases. In Drosophila, the intrabody C4 sFv has been shown to delay the symptoms of this
disease. The GTP-binding protein Rhes induces sumoylation in and therefore increases cytotoxicity of a
protein modified in this disease. It involves an increase in the number of glutamines beyond 36 in the polyQ
region on chromosome 4. It's not Tourette syndrome, but tetrabenazine was the first drug to be FDAapproved to treat the involuntary, irregular muscle contractions called chorea that is characteristic of this
disease. For 10 points, name this neurodegenerative disease caused by an autosomal dominant mutation,
which normally manifests itself in middle age.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease
Patients suffering from the X-linked McLeod neuro-acanthocytosis syndrome show similar symptoms to
those of this disease. Its namesake protein binds to Hip1 and dynamin, and plays a role in vesicle
trafficking. This disease occurs when 36 or more CAG repeats occur on its namesake gene on chromosome
4, resulting in glutamine amino acid repeats. Its patients exhibit the triad of repetitive movements, memory
loss, and changes in personality. For 10 points, identify this neurodegenerative disease named for an
American scientist, whose patients usually begin to exhibit symptoms when they are around 40 years old.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease or chorea
In 2001, Steffan et al found that the protein affected by this disease possessed acetyltransferase
activity, which allowed binding to CREB and p300 proteins. That affected protein has 36 to 155
glutamine residues as opposed to the usual 35, often manifesting from (*) poly-CAG repeats. It is
characterized by (*) astrogliosis due to loss of spiny neurons, though the most prominent nerve cell loss
occurs in the striatum. This disease's symptoms don't usually appear until the age of 30, which is why it
propagates despite being fatal and autosomal dominant. For 10 points, name this degenerative genetic
disorder associated with its namesake chorea.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease
This disease is caused by the same mutation that, on a different gene, causes spinocerebellar ataxia.
The protein associated with this disease helps mediate endocytosis by interacting with clathrinbinding proteins. A high-penetrance, early-onset form of this disease is called its akinetic rigid or (*)
Westphal type. Excess glutamine residues called a polyQ sequence result from a series of CAG repeats that
leads to buildup of this autosomal dominant disease's namesake misfolded protein. For 10 points, name this
disease whose symptom of uncontrollable, jerky movements led it to be dubbed its namesake's "chorea."
ANSWER: Huntington's disease [or Huntington's chorea before mention]
One indication of this disease is a low level of CREB binding proteins. When the mutation that causes this
disease is present on a different gene, it can cause spinocerebellar ataxia. One drug approved to treat this
disease is tetrabenazine, and the cause of this disease is a creation of a polyglutamine tract, due to an
overproduction of CAG repeats. This disease is caused by an autosomal dominant mutation, and it normally
appears at the beginning of middle age. For 10 points, name this genetic disease whose symptoms includes
involuntary movements known as its namesake chorea.
ANSWER: Huntington's Disease
This disease is caused by the existence of thirty-six or more CAG repeats in the polyQ region of a namesake
gene. Those excess repeats result in the overproduction of polyglutamine in this disease's namesake protein,
resulting in the creation of inclusion bodies that block the function of neurotransmitters. That mutation
found on the short arm of chromosome 4 causes this disease, one of the few with symptoms that become
more severe with successive generations, including muscle impairment and cognitive decline resulting in
dementia. For ten points, name this lethal degenerative disease which usually presents itself with spasmodic,
uncontrollable movements.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease
This disease is marked by reduced levels of the CREB binding protein, and its namesake protein binds to
Hip1 and is SUMOylated [SUE-moh-EE-late-ed] by rhes. The Westphal variant of this disease onsets at an
especially young age. It is caused by expansion of CAG repeats on chromosome 4, which result in the
production of a glutamine chain called the polyQ tract. For 10 points, name this neurodegenerative
autosomal dominant disease that causes involuntary muscle movements and sets on during middle age.
ANSWER: Huntington's disease
The Lonicera fly is the first known example of this type of creature to arise naturally, and
introgression creates organisms of this type. In plants, one type of these organisms can arise through
sympatric speciation via allopolyploidy. Transgressive phenotypes arise in organisms of this type,
and guinea fowl are able to form interfamilial ones. Their namesake vigor describes their sometimes
superior function relative to their parents. Haldane's rule notes that heterogametic ones have more
frequent (*) sterility. This word is also used to describe genetic crosses between heterozygotes, whose "di"
type gives a 9 to 3 to 3 to 1 phenotypic ratio. For 10 points, give this term used for organisms such as
mules, which result from species interbreeding.
ANSWER: hybrids [prompt "heterozygotes" or "heterozygous" organisms; do NOT accept "species"]
Watson and Crick used the tautomers (TAW-toh-mers) of the DNA bases to maximize this interaction.
Most of Kevlar's high strength comes from pi (PIE) stacking and this type of interaction. This type of
interaction occurs between amino acids n and n+4 in an alpha helix. Ice assumes a honeycomb like
structure to maximize these interactions that account for the high boiling point of water. For 10 points,
name this type of strong intermolecular force that occurs with nitrogen, oxygen, and fluorine and the
lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding
This non-diatomic compound is produced with the help of copper and zinc in several dismutases to avoid
the damaging effects of one of its components. When threatened, bombardier beetles use enzymes to break
down a mixture of hydroquinone and this compound. This compound binds to the heme group of an enzyme
that is extracted from horseradish roots. It is produced from the oxidation of fatty acids in organelles that
are named for this compound. The liver produces an enzyme that converts 40 million molecules of this
compound into water and oxygen per second. For 10 points, name this substance which is broken down by
catalase and has the formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [or H2O2 before mentioned]
An enzyme inhibited by tropolone and disulfiram is responsible for adding this functional group to
dopamine, and the rate-limiting enzyme of bile acid synthesis adds this functional group to
cholesterol and is known as CYP7A. The destruction of hypoxia inducible factors are triggered by
the addition of this functional group by EGLN2, and the addition of this functional group to the 17alpha position of progesterone activates it. An enzyme that adds it is mutated in PKU, and those amino
acids containing this functional group can be phosphorylated. More importantly, this functional group is
added to a bulky amino acid during the synthesis of collagen; that process requires vitamin C. For 10 points,
name this functional group present on modified prolines and the side chains of serine an threonine, with
formula OH.
ANSWER: Hydroxyl or alcohol
Monomitic systems occur when only the generative type of these structures is present. Other types of
them include the elongated and thick walled skeletal type and the multi-branching binding variety. Their
tips are sometimes the site of haustoria (how-STOR-ee-uh) in parasites. Those tips are the source of their
expansion through an organelle known as the spitzenkorper (SPIT-zen-kor-per). Most of them are divided
into cells by barriers called septa. A collection of these structures is known as a mycelium
(my-SEEL-ee-um). For 10 points, name these structures that make up most of a fungus.
ANSWER: hyphae
Monomitic systems occur when only the generative type of these structures is present. Other types of
them include the elongated and thick walled skeletal type and the multi-branching binding variety. Their
tips are sometimes the site of haustoria (how-STOR-ee-uh) in parasites. Those tips are the source of their
expansion through an organelle known as the spitzenkorper (SPIT-zen-kor-per). Most of them are divided
into cells by barriers called septa. A collection of these structures is known as a mycelium
(my-SEEL-ee-um). For 10 points, name these structures that make up most of a fungus.
ANSWER: hyphae
Their growth is directed by an organelle known as the Spitzenkorper, while adjacent ones often form
clamp connections. Species in which only generative ones appear are known as monomitic. Many of
them contain nutrient-absorbing tips known as haustoria, and in coenocytic species hundreds of them
may combine to form a continuous cytoplasmic mass. Typically divided by septa composed of chitin and
collectively onstituting the mycelium, for ten points, identify these branching filaments that are the basic
building blocks of all fungi.
ANSWER: hyphae
Organisms with the coenocytic type resemble plasmodial slime molds, since they are formed by repeated
mitosis without cytokinesis. They may form rings to trap and feed on prey, and Haustoria are a parasitic
type that take nutrients from plants without penetrating their cell membranes. Ascomycetes use specialized
ones, conidiophores, to reproduce, and the arbuscular type grows in response to low soil phosphorus levels
and forms mycorrhizae with plants. Cells in the more common type of them are separated by walls through
which organelles can pass, known as septa. Forming the mycelium, name, for 10 points, these filaments with
chitinous cell walls that make up the bodies of fungi.
ANSWER: hyphae
These structures contain small, granular, dark-staining vesicles known as Woronin bodies, which serve to
seal holes in their dividing walls. Conidophores are modified versions of these structures that are used in
reproduction, and one type of them is modified to penetrate woody plants for nutrients and are known as
haustoria. Individual cells of these are separated by walls permeable to ribosomes and mitochondria, known
as septa. The main components of the mycelium, for 10 points, name these chitinous fibers that form the
growing bodies of fungi.
ANSWER: hyphae
When these structures are wounded, they are patched up by peroxisome-dense double membranous
microbodies named for Woronin. The growth of these structures are controlled by organelles called
spitzenkorpers. These structures are made up of individual cells that are divided by septa. Yeasts are
unicellular, and thus do not have these structures. For 10 points, name these branching filaments that
collectively form the mycelium in fungi.
ANSWER: hyphae [or mycelium before stated]
These structures are flattened in order to form appressoria. The growth of these structures is
directed by an aggregation of microtubules and endosomal vesicles called the spitzenkorper.
Specialized ones with sharp tips used to penetrate hosts are called haustoria, and these structures can
form Hartig nets during symbiosis. Coenocytic ones lack (*) septa, and those belonging to the causative
agent of aspergillosis tend to branch at forty-five degrees. Generative ones are used for reproduction, which
is accomplished by fusing cells together to form a heterokaryon. For 10 points, name these chitinous
structures which interconnect to form a mycelium, small threads that make up the main body of a fungus.
ANSWER: hyphae [sing. hypha]
This structure contains the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is responsible for the synchonization of
slave oscillators and which receives direct input from the retina. Neurons of its arcuate nucleus
terminate in the median eminance and are responsible for the release of dopamine into a certain (*)
portal system. This structure is in part responsible for menstrual cycle regulation by releasing GnRH to
stimulate FSH and LH release. Its paraventricular neurons control the release of oxytocin and vasopressin
and project directly to the posterior pituitary. For 10 points, name this gland located just above the brain
stem that links the nervous and endocrine systems.
ANSWER: hypothalamus
Although it is not the medulla oblongata, this body part's TIDA neurons in its arcuate nucleus regulate
prolactin secretion. This organ produces two nearly identical sulfur-bridge-containing hormones, one of
which acts by increasing the number of aquaporin channels in its target tissue. This organ also synthesizes
somatostatin, which acts antagonistically to another hormone produced here, GHRH. It releases vasopressin
and oxytocin and is also a major source of neurohormones including releasing hormones" whose target
cells lie in the anterior pituitary gland. For ten points, name this region of the brain responsible for
homeostasis.
ANSWER: hypothalamus
One group of cells in this organ secrete NPY; that is this structure's arcuate nucleus. This structure's
ventromedial nucleus responds to increased leptin levels to signal satiety. This structure's pre-optic nucleus
is responsible for triggering the release of sex hormones. Cell bodies in this organ are responsible for
synthesizing oxytocin and ADH. This structure uses the hypophyseal portal system to send releasing factors
to the pituitary gland. For 10 points, name this master regulator of homeostasis, located in the brain.
ANSWER: hypothalamus [prompt on brain]
This structure contains the only cells that produce orexin. A group of cells in this organ fail to
migrate in Kallman's syndrome. A type of amenorrhea induced by excessive exercise is named for
this structure. CART, Agouti-Related Peptide, and NPY are synthesized by a group of cells in this
structure which are activated by ghrelin, are inhibited by leptin, and localize to the (*) arcuate
nucleus. The magnocellular cells in this organ's paraventricular nucleus synthesize oxytocin and
vasopressin, while other signaling factors synthesized here are secreted into the hypophysial portal system
in order to trigger the release of hormones from the pituitary. For 10 points, name this master
neuroendocrine regulatory organ found near the bottom of the brain.
ANSWER: hypothalamus
The fornix passes through this structure before reaching the mammillary bodies. Damage to this
structure can trigger diabetes (*) insipidus and the infundibulum connects this structure to the
neurohypophysis. Its region located above the optic chiasm contains the suprachiasmatic nucleus and
paraventricular nucleus, which secretes vasopressin and oxytocin. For 10 points, name this portion of the
diencephalon that maintains homeostasis, circadian rhythms, and body temperature.
ANSWER: hypothalamus
One region in this structure is the site of BMAL-1-CLOCK dimerization and is located above the optic
chiasm. The lateral and posterior portions of this structure produce orexins, deficits of which can lead to
narcolepsy. The hypophyseal portal system connects this structure to the HPA axis. Contained in the
diencephalon, it releases GHRH and CRH, as well as gonadotropin-releasing hormone, somatostatin,
oxytocin, and vasopressin. It connects the nervous and endocrine systems by linking to the pituitary gland,
and controls hunger, thirst, and homeostasis. For 10 points, name this brain region located beneath the
thalamus.
ANSWER: hypothalamus
This system includes a protein whose great variety is guaranteed by V(D)J recombination. Those proteins
are synthesized by cells of this system that have receptors IL-7 and CD19 and come in major forms like
"plasma" and "memory." This system includes mast cells and granulocytes (GRAN-yoo-low-sites) that stain
a characteristic brick-red, called eosinophils (ee-oh-SIN-uh-filz). Many cells of this system are transported
through the lymph, and this system's cells include macrophages (MAK-row-fay-jez), as well as several types
of B cells. For 10 points, name this system that contains white blood cells.
ANSWER: immune system [accept equivalents]
One set of proteins involved in acquiring this condition was discovered by Nomura and named after a
Drosophila gene; those proteins triggered by adjuvants are toll-like receptors. Wright and Douglas
discovered opsonins, part of the humoral form of this condition. The Hoskins effect, which inhibits this
condition against a new agent, results after this has developed against a similar agent and is also called
original antigenic sin. A natural form of this arises from prior exposure, and artificially-acquired forms of
this condition include vaccination. For 10 points, name this condition in which an organism is sufficiently
defended to avoid disease.
ANSWER: immunity [accept equivalents]
A proposed mechanism for its occurrence involves methylation of a CpG dinucleotide. This
phenomenon has been linked to Prader-Willi and (*) Angelman syndromes and it evolutionary origins
are in the struggle for control o of resource expenditure during pregnancy. In some insect species, entire
parental chromosomes can be eliminated through this process. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in
which an epigenetic marker regulates the allelic expression of a gene depending on its maternal or paternal
origin.
ANSWER: genomic imprinting (prompt on epigenetic mechanism)
One form of this phenomenon is caused by the methylation of CpG dinucleotide; the deletion of the same
gene on chromosome 15 can lead to either Prader-Willi syndrome or Angelman syndrome because of that
"genomic" form of this effect. Westermarck effect is a reverse form of this effect, and its most famous form
was studied in greylag geese by Konrad Lorenz. For 10 points, what phenomenon is the time-sensitive rapid
learning by young individuals, often associated with learning who the parent is?
ANSWER: genomic imprinting
This process is observed almost entirely in precocial species, though it has been observed in k-selected fish
like the convict cichlid [SIK-lihd]. The influence of this process on mate selection is evident in zebra
finches, whose females prefer males with head ornamentation resembling their fathers'. The failure of
sandhill cranes to serve as effective surrogates to whooping cranes is explained by this process, whose key
stimulus was found to be movement for the graylag geese studied by Konrad Lorenz. Zookeepers take
advantage of this learning mechanism to hand-rear baby mammals, while ultralight aircraft pilots have used
it to teach endangered birds to migrate. Explaining why chicks constantly follow a hen and occurring only
during a brief, critical period, named this form of learning in which young animals develop a long-lasting
attachment to a nearby object or individual, thereafter recognized as their "mother".
ANSWER: filial imprinting [accept word forms]
NOEY2 is a suppressor gene on chromosome 1 subject to this phenomenon, which puts certain individuals
at a greater risk for breast cancer. Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes, the latter of which is a happy
puppet disorder, are caused by an abnormal form of this on chromosome 15, suggesting that the parent
DNA was not properly methylated. For 10 points, name this genomic occurrence where some genetic
expression is parent-specific, which shares its name with an event studied by Konrad Lorenz, the period of
rapid learning experienced by newborns.
ANSWER: genomic imprinting
Most traits governed by this principle are the result of haplo-insufficiency, and when production of
hexosaminidase A [heks-o-SA-min-ee-dase A] is considered, Tay-Sachs disease shows this pattern of
inheritance. Time to flowering was the only pea plant trait of this type studied by Mendel, and baritone
voice and wavy hair are among the few human phenotypes (FEE-noh-"type") to result from it. People with
sickle-cell trait, but not sickle-cell disease, show this kind of phenotype, which also results when red and
white four o'clock plants are crossed. Often exemplified by the Palomino (pa-loh-MEE-no) horse and pink
snapdragons, name this pattern of inheritance in which a heterozygous offspring displays a trait in between
those of its dominant and recessive parents.
ANSWER: incomplete dominance [accept incompletely dominant or semi-dominance; prompt on blending; prompt on heterozygous before it is mentioned; do not prompt on "dominance" or "dominant"]
Viability at this stage is measured on a zero to ten scale that measures things like grimace and activity.
This stage is marked by the closing of the foramen ovale (FORE-oh-men oh-VAH-lay) and the ductus
arteriosus. It is characterized by an immature liver and high lactase activity. The Apgar score evaluates
individuals at this stage, during which the effects of teratogens (teh-RAT-oh-jenz) and congenital defects
first become apparent. For 10 points, name this stage that immediately follows birth.
ANSWER: infant [or newborn; or neonatal stage; or neonate; accept word forms for any correct answer; prompt on baby or equivalents; do not accept "fetus"]
One group of compounds whose concentrations rise in response to this process includes serum
amyloid A and C-reactive protein--those are APRs. This process is stimulated when C3a and C5a
cause one type of cell to degranulate. One class of drugs used to inhibit this process work by
inhibiting a cyclo-oxygenase which seeks to convert arachidonic acid into a type of eicosanoid known
as the prostaglandins. This process is initiated when (*) IgE binds to mast cells, prompting the release
of histamine. Inhibited by NSAIDs and coming in "acute" and "chronic" types, this process leads to airway
constriction in asthmatics, and it is a major component of an allergic reaction. For 10 points, name this
process which can cause tissues to turn red and swell up.
ANSWER: inflammation [accept word forms like "the inflammatory response," prompt on "allergies," prompt on "shock" or "septic shock"]
This pathogen's PB1 gene encodes both a polymerase and an apoptosis-inducing protein. One type of
it does not possess M2 ion channels and thus cannot be treated by amantadine, and it can kill healthy,
typically disease-resistant populations by causing cytokine storm. Its binding to sialic acid residues on
the surface of epithelial cells is inhibited by treatments for it like (*) oseltamivir. This pathogen is
classified according to which of sixteen hemagglutinin and nine neuraminidase glycoproteins are expressed
on its surface, such as the possibly pandemic H5N1. For 10 points, name this disease with strains commonly
called its "swine" and "avian" types.
ANSWER: influenza
The Mx1 protein in macrophages appears to specifically exist to respond to this pathogen. The B
form of this pathogen lacks an M2 proton channel, making that form immune to amantadine. This
virus can undergo reassortment since it contains multiple distinct negative-sense RNA segments
which can be exchanged when multiple strains of it coexist in a given cell. One surface glycoprotein
found on these orthomyxoviruses cleaves sialic acids from newly-synthesized virions, enabling their escape
from the cell. That protein, which is inhibited by drugs like oseltamivir, has nine known forms and is
neuraminidase. This virus's hemagglutinin protein can only be cleaved by proteases in the respiratory tract.
For 10 points, name this virus whose H1N1 form caused a pandemic in 1918.
ANSWER: influenza virus
Some drugs for this disease target the M2 proton channel. Other drugs used to treat it include zanamivir
[zah-NAM-ih-veer] and oseltamivir [oh-sel-TAM-ih-veer]. Composed of eight segments of single-stranded
RNA, this disease has subtypes designated by a specific combination of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase
proteins. Antigenic drift occurs in this disease, which is part of the Ortho-myxo-viridae family. A pandemic
caused by this disease in 1918 killed more than 20 million people. For 10 points, name this virus whose
types include Spanish, swine and avian.
ANSWER: flu [or influenza; or Influenzavirus A; accept more specific answers]
These viruses share a family with infectious salmon anemia virus and thogotovirus. Their genome encodes
the M2 ion transporter protein, which is the target of amantadine and is responsible for uncoating the virus
upon infection. Human forms of these viruses have a lysine residue at position 627 of its PB2 protein, and
these viruses consist of 7 or 8 different negative-sense RNA that can reassort in a carrier. Zanamvir and
ostelamvir interferes with these viruses ability to bind to and process sialic acid residues on cell surfaces,
which is performed by hemagglutinin and neuraminidase, respectively. Usually classified using an H-x-N-y
notation, and occurring in Moscow, Hong Kong, and Spanish varieties, FTP, name these orthomyxoviridae
which cause the flu.
ANSWER: Influenza virus (Accept more specific answers, eg "Spanish flu", "Avian flu" until "reassort" and "Orthomyxoviridae" until mention)
One protein on the surface of this virus cleaves sialic acid residues, and this virus removes its envelope
by moving protons through its M2 channel. Among the treatments for this virus are amantidine and the
neuraminidase inhibitor zanamivir. The 'A' form of this virus is divided into serotypes that follow the
formula HxNx, such as H5N1 and H1N1. For 10 points, name this viral infection whose symptoms are
similar to the common cold and whose 1918 "Spanish" pandemic killed over 50 million people.
ANSWER: influenza
Oseltamivir is a treatment for this virus, whose genome's eight segments can undergo reassortment.
This virus, a member of family Orthomyxoviridae, can trigger upper respiratory conditions like croup
and cause tissue damage in the (*) lungs. The types of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins are used
to name strains of this virus, like the H5N1 strain. For 10 points, name this common virus that has bird and
swine varieties.
ANSWER: Influenza virus (accept the flu virus)
Viruses causing this disease are in family Orthomyxoviridae (OR-tho-MIX-oh-VEER-ih-day). One of
those viruses has antigenic shifts, an unpredictable recombination of surface proteins, making it hard to
make true vaccines for this disease. Those viruses are classified by the types of hemagglutinins
(HE-muh-GLUE-tin-ins) and neuraminidases (NOOR-uh-MIN-ih-day-sez) in their envelopes, making
strains such as H3N2 and H2N1. For 10 points, name this disease for which people are often vaccinated in
the fall.
ANSWER: influenza
The receptor for this pathogen to bind to other cells is a sugar called sialic acid. Drugs used to treat this
pathogen include oseltamivir and others which block this virus's M2 surface channel, while a common
vaccine used to fight it is TIV. A 1957 epidemic was caused by the H2N2 form of this virus, and a more
recent outbreak was instigated by its original host animal, pigs. Although it can result in pneumonia, its
most common symptoms include fever, chills, muscle aches, and irritation of nasal tissue. For ten points,
name this virus which caused a "Spanish" outbreak in 1918.
ANSWER: influenza (prompt on "u" or "u virus")
A peptide derived from this virus with the sequence Y-P-Y-D-V-P-D-Y-A is commonly used for protein
purification. This virus requires the M2 channel for uncoating. It undergoes antigenic shift when its 8 RNA
strands shuffle, and it has neuraminidase (NUHR-am-in-uh-dayse) and hemagglutinin on its surface.
Oseltamivir is a treatment for this virus. For 10 points, name this virus that comes in swine, bird, and
Spanish varieties and causes a cold-like illness.
ANSWER: influenza virus [or flu virus]
The human disease causing virus is found in genus Orthomyxoviridae. Like some forms of smallpox,
virulent forms of this virus can trigger a cytokine storm. This virus is combated by amantadine and
oseltamivir. Variants in this virus's Hemagglutinin and Neuraminidase components leads the the HN
classification of it. An example of such a classification would be H1N1 which can be of avian or swine
origin. For 10 points, name this virus that causes the flu.
ANSWER: influenza virus [prompt on flu]
These causative agents can attach due to interactions between spike proteins and sialic acid residues on
epithelial cells, causing hemagglutination; the drug oseltamivir inhibits such binding. These viruses are in
the (*) Orthomyxoviridae family and are classified by the arrangement of hemaglutinin and neuraminidase
glycoproteins on their surfaces. With genomes of eight single-stranded RNA segments, there are A, B, and
C types of these viruses. Including serotypes such as H5N1 and H1N1, for 10 points, name this group of
viruses causing pandemics such as the "Spanish" and recent "swine" variants.
ANSWER: influenzavirus or flu
Infection with these microbes was once treated with an M2 ion channel inhibitor called amantadine. They
have an eight-segment negative-strand RNA genome, pieces of which can mix among infected cells to
generate novel genomes in a process called antigenic shift. Cleavage of sialic acid residues leading to
release of this virus from the cell can be inhibited by neuraminidase inhibitors zanamivir and oseltamivir.
Hemagglutinin and neuraminidase are used to identify varieties of this virus, such as the recent H1N1 strain.
For 10 points, name these microbes from the family Orthomixyviridae whose avian and swine varieties are
major public health concerns.
ANSWER: influenza virus
The recently-discovered F16 antibody binds to all 16 subtypes of a protein expressed by this
pathogen. During infection, this pathogen's matrix protein M1 dissociates from the ribonucleoprotein
after M2 proton channel activity lowers the pH. Another protein expressed by this pathogen is
cleaved by proteases into two forms, one of which extends a triple alpha helix to the endosomal
membrane. This pathogen, whose different strains are all members of Orthomyxoviridae, binds to
sialic acid-rich sites. Different subtypes of its surface proteins (*) hemagglutinin and neuraminidase are
used for classification. Cold temperatures contribute to its spread during its namesake "season" in winter.
For 10 points, name this virus whose H1N1 "swine" strain emerged in 2009.
ANSWER: influenza virus [accept Orthomyxoviridae before mention]
This pathogen's genome exists as eight single-stranded pieces of RNA. One of its surface proteins helps it
bind to the host cell, while another digests sialic acid to facilitate the release of newly replicated viruses.
Those proteins are hemagglutinin and neur-aminidase, the different types of which determine the
classification of any given strain. Classified as type A, B, or C, it belongs to the family ortho-myxoviridae.
Some types include H5N1 and H1N1. For 10 points, name this virus responsible for the "Spanish," "avian,"
and "swine" varieties of its namesake disease.
ANSWER: influenza viruses
The pathogenesis of this human disease is studied in ferrets. One drug that combats this disease prevents a
certain protein from binding to sialic acid; that drug is oseltamivir. A recently-developed and annuallymodified vaccine for this disease, uses live, inactivated orthomyxovirions, is trivalent, and is produced as a
nasal spray. Antigenic drift of this virus's hemagglutinin and neuraminidase surface proteins is responsible
for its high mutation rate, and those proteins give rise to serotype names like H5N1. For 10 points, identify
this disease whose "Spanish" strain caused a 1918 pandemic, for which many people are vaccinated each
winter.
ANSWER: influenza [or Influenzavirus]
One gene encoded by this virus has an H274Y mutation that renders it drug-resistant. An alternate
reading frame of its PB1 gene encodes a protein that interacts with mitrochondrial pore components.
The uncoating of this virus requires the M2 channel, which is inhibited by amantadine. The genome
of this agent contains eight negative-sense RNA strands, which allows it to recombine and (*) jump
species during a co-infection. Its genome encodes a pair of surface proteins that bind to and cleave sialic
acid, known as hemagglutinin and neuraminidase. This virus, which is targeted by zanamvir and
oseltamivir, undergoes antigenic drift, resulting in a new strain every year. For 10 points, name this
orthomyxovirus that causes a yearly swath of cold-like illnesses.
ANSWER: Influenza
The relative susceptibility of this agent to the MF59 adjuvant has caused some controversy. The
classic example of antigenic shift concerns their mixture. They bind to a cell as a result of the
interactions of sialic (SAHY-al-ick) acid and the proteins hemagglutinin (HEEM-uhg-gloot-in-in) and
neuraminidase (NYOOR-uh-min-uh-dase). From the family orthomyxoviridae
(AWR-thuh-micks-oh-veer-ih-day), their "A" subtype, not "B" or "C," contains the (*) H1N1 strain.
For 10 points, name these viruses that cause a disease with "Spanish," "avian," and "swine" types.
ANSWER: influenza viruses [accept ortomyxoviridae before mentioned]
An S31N mutation on the gene encoding their M2 proton pump makes these entities resistant to drugs such
as rimantadine and amantadine. Certain proteins on their surfaces allow them to bind to sialic acid residues
and facilitate their entry into host cells, those being their hemagglutinin domains. Belonging to the family
orthomyxoviridae, their virulence is inhibited by zanamivir and oseltamivir, and these infectious agents are
identified by the Hx Ny nomenclature, such as the H5N1 that spread from birds. For 10 points, identify
these viruses responsible for pandemics such as the "Hong Kong," "Spanish", and recent "Swine" variants.
ANSWER: influenza viruses [or flu viruses; prompt on viruses]
This phenomenon is employed in the treatment of sleeping sickness using DFMO, an ornithine
analogue. When feedback from another binding event causes this, allosteric effects explain the
sigmoidal shape of the Michaelis-Menten plot. This phenomenon exists in competitive, noncompetitive,
and irreversible varieties, and it often involves the occupation of an active site, which prevents
substrates from binding. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that prevents reactions from being
accelerated by protein catalysts.
ANSWER: enzyme inhibition
In 2003 Eismann et al. showed that a few species in this class were capable of feeling pain. Species of this
class are primary carriers of the diseases Pogosta, African sleeping sickness, and the plague. Extinct orders
of this class include Archodonata and Megasceptora. Extant orders of this class include Lepidoptera,
Coleoptera, and Hymenoptera. The common lab animal Drosophila melanogaster is a member of this class.
For 10 points, name this class of six-legged arthropods that includes butterflies and fruit flies.
ANSWER: insects [or insecta]
It's not Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, but mutations at codon 178 on the PRNP gene can cause an inherited
variant of this disease. Tasimelteon and ramelteon can be used to treat it by acting on the suprachiasmatic
nucleus. A 2012 paper published by Dizon and Cheng established the usefulness of the Internet in treating
this disease. The pineal gland synthesizes a hormone that affects this disorder; that hormone is melatonin,
which helps control circadian rhythms. The transient variety of this disease lasts less than a week and is
commonly caused by stress. This condition is often confused with narcolepsy, though narcoleptics tend to
get much more sleep than suffers of this condition. Name this condition in which a person has difficulty
going to sleep, or cannot sleep at all.
ANSWER: insomnia
Cancer of the cells producing this hormone can be treated with streptozotocin, and those cells release this
hormone after the closing of a potassium channel. This hormone is activated after the cleaving off of a
C-peptide, and it works by binding to a tyrosine kinase receptor. This hormone, released from the beta cells
of the islets of Langerhans, promotes the synthesis of glycogen and accelerates glycolysis, and is typically
released after a meal. For 10 points, name this pancreatic hormone that decreases blood sugar levels, which
is deficient in diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
An artificial form of this protein contains a myristic acid molecule bound to lysine B29. Mice
with a particular mutation in carboxypeptidase E exhibit increased levels of the "pro-" form of
this protein. This protein's signaling leads to the closure of the Kir6.2 potassium channel, which
is also called the sulfonyurea receptor. Tumors secreting it can be diagnosed using a 72-hour
fast. A disease in which this protein is lacking in the blood is caused by autoantibodies to
glutamic acid decarboxylase. Measuring the C-peptide level is a way of distinguishing between
artificial and natural forms of this hormone, which decreases the flux of fatty acids from adipose
tissue and inhibits gluconeogenesis. For 10 points, name this protein produced in the beta cells of
the islets of Langerhans, whose secretion or function is impaired in diabetics.
ANSWER: insulin
This molecule was originally isolated by Macleod and Banting, and has a zinc ion center. Aiding the
expression of PFK 2, this protein decreases gluconeogenesis and increases glycogen synthesis. This
hormone is produced by beta cells in the islets of Langerhans, located in the pancreas. For 10 points, name
this hormone which decreases the blood sugar level, is antagonistic to glucagon, and whose deficiency is the
cause of diabetes mellitus.
ANSWER: insulin
Novolin and Humulin are two commercial varieties of this hormone produced by E. coli and yeast
respectively. This molecule starts a signaling cascade in which PI3K activates PDK1 and then the
serine kinase AKT which upregulates glycogen synthesis, protein synthesis, and active transport of
(*) glucose. Its alpha and beta subunit are connected by two disulfide bridges, and it is stored as a
hexamer. This hormone opposes glucagon, and like amylin this hormone is secreted by beta cells in the
islets of Langerhans. For 10 points, name this hormone that reduces blood glucose levels often taken by
diabetics.
ANSWER: Insulin
A resistance to this hormone can be caused by polycystic ovary syndrome. The stress hormone
norephinephrine inhibits it by binding to alpha-2 receptors. It increases hydrochloric acid secretion by
parietal cells, lowers blood potassium levels, and causes cells to absorb more amino acids, increasing
protein synthesis. Brain cells do not require it, ensuring that they will have a constant supply of fuel. It is
produced by beta cells in the islets of Langerhans, and simulates body cells to increase blood glucose
absorption, opposing the action of glucagon. For 10 points, name this hormone, a deficiency of which
causes diabetes mellitus.
ANSWER: insulin
This compound is synthesized by prohormone convertases 1 and 2 acting upon a precursor molecule.
Regulatory sequences on the gene that codes for this compound bind to the Pdx1, NeuroD, and MafA
transcription factors. Polycystic ovary syndrome is caused by resistance to it, and its activation
involves the excision of the C-peptide. Levels of this compound fluctuate every three to six minutes in
the body, and (*) glucagon opposes its action. This compound is released by beta cells in the islets of
Langerhans in the pancreas. For 10 points, name this hormone which controls blood sugar levels and which
is deficient in diabetic patients.
ANSWER: insulin
Tumors that secrete this hormone are treated with streptozocin. GLP-1 triggers its release, and
analogues of it include NPH and Detemir. Six molecules of this hormone are coordinated to zinc in a
vesicle. It leads to increased GLUT transporter activity in target tissues through tyrosine kinase
activation. By activating PP2A, this molecule inhibits triglyceride breakdown, and in the liver it
stimulates glycogen formation. One common disease sees peripheral tissues become (*) resistant to this
hormone, which is secreted from the beta cells of the islets of Langerhans. This hormone's action opposes
that of glucagon and serves to decrease blood glucose. For 10 points, name this hormone secreted from the
pancreas, whose levels are insufficient in diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
A precursor of this molecule is made up of three distinct portions, one of which is cleaved off by a
peptidase. This molecule's receptor functions as a tyrosine kinase. A set of growth factors alternatively
called somatomedins get their name because they are structurally similar to this molecule. This molecule
indirectly promotes fatty acid synthesis because the liver has an upper limit on the amount of glycogen it
can store. Binding of this molecule to its receptor causes the movement of glucose transporters to the cell
membrane. Glucagon has the opposite effect as this molecule. For 10 points, name this hormone produced
in the Islets of Langerhans, whose production or reception is faulty in diabetics.
ANSWER: insulin [accept insulin-like growth factors]
The family that contains this protein also contains a protein suspected to soften the pubis symphysis, which
peaks during the first trimester of pregnancy and at delivery. Regulatory sequences of the gene that codes
for this protein include MafA and the CAAT enhancer binding element, and NeuroD1 regulates its
synthesis. The release of this hormone occurs in a three- to six-minute rhythm, and HGH induces the liver to
secrete one of a family of growth factors with sequence similarity to it. This hormone is released following
IP3 binding to the ER, triggering calcium release. For 10 points, name this hormone, secreted by the beta
cells in the pancreas, which induces tissues to take up glucose and is administered to sufferers of diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
Modified forms of this hormone include aspart, lispro, and glargine, and six molecules of this
hormone coordinate to a zinc ion in a vesicle. This hormone results in increased GLUT4 expression
in target tissue, and increases the rate of glycogen synthesis and fat storage. This hormone is released
from the beta cells of the islets of (*) Langerhans, and opposes the action of glucagon (GLUE-kah-gohn).
For 10 points, name this hormone which is often deficient in diabetics and is responsible for lowering blood
sugar.
ANSWER: insulin
This compound promotes the dephosphorylation and activation of enzyme HMG-CoA to favor cholesterol
synthesis and a phenylalanine for leucine substitution at residue B25 results in its "Chicago" variety. Its
biosynthesis involves an excision of the C-peptide, and the compound functions by binding to tyrosine
kinase receptors on cell surfaces. Sanger's improvement upon the methods of Edman degradation involved
its sequencing, and its production occurs primarily in beta cells on the islets of langerhans. For ten points,
name this pancreatic counterpart of glucagon used to regulate blood sugar, deficiencies of which are found
in sufferers of diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
Production of this hormone oscillates with a period of 3-6 minutes, and Frederick Sanger earned his first
Nobel Prize for sequencing it. Its uptake stimulates synthesis of fatty acids and glycogen, and it is produced
in beta cells in the islets of Langerhans. This peptide hormone which stimulates glucose uptake acts in
opposition to glucagon, another pancreatic hormone. For 10 points, name this hormone that is deficient in
type I diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
A growth factor named after this substance has been shown to increase fat cell recruitment. Receptors of
this substance are normally stored as tetramers whose two kinase domains come together in the presence of
this substance. Banting and Best isolate an active form of this substance by ligating a certain duct in dogs.
High levels of this substance cause the movement of GLUT4 proteins to cell membranes. The autoimmune
destruction of a body's beta cells results in one disease associated with this hormone, and this hormone
counteracts the effect of glucagon. For 10 points, name this hormone produced in the Islets of Langerhans
that is lacking in diabetics.
ANSWER: insulin [accept insulin like growth factor until "Banting"]
This compound, consisting of A and B chains linked together, can be activated after removal of the C
peptide component to promote the dephosphorylation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase. When it binds to certain
tyrosine kinase receptors, GLUT-1 transporters are integrated into the plasma membrane to allow for the
increased trafficking of glucose. Glucagon acts as an antagonist to this enzyme made in beta cells. FTP,
name this hormone critical for the regulation of blood sugar levels, whose deficiency results in diabetes
mellitus.
ANSWER: insulin
The concentration of a C peptide formed during synthesis of this molecule is often used to estimate the
level of this hormone's secretion. Unlike a molecule produced by alpha cells, secretion of this hormone is
inhibited by the sympathetic nervous system. It is produced by beta cells in the islets of Langerhans in
response to high plasma glucose levels. For 10 points, name this hormone that is at abnormally low levels
in individuals with Type I diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
The Somogyi effect is caused by an abundance of this hormone during sleep, and it is released in reaction to
the presence of IP3 and the activation of the GLUT2 protein. Consisting of three short helices, it has effects
such as an increase of glycogen synthesis and a decrease in blood sugar levels, as it increases cellular
uptake of glucose. For 10 points, name this hormone produced in the beta cells of the pancreatic islets of
Langerhans, a lack of which causes type 1 diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
Calcium is released after this substance is released following the binding of IP3 to the endoplasmic
reticulum. Frederick Sanger used trypsin to determine the structure of this hormone, which binds to its
receptor to increase glycogen synthesis. It is produced in the beta cells of the Islets of Langerhans in the
pancreas. It is opposed by glucagon, which performs the opposite effect by increasing blood glucose levels.
For 10 points, name this hormone lacked by sufferers of diabetes mellitus.
ANSWER: insulin
This substance inhibits the conversion of triglycerides to fatty acids in adipose tissue, and commercial forms
of this substance include Actrapid ["act rapid"]. Along with amylin, this hormone is produced in the beta
cells of the islets of Langerhans, which are found on the pancreas. Glucagon counteracts this hormone, and
increased concentrations of this hormone result in the activation of proteins that transport glucose over cell
membranes. For 10 points, name this hormone which is lacking in people with diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
This molecule's biosynthesis requires the removal of the c-peptide. Its namesake "growth factors" are
located in the p13 and p15 subsections of chromosome 11. In the body, the concentration of this hormone
oscillates with a period of three to six minutes before returning to base levels. Glucagon counteracts the
effects of this hormone, the lack of which causes hyperglycemia. It is produced by the beta cells of the islets
of Langerhans in the pancreas. For 10 points, name this mammalian hormone that regulates the levels of
glucose in the body, which some diabetics must inject.
ANSWER: insulin
The expression of this protein is partly controlled by the binding of NeuroD1 and Par1, and its secretion is
inhibited by SIRT4, which ADP-ribosylates glutamate dehydrogenase. Artificial versions of it include
Glargine and Lispro versions, and its structure consists of a central zinc ion coordinated to histidine
residues in a hexamer. Originally extracted by Banting and Macleod, this hormone partly operates by
upregulating the translocation of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane. By up-regulating protein kinase B and
PFK-2, this hormone promotes glycogen synthesis and opposes gluconeogenesis. Antagonistic to glucagon,
FTP, name this peptide hormone secreted from the beta cells of the Islets of Langerhans, responsible for
lowering blood sugar.
ANSWER: Insulin
Resistance to it is present in many cases of polycystic ovary syndrome as well as in "Syndrome X". The
radioimmunoassay for it was developed by Rosalyn Yalow, years after Frederick Sanger determined its
primary structure. It is often taken subcutaneously using namesake "pens", and usually degrades 71
minutes after its release from beta cells. Activation of it results in glycogen absorption, and it thus
opposes the effects of glucagon. For 10 points, name this hormone which is secreted in the pancreas
and is disturbed by diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
Resistance to this chemical is highly correlated with polycystic ovary syndrome. A modification of
this compound that has undergone a glycine-asparagine substitution and had two arganines added to
its B chain is commercially important because it readily hexamerizes and this chemical is stored as an
inactive hexamer. This signal molecule is activated by removal of its (*) C peptide component to
promote the dephosphorylation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase. When this enzyme binds to its tyrosine kinase
receptor, GLUT's are activated to facilitate trans-membrane import of a substance whose export is
facilitated by this hormone's agonist, glucagon. For 10 points, name this hormone extracted by Frederick
Banting that regulates blood sugar levels.
ANSWER: insulin
Growth hormones with a sequence similar to this have an axis that promotes cell proliferation.
This hormone is secreted along with a cleaved C-peptide. Frederick Sanger was awarded the Nobel
Prize for determining the structure of this protein. It is produced by the (*) beta cells of the Islets of
Langerhans, and it is the antagonist hormone to glucagon (GLOO-kah-gone). For 10 points, name this
hormone that stimulates the uptake of glucose, used to treat diabetes patients.
ANSWER: insulin
With a half-life of only 71 minutes, this hormone degrades quickly but is not required by the brain.
Frederick Banting discovered this hormone whose primary structure of two polypeptide chains was
determined by Frederick (*) Sanger. It is produced in the beta cells of the islets of Langerhans, and works
with glucagon to maintain stable blood sugar levels. For 10 points, name this pancreatic hormone, a
deficiency of which causes diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
The receptor for this hormone is hetero-tetrameric tyrosine kinase which has its subunits linked via disulfide
bonds, and that receptor recruits the IRS adaptor protein to activate PI3 kinase. Signaling by this molecule
also results in recruitment of Glut4 transporters to the cell membrane, and its amino acid sequence was
determined by Frederick Sanger. This molecule activates a pathway which results in increased storage of
blood glucose in the form of glycogen. For 10 points, identify this molecule released by beta cells of the
islets of Langerhans, whose signaling is defective in patients suffering from diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
Polycystic ovary syndrome can cause a resistance to this hormone, and the enzyme trypsin was used to
determine the structure of this hormone by Frederick Sanger. This hormone activates hexokinase and
inhibits glucose-six-phosphate in the liver, which increases the phosphorylation of glucose. Increased
concentrations of this hormone results in the activation of proteins that transport glucose across cell
membranes, and the underproduction of this hormone can lead to high blood pressure. For 10 points, name
this hormone produced by the beta cells in the pancreas that is lacking in people with diabetes.
ANSWER: Insulin
In order to form this compound, PC1, PC2, and carboxypeptidase E must remove the C peptide portion.
This hormone is released when an increased ATP to ADP ratio is sensed, which leads to the closing of
potassium channels. This causes depolarization of the cell, leading to an increase in calcium levels and
secretory vesicle release of this hormone. When this hormone binds to its receptor, it activates the PKB
pathway, leading to more synthesis of glycogen in muscle and fat cells. For 10 points, name this hormone
that is secreted by the beta cells in the islets of Langerhans and whose lack of activity is linked to diabetes.
ANSWER: insulin
The RGD domain of von Willebrand factor binds to one of these proteins, and the anti-angiogenic
factor cilengitide binds to one of these. The receptor for adenovirus is one of these molecules.
Glanzmann's Thrombasthenia is caused by a defect in one of these proteins. The anticoagulant
monoclonal antibody abciximab attacks one of these proteins, which binds to fibrinogen in an ADPdependent manner. The N-termini of their alpha-subunits bind to divalent cations. The binding of
talin binds to and activates these proteins, which can trigger the activity of focal adhesion kinases.
These heavily glycosylated proteins consist of a heterodimer of an alpha and beta subunit, which bind to
collagen and other extracellular matrix components. For 10 points, name these cell surface proteins named
for the fact that they are integral to the cell membrane.
ANSWER: Integrins (prompt on glycoproteins)
At the end of this phase, proteins like ATM and ATR check for DNA damage, and the concentration of a
complex called maturation-promoting factor increases. Progress through this phase is governed by relative
concentrations of CDKs and cyclins. During this phase, in which the nuclear membrane remains intact, a
cell may enter the quiescent G0 phase at the restriction point. This phase contains two gap phases separated
by a synthesis phase, during which DNA is replicated. For 10 points, name this phase of the cell cycle in
which a cell spends its time when not performing mitosis.
ANSWER: interphase [accept G1 phase or S phase or G2 phase until "two gap phases" is read]
One important step during this phase sees CKI-p16 inhibit CDK4/6; when this is overcome, cyclin E
interacts with CDK2 to being the next step of this phase. Another step in this phase sees MPF activate
CDK to begin the phase after this one. Those two steps are the G1 and G2 checkpoints. Another stage
that occurs during this period sees the formation of two sister chromatids and is known as S phase. For
10 points, name this phase that occupies the majority of the cell's life cycle, the stage in which there is
no cell division through mitosis.
ANSWER: interphase
The initial part of this phase involves the accumulation of growth factors, cyclin-dependent kinases,
and S-promoting factor. This process is characterized by successive activity of DNA helicase and
polymerase, resulting in the formation of successful copies of the genome in a "semiconservative"
process. Once the G2 stage of this phase is completed, the cell proceeds to the M phase. For 10 points,
name this precursor phase to mitosis in which DNA replication occurs.
ANSWER: interphase [prompt on "cell cycle"]
According to the Lynch model, these entities are weeded out in organism with large population sizes.
They can be located using the GU-AG rule and their eucaryal tRNA variety is located in the anticodon loop between nucleotides 37 and 38. Group II examples possess (*) open reading frame regions
that code for maturase proteins, which facilitate their own ribozyme activity. Although they are present in
chloroplast tRNA genes, these regions are typically not present within prokaryotic DNA. For 10 points-
name these non-coding regions of DNA that are removed from precursor mRNA through splicing.
ANSWER: introns
Trypanosomes deal with these entities in a mechanism involving the SL molecule, and that mechanism
typically involves BBP binding to these entities. During their elimination, they associated with U6 and U2
particles, unlike the U12-mediated elimination of them seen in many mammals. They are typically flanked
by GU and AG regions, and attachment of various small nuclear RNPs around these facilitates the
formation of a lariat structure when phosphodiester bonds are generated between their ends in the
spliceosome. That process removes these sequences to form mature RNA. For 10 points, name these noncoding regions within DNA.
ANSWER: introns or intragenic region or intervening sequence
Carolus Linnaeus' original taxonomy of living organisms divided this group of animals into two categories:
worms and insects. However, as this group encompasses 95% of the kingdom Animalia, more divisions
including Rotifera, Nemertea, Cnidaria, and Arthropoda having since been created. Members of this group
have only one copy of the Hox genes and are found in all animal subpylums except the Craniata subpylum
of Chordata. FTP, name this category of animals that have no backbone.
ANSWER: invertebrates
A lack of this element in the diet or a lack of selenium [seh-LEEN-ee-um] can ruin growth plates of bones,
which is called Kashin-Beck disease. Its lack also can lead to the stunted physical and mental growth known
as cretinism [KREET-in-ism]. Those deficiencies are more common in mountain regions because this
element is often ingested through seafood, especially kelp. In order to prevent deficiencies, this element
often is added to salt. Name this element important in thyroid hormones, a lack of which can lead to a
swelling of the neck called goiter.
ANSWER: iodine or I
This element forms a namesake cycle with sulfur whose net reactant is water and net products are
hydrogen gas and oxygen gas. A hormone that includes this element is thyroxine (thy-ROX-een), which
loses one atom of this element to yield its active form. Preparations of this element include Lugol's solution,
and its presence in the diet prevents goiter. For 10 points, name this halogen often used as a test for starch
and in a disinfecting agent, which on the periodic table appears below bromine but above astatine.
ANSWER: iodine
Dess and Martin showed the use of a hypervalent form of this element, in which it is bound to three acetoxy
groups, in the oxidation of alcohols into aldehydes. Glycogen is stained brown by Lugol's solution, which
contains the molecular form of this element with its potassium salt, and a similar combination is also used as
a mordant for Gram's stains. A complex of poly-vinyl-pyrro-lidone and this element is commonly used as a
disinfectant, and is called Betadine. Selenium dependent enzymes convert hormones containing this
element from the T4 to the T3 form, and For 10 points, identify this element which is essential for the
secretion of thyroxine, and whose deficiency leads to goitre.
ANSWER: iodine [or I]
Picrotoxin inhibits one example of this class of proteins. The S4 helix found in one family of these proteins
modulates the proteins' function in response to the environment. A defect in one of these proteins leads to
Congenital myotonia. Cyclic nucleotides control the CNG type of these proteins. Capsaicin works by
binding to a member of the TRP family of these proteins. When activated, Ryanodine Receptors act as one
of these on the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The binding of glutamate to the NMDA receptor leads to the
removal of the magnesium blocking the pore of the one in NMDA. Voltage gating allows for these proteins
to stop calcium or sodium flow depending on the potential. For 10 points, name these proteins that allow
charged molecules to move across a membrane.
ANSWER: ion channels
A compound with a high affinity for this element named yersiniabactin is produced by Yersinia pestis.
In core-collapse supernovae, the r- and s- processes are used to produce nuclei heavier than this
element. One solution used to purify waste water consists of hydrogen peroxide and a catalyst of this
element, known as Fenton's reagent. Though not aluminum, a chloride of this element is commonly
used as a catalyst for Friedel-Crafts reactions. The gene HAMP expresses the protein that regulates the
homeostasis of this element in mammals, known as hepcidin. One alloy of this element can undergo
martensite, bainite and pearlite phase transitions. Meat's red color and our blood's ability to transport
oxygen are both mediated by proteins containing this element. For 10 points, what is this transition element
with symbol Fe?
ANSWER: iron [accept Fe until mentioned]
The homeostasis of this element in the body is partially mediated by Repulsive Guidance Molecule C
and in the intestines it is transported by DMT1. One protein that regulates this element is made of 24
protein subunits, stores this in the center of a spherical structure as a crystalline solid, and releases
this as an ion attached to 6 water molecules. (*) One compound containing this element is bound to by
histidine F8 to protein. A protein with it was the first protein to have its structure successfully determined
by x-ray crystallography. A related protein can bind this cooperatively and has four subunits. This element's
concentration is regulated by ferritin and it is contained in the porphyrin ring heme as part of its role as a
carrier for oxygen in hemoglobin. For 10 points, name this element symbolized Fe.
ANSWER: iron [accept Fe before it is read]
IRE-BP regulates transcription of a receptor for this element; this element then detaches from
that receptor at low pHs in the endosome. Siderophores bind this element. The proximal histidine
coordinates an atom of this element. Oxygen binds an atom of this element in Complex IV of the
ETC. This metal binds water in the active site of aconitase, an enzyme in which this element forms
clusters with (*) sulfur. Cytochromes contain this metal in their active sites. Four porphyrin nitrogen atoms
coordinate this element in a protein in which it can exist in either +2 or +3 oxidation states. For 10 points,
name this metal which binds oxygen to transport it through the blood, since it's at the center of hemoglobin.
ANSWER: iron [or Fe]
Along with cholestasis and growth retardation, overabundance of this substance is characteristic of
GRACILE syndrome. One syndrome in which this substance is inappropriately absorbed is treated with
deferoxamine. Mutations in HFE or hepcidin cause an overload of this element, resulting in diabetes and
cirrhosis. This element binds to the DMT1 transporter in the gut, and regulates gene expression by binding
to its namesake response element, which is found in the tail of TF mRNA. This element is found alongside
sulfur in a certain cluster in aconitase, and this metal is also found in a protein that contains a glutamic acid
to valine mutation in sickle cell anemia patients. For 10 points, name this metal, which is found in the
oxygen-binding site of hemoglobin.
ANSWER: Iron
One receptor important in the metabolism of this substance contains a YTRF endocytotic signal. The
master regulator of the metabolism of this substance is encoded by the HAMP gene. Duodenal
cytochrome b reduces this substance in the gut, allowing it to be taken up by DMT1 transporters.
This substance binds to an RNA element containing a CAGUGN hairpin, which is called its namesake
response element. The cytoplasmic form of aconitase serves as a sensor of the levels of this element,
because that protein contains a (*) cluster of this element and sulfur. Hemochromatosis is an overload of
this substance. This metal is coordinated to histidine residues in an oxygen-carrying protein. It is stored in
ferritin. For 10 points, name this element which is coordinated to porphyrin of the heme prosthetic group of
hemoglobin.
ANSWER: Iron
These landforms are biogeographically analogous to biodiverse mountain peaks, which are known as the
"sky" type of this landform. A severe bottleneck in the human population may have been caused by a
volcanic eruption on one of these landforms about 70,000 years ago. The body size of Homo floresiensis is
believed to be an example of the dwarfism that characteristically occurs in these landforms. Coral atolls
may develop after these landforms subside. Allopatric speciation, and hence adaptive radiation, is
frequently observed on collections of these landforms, as in the case of Darwin's finches. For 10 points
each, identify these landforms surrounded by water.
ANSWER: islands [accept island chains or obvious equivalents; accept Galapagos Islands; accept sky islands; prompt on "Galapagos"; prompt on "Toba"; prompt on "Sumatra"; prompt on "Indonesia"]
The differentiation of these structures is controlled by ngn3 and a down-regulation of Notch signalling,
while they are further subdivided by the actions of Pax4, Pax6, and Brn4. Knocking out p48 causes these
structures to appear in the spleen, and one method of transplanting these structures is known as the
Edmonton Protocol. One compound produced here stimulates the neuropeptide-Y secreting neurons of the
arcuate nucleus, while another inhibits the release of growth hormone and comes in 14- and 28-amino acid
varieties. In addition to grehlin and somatostatin, this series of cells is more famous for producing a pair of
peptides that regulate blood glucose levels. For 10 points, name this endocrine portion of the pancreas
whose alpha cells secrete glucagon and whose beta cells secrete insulin.
ANSWER: Islets of Langerhans [or endocrine pancreas; prompt on pancreas]
With Alexander Yersin, one scientist from this country discovered the causative agent of plague, and
with von Behring that scientist developed serum therapy for tetanus. A chemical plant in this country is
responsible for poisoning several residents with methylmercury. Another scientist from this nation named
the causative agent of dysentery. A pair of scientists from this country used pulse-chase experiments to
show that DNA replication on the lagging strand occurs via namesake short "fragments". For ten points,
name this country, the home to the discoverer of Okazaki fragments.
ANSWER: Japan
The molecule central to this disorder can be "conjugated" or "unconjugated" depending on whether it is
attached to glucuronic acid. Large gallstones block a duct and cause this disorder in Mirizzi's syndrome.
Gilbert's syndrome causes a mild form of this disorder, which is more serious in Crigler-Najjar syndrome.
The first symptom of this disorder is often scleral icterus, in which the conjunctiva of the eye is discolored.
For 10 points, name this disorder that stems from the liver producing too much bilirubin and causes yellow
skin.
ANSWER: jaundice [accept icterus before read; or hyperbilirubinemia before "bilirubin;" prompt on heightened bilirubin or equivalents before "bilirubin"]
This man's work inspired the Balmis expedition. This scientist was elected to the Royal Society after
publishing a paper about how baby cuckoos pushed other chicks out of their nests. This man's work may
have been inspired by Benjamin Jesty. James Phipps was his first test subject after this man was inspired by
the fact that milkmaids did not suffer from a certain disease. For 10 points, name this "father of
immunology" who developed a vaccination for smallpox.
ANSWER: Edward Jenner
A chief of surgery at this school was assisted by Vivien Thomas and Helen Taussig in developing a
namesake shunt to cure the Tetralogy of Fallot. This school was the model for the modern research-focused
university under President Daniel Gilman. A surgeon working here, who pioneered the technique for
separating conjoined twins joined at the head, aroused controversy for comments made at the National
Prayer Breakfast and is Ben Carson. For ten points, identify this university located in Baltimore, named for a
Quaker businessman.
ANSWER: Johns Hopkins University [or JHU; do not accept "John Hopkins"]
New species that appeared during this period include coralline algae and the invertebrate rudists and
belemnites. The Morrison Formation was formed during it as a remnant of the Sundance Sea, while other
geographic developments include the formation of the Gulf of Mexico and the splitting of Pangaea into
Laurasia and Gondwana. Named after the Swiss mountain range in which it was originally formulated by
Abraham Werner, this is, for 10 points, which middle period of the Mesozoic Era found between the
Triassic and the Cretaceous?
ANSWER: Jurassic Period
This period saw the formation of the Karoo basalt and a rift event that lead to a large dome forming in the
North Sea region. The ending of the previous timespan and the beginning of this period saw the formation
of the Newark Supergroup, which led to the creation of the Palisades. Nevadan orogeny and the Toarcian
anoxic event occurred during this period, which also saw the closing of the Tethys ocean. The Morrison
Formation is one of the most important sources of its dinosaurs, such as Allosaurus, Apatosaurus, and
Stegosaurus. For 10 points, name this period of the Mesozoic era coming before the Cretaceous and after
the Triassic.
ANSWER: Jurassic period
Cimmeria collided with Laurasia during this period, which saw the proliferation of plesiosaurides.
Named for a mountain range on the Swiss-French border, this period experienced the first
appearance of the direct predecessors of sharks, neoselachii. Birds first took flight during this period,
which is divided into the Lias, Dogger, and Malm epochs. The [*] breakup of Pangaea occurred during
this period whose wildlife included the Stegosaurus and the Brachiosaurus. For 10 points, name this period
between the Triassic and Cretaceous that is most famous for its prolific dinosaur population.
ANSWER: Jurassic Period
This period saw the development of true coralline algae and the giant sea predator Liopleurodon. In
addition to those two, other marine species included the giant filter-feeding fish Leedsichthys and
belemnites, cousins of the ammonites. By the end of this period, the supercontinent Pangaea had
completely (*) split into the two landmasses Laurasia and Gondwana. A fossil from this period discovered
in Wyoming was known as "Big Al" due its completeness and was a juvenile Allosaurus. Other animals that
lived during this period included Diplodocus and the first bird, Archaeopteryx. For 10 points, name this
geologic period which came after the Triassic, famous for its huge number of dinosaurs.
ANSWER: Jurassic Period
During this period, North America was home to an inland sea home to the ichthyosaur Ophthalmosaurus.
The deposits and fossils left after that body of water, the Sundance Sea, dried up became this period's
Morrison formation. Another of this period's fossil deposits, the Solnhofen limestone, contains the
preserved feathers of an animal long thought to be the earliest bird, Archaeopteryx. Dinosaurs such as
Brachiosaurus, Allosaurus, and Stegosaurus also lived during this period. For 10 points, identify this
second geological period of the Mesozoic era, which took place after the Triassic.
ANSWER: Jurassic Period
The last age in this period was known as the Tithonian, and Pangaea became divided into Laurasia and
Gondwana during this period. It was marked by the rise of plants such as conifers and cycads as well as
herbivorous sauropods. Other dinosaurs from this period included Allosaurus and Stegosaurus. For 10
points, name this second geological period of the Mesozoic era, which occurred between the Triassic and
Cretaceous.
ANSWER: Jurassic period
The extinction event preceding this period saw the dying off of the conodonts. The Morrison Formation
is from this period. This period is named for a mountain range north of the Alps in Switzerland and France.
The Solnhofen limestone contains fossils from this period, including Archaeopteryx. The Brachiosaurus
and Apatosaurus first appeared in this period. This is the middle period of the Mesozoic Era. For 10 points,
name this period occurring before the Cretaceous and after the Triassic.
ANSWER: Jurassic period
The Morrison formation is composed of sedimentary rock from this period, which is named for a
mountain range on the Swiss-French border. The Nevadan Orogeny occurred during this period, and
coralline algae first appeared during this time. The Tethys Sea was formed during this period when
Pangaea (*) divided into Laurasia and Gondwana, and its Tithonian stage preceded the Cretaceous period.
This period saw the evolution of flying birds, like the archeopteryx [ar - kee - OP - ter - iks], as well as
sauropods such as the apatosaurus and the brachiosaurus. For ten points, identify this period of the
Mesozoic era following the Triassic which is known for the proliferation of dinosaurs.
ANSWER: Jurassic period
The late Kimmerigian epoch of this period saw the onset of the marine crocodile genus Geosaurus while
invertebrates that appeared during this time include the belemnites and reef-building mollusks known as
rudists. North American was home to the Sundance Sea during this time; sediments of which are found
below the sediments of the Morrison Formation. This middle of this period saw the placement of large
batholiths in the northern Cordillera resulting in the Nevadan orogeny as well as the closing up of the
Tethys Sea. Early ornithopods diversified into the stegosaurs during this time while large sauropods such as
Brachiosaurus also became dominant. Named after a subrange of the Alps, FTP, identify this period of
geological time; the second period of the Mesozoic Era which lies between the Triassic and Cretaceous.
ANSWER: Jurassic Period
The virus that causes this disease encodes a G-protein coupled receptor responsible for activating p38-MAP
Kinase and a namesake spindle-cell growth factor, and also codes for a Fas-ligand inhibiting protein. This
disease's causative agent causes multicentric Castleman's disease when it expresses interleukin-6, and when
co-infected with Epstein-Barr virus causes primary effusion lymphoma. Chang and Moore used
Representational Difference Analysis to show that Human Herpesvirus 8 causes it, and its chief symptom is
a series of black or purple papular lesions in the mouth and skin. FTP, name this disease first described by a
Hungarian doctor, a certain sarcoma commonly found in AIDS patients.
ANSWER: Kaposi's Sarcoma [accept "Castleman's disease or "primary effusion lymphoma" before mentioned]
One stain commonly used to produce these is sometimes used in malaria diagnosis. That stain, called
Giemsa [GEEM za], complements other methods like SKY, the spectral kind, which is employed when
sample cells are cancerous or otherwise diseased. FISH can be used to brighten its results, which are often
taken when cells are arrested by colchicine in metaphase. Diagnosis of Turner and Klinefelter's syndromes
is facilitated by this tool by observing the lack or double presence of the X chromosome. For 10 points,
identify these genetic tools, which display a eukaryote's full set of chromosomes.
ANSWER: karyotypes [accept word forms]
A stain of methylene blue and the red dye eosin, named for Gustav Giemsa, is often used on these.
Colchicine is used to capture cells in the middle of metaphase so that biologists can capture fully condensed
chromosomes in preparing these. Human ones contain forty-six chromosomes, and for analysis they are
neatly arranged into pairs.
ANSWER: karyotype
Carle and Olson developed an "electrophoretic" version of this technique that involved orthogonal field
alternation. Though it has nothing to do with clinical trials, another form of this technique has "3+3", "2+3",
and "3+2" types, where the second number indicates the number of haptene-labeled probes. Visualization
methods in this technique include the "trypsin-Giemsa", or "G-banding", technique. Cells used in this
technique must be treated with colchicine so that they can be arrested in metaphase. In normal humans, this
technique visualizes a set of 46 genetic structures. For 10 points, identify this technique used during
pregnancies to screen for fetuses having chromosomal abnormalities, which produces an ordered plot of an
individual's chromosomes.
ANSWER: karyotyping [accept word forms]
Filaggrin binds to fibers of this protein, whose "cyto" form is used to denote acidic or basic
subdivisions found in intermediate filaments. Squamous cell carcinoma can produce "pearls" of this
protein, whose genes are mutated in epidermolysis bullosa (*) simplex. Cornification forms this protein,
which comprises baleen and contains a high volume of cysteine in stabilizing disulfide bridges, explaining
why this protein smells similar to rubber when burned. Its more rigid beta- form is found in turtle shells,
beaks, and feathers. For 10 points, identify this structural protein whose alpha- form comprises hooves,
fingernails, and hair.
ANSWER: keratin
Defects in the member of this family of proteins denoted 17 are associated with steatocystoma multiplex.
The Weber-Cockayne and Dowling-Meara subtypes of EBS result from mutations in genes encoding for
members of this family, which are attached to cadherin proteins by desmosomes. Silk fibroins are
considered members of this family, and it can form hard plugs when it entraps hair follicles, causing acne
vulgaris. Aloing with elastin and collagen, it give skin its strength. For 10 points, name these proteins, the
alpha variety of which can be found in the hair and horns of animals.
ANSWER: Keratin
The supertwisting of this protein is left-handed. Rich in hydrophobic residues that join together its
coil structure, it makes up protofilaments, which are part of protofibrils. Crick and Pauling
postulated its double-stranded structure oriented in parallel, linked by disulfide bonds. Its beta form,
rich in beta sheets, is prevalent in the harder skin and shells of reptiles while the softer alpha form is found
in mammals. For ten points, name this fibrous protein constituting wool, nails, and hair.
ANSWER: keratin
This protein produced during cornification contains several dimers which form a single
protofilament, which then form higher level protofibrils, microfibrils, and macrofibrils. The alpha
form of this protein contains a repeating seven unit pattern which forms a structure called a coiled
coil. That form is classified by the number of disulfide bridges it contains, which can be curled by
application of an oxidizing agent as performed during a (*) perm. For 10 points, name this hard protein
found in claws and fingernails.
ANSWER: keratin
This class of proteins is carboxymethylated and stored in Mallory bodies in hepatocytes. Filaggrin
binds to members of this protein family. These proteins are split into two homology classes: acidic
and basic. Epidermolysis bullosa simplex is caused by a defect in one of these proteins. The alpha
class of them forms a coiled coil. Cells named for these proteins differentiate in a process called (*)
cornification, and are shed through desquamation. These proteins are easily oxidized because of their high
concentration of sulfur. They make up a major class of intermediate filaments. 95% of the epidermis
consists of cells that make these proteins. For 10 points, name this class of strong proteins found in human
hair and fingernails.
ANSWER: keratins [or cytokeratins]
In squamous cell carcinomas, layers of these proteins form concentric rings resulting in a structure called a
namesake "pearl." A fragile skin that is extremely sensitive to pressure is characteristic of Epidermolysis
Bullosa Simplex, which is often caused by mutations in genes for these proteins. Leucine and glycine are
prevalent in the helix-forming alpha forms of these proteins, and most of these proteins are made of an
acidic chain and a neutral chain. They also have a large proportion of cysteine residues which form disulfide
bonds. For 10 points, identify these proteins which are found in dead tissue such as hair and nails.
ANSWER: keratin
Cells which are named for this protein can be surrounded by an envelope containing cystatin A and
loricrin. IRS cells produce large amounts of trichohyalin and this other protein. Filaggrin helps
facilitate aggregation of this protein, whose acidic and basic types form type I and type II (*)
intermediate filaments. Cells that produce this protein are located in abundance in the stratum granulosum
and the stratum lucidum. Large amounts of this protein are produced in a hardening process known as
cornification. In the epidermis this protein makes skin waterproof and contributes to its structural integrity.
For 10 points, name this protein found in abundance in hair and fingernails.
ANSWER: keratin
This protein binds to the protein filaggrin, and cells that produce it originate in the stratum basale.
Type I and type II intermediate filaments are composed of acidic and basic isoforms of this protein.
The production of this protein, which results in cell death, is called cornification, and desquamation
often results in it being lost. This protein contains large amounts of the amino acid cysteine [SIS-teen],
and it is the primary component of the epithelium [ep-ih-THEE-lee-um], providing strength and
waterproofing. Name this structural protein that makes up the skin, hair, and nails.
ANSWER: keratin
This protein is produced through a process called cornification, and it is consumed by the fungus that
causes athlete's foot. A beta variety of this protein adds rigidity to the skin of reptiles and contributes to the
resilience of porcupine quills and turtle shells. That property is the result of this protein containing an an
amino acid that forms disulfide bridges with itself through permanent crosslinking, That cysteine-based
composition has led to this protein's abundance in human skin, as well as other parts of the body. For 10
points, name this protein that also forms human hair and nails.
ANSWER: keratin
In desmosomes, desmoplakin bind to one type of this protein on the intracellular face, and a condition
commonly known as "chicken skin" occurs when this protein builds up in pores. This protein contains high
proportions of glycine and alanine for tight bonding of the coiled coil it normally appears in, which contains
several disulfide bonds for stability. Silk fibroins belong to this family of proteins, which, along with elastin
and collagen, provides elasticity to the skin. For 10 points, name this common, filamentous structural
protein found in feathers, claws, fur, and especially skin, hair, and nails.
ANSWER: keratin
Dane's method is used to stain both mucin and this molecule, and this protein mediates cell polarity
by binding to Albatross protein and the apical junction complex. Its aggregation is triggered by
filaggrin in one organ, and this protein is prevalent in the stratum lucidum and stratum corneum of
one structure. Mutations in the 5th or 14th isoforms of this protein leads to EBS, and it is attached to
desmoplakin in on the one face of desmosomes. This protein contains a long alpha-helix flanked by
disordered domains, and acidic and basic isoforms of it dimerize, and the dimers proceed to form tetramers
which arrange in fibrils. Its structure is formed by crosslinking of cysteine , and it is the main component of
type 1 intermediate filaments. For 10 points, name this structural protein that gives strength to skin, hair and
nails.
ANSWER: Keratin
Ichthyosis bullosa (ik-thee-OH-sis buh-LOH-sah) of Siemens (SEE-mens) is one disease caused by a
mutation in the gene for this protein, which makes up the intermediate filaments found in desmosomes
(DEHZ-moh-sohmz). Ringworm fungi (FUN-gai) feed on this protein, produced in large quantities by
cornified cells, and the high number of disulfide bridges within this protein make it insoluble in water.
Clothes moths are among the few animals that can digest this protein, which is also found in the baleen
(buh-LEEN) of whales. Forming the shells of turtles and the horns of rhinos, name this epidermal protein
found in hooves, claws, nails, and hair.
ANSWER: keratin
One disease of this organ has characteristic wire-loop lesions, while another disease of this organ is often
caused by taking expired tetracycline, and is called Fanconi's syndrome. One section of this organ uses slit
diaphragms to maintain its function. One enzyme produced in this organ is 1-alpha-hydroxylase, which is
responsible for producing the active form of vitamin D. Interstitial fibroblasts in this organ produce
erythropoietin. This organs functional unit contains the glomerulus, Bowman's capsule, and the Loop of
Henle. That functional unit is acted upon by antidiuretic hormone and is called a nephron. Name this organ
that is responsible for cleaning the blood and producing urine.
ANSWER: kidney
This organ contains a mass of capillaries called the glomerulus (glah-meh-ROO-luhs) that is surrounded
by Bowman's capsule. It regulates blood pressure by releasing renin into the bloodstream, and it releases
waste like ammonium into urine via the ureter. Painful buildups of calcium and uric acid can deposit in this
organ, forming its namesake "stones". It is composed of around one million nephrons. For 10 points, name
this organ whose function is simulated by dialysis, which is responsible for filtering the blood.
ANSWER: kidney
A Wilms tumor may form in this organ, one portion of which is divided into cortical and juxtamedullary
classes. Lithotripsy is used to eradicate one affliction that takes place in this organ. It features podocytes
within a network of capillaries surrounded by Bowman's capsule. The glomerulus comprises one portion of
this organ, whose functional unit is the nephron. For 10 points, name this paired organ responsible for blood
filtration and urine production, which may also be the site of painful "stones."
ANSWER: kidneys
In reptiles, this organ is made up of lobules arranged in a linear fashion. Wilms' tumors are usually
located in these structures in children. The fusion of two of these structures is called cross-fused
ectopia, or the "horseshoe" type of these. This organ contains numerous (*) Malpighian pyramids and
fluids that enter this structure travel through the glomerulus, located in the Bowman's Capsule. The
ascending and descending limbs of the loop of Henle helps concentrate waste, and those structures are
segments of the nephron which makes up this organ. Dialysis is used in place of this organ for people with
failed or missing ones. For 10 points, name this bean-shaped organ responsible for filtering blood.
ANSWER: kidneys
These organs express the enzyme that hydroxylates vitamin D at the 1 position. The function of these organs
can be measured using the Cockcroft-Gault formula, which requires measuring the creatinine clearance. One
set of cells in this organ secretes erythropoietin. The functional unit of these organs ends with the collecting
duct and begins with the glomerulus; that functional unit is the nephron, which also contains the Loop of
Henle. For 10 points, name these organs which are usually paired, and which are responsible for controlling
the osmolarity of and filtering the blood.
ANSWER: kidneys
Both the Vero cell line and the HEK293T cell line originate from this organ, which in children is
affected by minimal change disease and Wilms Tumor. GFR and serum creatinine are measures of
its function. This organ secretes erythropoietin and activates vitamin D by hydroxylation. The
calyces of this organ surround its pyramids, and its functional unit uses a countercurrent multiplier
mechanism. On section of this organ up-regulates aquaporins in response to (*) ADH. Its functional
unit begins with a ball of capillaries called the glomerulus surrounded by Bowman's capsule, which then
dips down into the medulla via the Loop of Henle. For 10 points, name this organ whose functional unit is
the nephron, which filters the blood to produce urine.
ANSWER: kidney [anti-prompt on "nephron", "glomerulus", "Loop of henle", "Bowman's capsule" "proximal convluted tuble", "distal convoluted tubule", "proximal straight tubule", and "distal straight tubule" until mention]
Wilms' tumors manifest in these structures, in which one could find the malpighian pyramids. Fluids that
enter this structure travel through the glomerulus, which is located in Bowman's capsule, before entering the
Loop of Henle. The enzymes calcitriol and renin are secreted by this structure, which is emptied of its
contents via ureters. Dialysis helps perform the primary functions of this organ, which filters blood using
nephrons. For 10 points, identify this paired organ which produces urine.
ANSWER: kidneys
One disease that destroys this organ is caused by the BK virus. An autoimmune disease that causes
lung damage by attacking the alpha-3 chain of type IV collagen also attacks this organ, and is named
Goodpasture's syndrome. One structure within this organ achieves its function through slit-diaphragms 
between podocytes, and blood flow through that section is regulated by mesangial cells.
Another section of this organ forms a (*) countercurrent exchange system with the vasa recta, and among
the hormones that modify the function of this organ include aldosterone and one that causes more
aquaporins to be inserted into the membrane of the collecting duct, called vasopressin. The functional unit
of this organ contains a proximal and distal convoluted tubules flanking the Loop of Henle; that unit is
called the nephron. FTP, name this bean-shaped organ that makes urine.
ANSWER: Kidney
Syndromes that affect this organ include WAGR syndrome and Denys-Drash syndrome, both of which
increase the chance of developing Wilm's tumor. Another disease of this organ is Minimal Change disease,
which increases its permeability to serum albumin, causing edema. Diabetic neuropathy is a disease of this
organ that affects the blood vessels of the glomerulus, a capillary tuft that filters fluids out of the blood and
into Bowman's Capsule. Dialysis is able to perform the tasks of this organ and is administered to patients
with failed or missing ones. For 10 points, name this organ that filters the blood and produces urine.
ANSWER: the kidneys
One portion of this organ is a U-shaped structure known as the loop of Henle, which is a component of a
more general structure in this organ which is divided into cortical and juxtamedullary types. Those
structures are responsible for regulating the concentration of water in the body, and are called nephrons.
For ten points, name this organ responsible for filtering the blood, whose function is carried out in some
people by dialysis.
ANSWER: kidney
One tumor of this organ occurs often in patients with Denys-Drash syndrome and is caused by
deletion of the WT1 gene on chromosome 11p. Clear cell carcinoma of this organ is common in von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome. Mutations in cilia-localizing proteins causes a disease in which this organ
is filled with cysts. One section of this organ requires podocin in order to form (*) slit pores, which lie
opposite a basement membrane from an array of podocytes. One section of this organ inserts aquaporins
into its membrane in response to ADH. One section of this organ contains the NKCC1 cotransporter in its
thick limb and uses a countercurrent multiplier system to concentrate the filtrate. For 10 points, name this
organ whose functional unit contains a group of capillaries called the glomerulus, the Bowman's capsule,
and the loop of Henle as part of the nephron.
ANSWER: kidney
The GFR measures the function of this organ. In the distal tubules of this organ, sodium ion absorption is
stimulated by aldosterone. Semipermeable twisted masses of tiny tubes form glomeruli in this organ, which
transfer filtrate to Bowman's capsure. The glomeruli act as the main filters for this organ's functional unit,
the nephron, which is responsible for reabsorbing water. For 10 points, name this organ that produces urine.
ANSWER: kidneys
One disease affecting this organ results from increased permeability in one of its basement
membranes and is called minimal change disease. One major hormone secreted from this organ
participates in a regulation system with angiotensin and aldosterone. One structure in this organ allows
small ions to pass through but filters out platelets and protein, and this organ's loop of Henle helps
concentrate urine. For 10 points, name this organ, whose basic functional unit is the nephron.
ANSWER: kidneys
A growth in these organs that can be caused by Denys-Drash [deh-nees drash] syndrome is a Wilms tumor.
These organs secrete calcitriol [kal-sih-TRIE-ol] and EPO. Several nutrients are reabsorbed by these
organs' proximal convoluted tubules, each of which is between a Bowman's capsule and a loop of Henle
[HEN-lee] inside a nephron [NEH-fron]. The adrenal [uh-DREE-nul] glands are on top of these organs. The
waste from these organs is sent through a ureter [YUR-eh-tur] to the bladder. Name these organs that filter
the blood and can produce very painful stones.
ANSWER: kidneys
Blood vessels and nerves supplying it pass through a structure called the hilum. It is the site of calcitriol
synthesis, which is required for proper calcium absorption and deposition. Its principal units are fed by
arcuate arteries and veins, and its byproduct is released during micturition. This organ is responsible for
regulating red blood cell counts as it releases erythropoietin, and it also controls arterial pressure through
the hormones renin and angiotensin. The macula densa is found in this organ adjacent to the
juxtaglomerular apparatus. Its inner medulla contains the duct of Bellini and the thin loop of Henle, while
its cortex contains nephrons. For ten points, name this filtration organ responsible creating urine.
ANSWER: kidney
Congenital disorders of this organ include the relatively benign fusion called the "horseshoe" type of this
organ. The function of this organ is regulated by aldosterone, which is secreted in response to angiotensin
II. This organ secretes hormones such as erythropoietin and renin. The functional unit of this organ
includes Bowman's capsule, which encloses the glomerulus. For 10 points, name this organ containing
nephrons that filters waste products such as urea from the blood, producing urine.
ANSWER: kidney
This organ affected by Liddle's syndrome and Denys-Drash syndrome can develop Wilm's tumors. People
with Alport syndrome lose function of this organ that is home to Malpighian pyramid cells, the efferent
artery, the afferent vein, and the distal convoluted tubule. Bowman's capsule surrounds the glomerulus in
this organ that sees fluids flow through the loop of Henle. The ureters leave this organ, and the filtering of
blood by nephrons in it can be assisted by dialysis. For 10 points, identify these paired organs that clean out
the blood.
ANSWER: Kidneys
This organ is organized into cones of tissue called Malphigian pyramids, and it produces hormones like the
vitamin D derivative calcitriol. Macrophages in this organ are called mesangial cells, and its tubules are
acted upon by hormones like vasopressin. It contains cells with long processes that wrap around capillaries,
podocytes. Those capillaries belong to a structure enclosed by a sac called Bowman's capsule, the
glomerulus. If these organs are not working properly, their function can be replaced to some extent by
dialysis. For 10 points, name this organ whose functional unit is the kidney and which filters the blood to
produce urine.
ANSWER: kidneys
The increased permeability of one of this organ's basement membranes can cause minimal change disease.
One structure in this organ contains mesangial cells and capillaries which are surrounded by podocyte cells
from the Bowman's capsule. The glomerulus and the loop of Henle are both structures in this organ, and
two enzymes secreted by this organ are calcitriol and renin. Fluid retention is increased by this organ when
responding to vasopressin, and the functional unit of this organ is the nephron. For 10 points, name this
organ that filters blood and produces urine.
ANSWER: Kidney
This organ contains JG cells, which secrete a hormone that leads to the creation of angiotensin and
aldosterone. Blood enters and exits this organ through the afferent and efferent arterioles, respectively. The
functional units of this organ contain areas such as Bowman's capsule and the loop of Henle. Material from
this organ ends up flowing through the ureters into the bladder, but that process can be blocked by this
organ's namesake stones. For 10 points, name this organ, which includes nephrons and is part of the
excretory system.
ANSWER: kidney
Although not the lungs, antibodies target a structure in these organs in Goodpasture's syndrome. They
detect decreased oxygen levels and release erythropoietin, stimulating erythrocyte generation. Their failure
is characterized by a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate, as well as increased createnine serum levels.
This organ responds to vasopressin which increases fluid retention. It filters blood through nephrons, and
dialysis performs this organ's function. The adrenal glands are located above, For 10 Points, what structures
connected to the bladder by the ureter.
ANSWER: Kidneys
It's not the small intestine, but mutations in GLEPP1 may result in the abnormal growth of vacuoles
and microvilli in this organ, two hallmarks of minimal change disease. Intense physical exercise
might result in a "pseudo" condition mimicking a serious disease of this organ for three days. This
organ participates in phosphate and calcium regulation by secreting calcitriol. One part of this organ
extends footlike projections that interface with capillaries, known as (*) podocytes. This target of
aldosterone releases renin, the activator of angiotensin. Between its proximal and distal convoluted tubules,
this organ contains the loop of Henle. For 10 points, name this organ, composed of nephrons, that filters
blood to produce urine.
ANSWER: kidney
A hormone secreted from this organ is responsible for triggering the formation of red blood cells; that
hormone is erythropoietin. This organ contains balls of capillaries surrounded slit diaphragms and
podocytes, which are responsible for keeping proteins from leaking out of the circulation. The functional
unit of this organ contains a pair of convoluted tubules book-ending the Loop of Henle, and is called the
nephron. This organ is responsible for maintaining salt balance. For 10 points, name this organ which
produces urine.
ANSWER: kidney
Vasopressin targets this organ. Granular cells in the macula densa of this organ are responsible for
secreting renin. A network of capillaries in this organ is known as the glomerulus. This organ
contains a countercurrent multiplier called the loop of Henle, which is located in its smallest
functional unit, the (*) nephron. Blood to it is supplied by the renal arteries. Decline in function of this
organ causes people to be treated with dialysis. For 10 points, identify this organ that eliminates waste and
produces urine.
ANSWER: kidneys
The Macula Densa attaches one structure in this organ to another. Another structure found in this
organ has mesangial, epithelia, and endothelial cells, and that structure contains a basement
membrane of capillaries. That structure in this organ is surrounded by the Bowman's Capsule, and
other structures in this organ include the proximal and distal tubules, the Loop of Henle, and the
Glomerulus. Ureters leave these organs, and the adrenal glands can be found on top of these organs.
Nephrons are the functional units of, for 10 points, these organs responsible for cleaning out the blood.
ANSWER: the kidneys
Like the lungs and skin, this organ is unable to function in persons with collagen-4 mutations because its
basement membrane is split. Like the ovary, this organ becomes polycystic in a namesake
autosomal-dominant disease. The functional units of this organ contain a ball of capillaries called the
glomerulus, which pass the filtrate to Bowman's capsule, then to the loop of Henle. The function of these
organs is replaced in dialysis. For 10 points, name these blood-filtering organs that produce urine.
ANSWER: kidney
The apex of certain cone-shaped tissues in them is surrounded by the major and minor calyxes, and
two vessels contained in them are the efferent artery and the afferent vein. In addition to the
Malphigian pyramid cells, they include a pack of specialized macula densa cells, which line the walls of
the DCT. Podocytes compose the visceral layer of another structure in them which bars entry to
platelets, the Bowman's capsule. Containing the glomerulus and the ascending and descending limbs of
the loop of Henle, for 10 points, name these organs composed of many nephrons.
ANSWER: kidneys
A disease relating to this organ, Denys-Drash syndrome, is caused by an abnormality in the WT1 gene and
is characterized by Wilms Tumor. Along with the lungs this organ regulates the concentration of
bicarbonate ions in order to take part in acid-base homeostasis. The epithelial tissue of this organ contains
podocytes which are located primarily in the glomerulus. Reabsorption of glucose and the regulation of
blood pressure are secondary functions of this organ which consists of the Loop of Henle and Bowman's
Capsule. Nephrons are the functional units of, FTP, what organs of the human body responsible for
removing waste products and excess water from blood to produce urine.
ANSWER: Kidneys
The basement membrane of these structures acquires a basket-weave appearance while they scar in
Alport syndrome. This organ contains a structure whose slit diaphragms occur in between podocytes,
and one hormone produced here forms a blood pressure regulating system with angiotensin. This
organ contains a structure that consists of a capillary tuft and is surrounded by Bowman's capsule called the
glomerulus. This organ concentrates sodium to retain water in the loop of Henle, and it sits under the glands
that produce epinephrine. For 10 points, name this organ, whose central functional unit is the nephron and
which produces urine for expulsion by the bladder.
ANSWER: kidney
This organ is affected in a disorder caused by faulty production of type IV collagen, resulting
in a basket-weave appearance called Alport syndrome. This organ uses a system similar to
countercurrent exchange called a countercurrent multiplier. The permeability of one structure in
this organ is increased by the insertion of aquaporins due to the effect of vasopressin, also called
antidiuretic hormone. In this organ, a tuft of capillaries surrounded by the Bowman's capsule
is called the glomerulus [gloh-MAIR-yoo-luss]. The basic functional units of this organ are the
nephrons [NEF-rahnz]. Identify this pair of organs that filter blood, producing urine.
ANSWER: kidneys [accept renal glands]
This organ contains major and minor calyxes and produces the hormone calcitriol
(cal-sih-TREE-all) to increase calcium uptake. It also secretes renin to help produce angiotensin
(an-gee-oh-TEN-sin). Functions of it include blood pressure regulation and maintaining acid-base
homeostasis. The ureter connects this organ to the (*) bladder. The Loop of Henle is a part of the basic
functional unit of them called the nephron. For 10 points, name the pair of bean-shaped organs that filter
the blood and produce urine.
ANSWER: kidneys
One structure within this organ includes slit-diaphragms between podocytes, and a U-shaped structure
within this organ is called the loop of Henle. Another structure in this organ is surrounded by Bowman's
Capsule, and this organ secretes enzymes like calcitrol and renin. The adrenal glands are found above this
organ, and its functional unit is the nephron. For 10 points, identify this organ responsible for urine
production and blood filtration.
ANSWER: kidneys
One structure in this organ is lined by podocytes and features capillaries with fenestrations not spanned by
diaphragms that are large enough for anything smaller than a red blood cell to enter. The granular cells of
its juxtaglomerular apparatus secrete a hormone that forms a system with angiotensin and aldosterone. Its
functional units contain a glomerulus surrounded by Bowman's capsule, and that aforementioned proximal
tubule is part of the loop of Henle. Located under a pair of glands that secrete cortisol and epinephrine, for
10 points, name these organs that contain many nephrons and are responsible for producing urine.
ANSWER: kidney
Lithotripsy is the method of choice for removing these objects, which contain small amounts of
mucoprotein. The largest of them are sometimes known as "staghorn" ones. About fifteen percent of them
are composed of magnesium ammonium phosphate, but they are most commonly composed of calcium
oxylate and calcium phosphate. They are most noticeable when they end up in the ureter, causing back and
groin pain as they "pass." For 10 points, name these hard objects that form in an organ used to filter blood.
ANSWER: kidney stones
McMaster's Susan Dudley performed an experiment with sea rockets to show that this process can
occur in plants. Keller and Ross were the first to find this process occurring due to a "green beard"
gene. One formulation to explain this process holds that r times B must be greater than C for it to
occur; that rule for this process is named after W.D. (*) Hamilton and includes Wright's coefficient of
relationship. This process was first formulated by Fisher and Haldane, and it explains how eusocial colonies
can have castes of sterile workers. For 10 points, name this process in which organisms act for the
reproductive success of their relatives, a form of biological altruism.
ANSWER: kin selection [accept kin altruism; prompt inclusive fitness; prompt on altruism before mentioned; prompt on eusocial or forms thereof before mentioned]
The structure of these proteins typically consists of a glycine rich N terminal near a lysine along with a
central aspartic acid needed for the protein's activity. Long term potentiation in the brain is believed to be
enhanced in part by members of this group of proteins, one of which is mitogen activated and the other of
which is regulated by calcium ions and calmodulin. The majority of these proteins act on the amino acids
tyrosine, threonine, or serine, of which the latter two contain a hydroxyl group. Cyclins work by activating
one member of this family of proteins. Another member of this family of proteins depends on the level of
cyclic AMP, while in general this family of proteins works by transferring a certain functional found in
ATP. For 10 points, name this class of enzymes that transfer a phosphate group.
ANSWER: protein kinases
Pathways involving these types of enzymes often recruit subsequent proteins via SH2 domains. The
cAMP Response Binding Protein is only able to bind DNA after it has been acted on by one of these
enzymes. Insulin receptors have the activity of these enzymes on their cytoplasmic faces. These
enzymes are classified based on whether they work on tyrosine residues or serine and threonine
residues, and Ras activates a pathway involving a (*) cascade of these enzymes called the Map cascade.
The first enzyme of glycolysis is one of these enzymes that works on hexoses. The effect of this type of
enzymes is reversed by phosphatases. For 10 points, name these enzymes that transfer phosphate groups
onto substrates.
ANSWER: kinases [prompt on answers like "enzymes that transfer phosphate groups" until giveaway; accept protein kinases; accept specific types like "tyrosine kinases" or "serine/threonine kinsases"]
Besides increased risk for germ cell cancer and certain linguistic and learning disabilities, this disease
causes taurodontism and gynecomastia. However, it does impart added protection from any recessive, sex-
linked diseases due to the presence of an extra Barr body. Increased height, breast enlargement, and
decreased body hair can all be attributed to high levels of follicle-stimulating and luteinizing hormones and
low levels of testosterone production associated with this ailment. FTP, name this male-only syndrome best
characterized by infertility and a XXY trisomy of the sex chromosomes.
ANSWER: Klinefelter's Syndrome
The main symptoms of this disease may be caused by the inability of Sertoli cells to communicate with the
other cells in their environment; those symptoms include microorchidism, which is brought by the
hypogonadism that results. More severely, this condition can lead to an increased risk of contracting breast
cancer, partially due to the gynecomastia that sometimes results, or osteoporosis, especially if testosterone
replacement therapy has not been undergone. However, it is believed that people with this disease are less
likely to contract X-linked recessive diseases. The most common sex-chromosome disorder, this is, for 10
points, what disease in which men possess an extra X chromosome, named after the American
endocrinologist who first described it?
ANSWER: Klinefelter's syndrome
Komatz et al. determined that there is a higher incidence of taurodontism in those with this
condition. Its sufferers exhibit depressed secretion of inhibin B. Besides these observations of Sertoli
cells in seminiferous tubules, patients exhibit increased incidence of lupus erythematosus, decreased
expression of facial hair, and gynecomastia. The opportunity to form an additional methylated object
protects individuals from certain recessive conditions. Patients often exhibit small testicles, though the
principal effects of this condition are high serum FSH and LH levels. For 10 points, identify this trisomy in
which affected individuals have two X chromosomes and one Y.
ANSWER: Klinefelter's syndrome
Calcium regulates this pathway by activating isocitrate (iy-soh-CIH-trate) dehydrogenase
(dee-high-DRAH-geh-nays). Coenzyme Q helps convert succinate (SUCK-sih-nate) into fumarate
(FEW-mih-rate) during this process. This process takes acetyl CoA (ah-SEE-till KOH-AY) and eventually
ends in oxaloacetate (acks-sah-loh-AH-seh-tate). Each turn of this process produces one ATP via substrate
level phosphorylation (fahs-for-ih-LAY-shun), but it also generates three molecules of NADH. For 10
points, name this cycle of cellular respiration that takes place in the matrix of mitochondria, sometimes
called the citric acid cycle.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [prompt on citric acid cycle before it is mentioned]
An FADH2 molecule is created when succinate is transformed into fumarate during this process. It follows a
process involving enolase and hexokinase. It also produces one GTP, two CO2 and three NADH. It starts
when oxaloacetate reacts with acetyl-CoA which is derived from pyruvic acid. That step produces citrate
which is why this is also known as the citric acid cycle. For 10 points, following glycolysis and preceding
the electron transport chain, this is what cycle of cellular respiration.
ANSWER: Krebs Cycle [accept citric acid cycle before mentioned]
A molecule used in the first step of this process is produced with the assistance of thiamine
pyrophosphate and lipoate in the PDC complex. A dehydration reaction followed by a hydration reaction
converts this pathway's namesake molecule into an isomer via the action of aconitase. A single GTP
molecule is produced in this pathway through the conversion of succinyl CoA into succinate, which is then
oxidized into fumarate. Before the first step of this process, pyruvate is made into acetyl CoA. For 10
points, name this stage of cellular respiration that is preceded by glycolysis and followed by oxidative
phosphorylation.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [or TCA cycle or citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle]
One step of this process is inhibited by flouroacetate, while another mutation in this process leads to
hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma. One of its intermediates shuts with arginosuccinate to
control urea production, while another is responsible for shuttling in reducing equivalents via exchanging
with aspartate. One step uses cis-aconitate as an intermediate in an isomerization. In another step, succinate
is oxidized to fumarate. Its final step oxidizes malate to a product on which an aldol condensation is
performed in its first step, oxaloacetate. Preceded by pyruvate dehydrogenase complex turning pyruvate
into acetyl CoA, for 10 points, name this step which follows glycosylation in cellular respiration, a cycle
sometimes named for a product found in lemons.
ANSWER: citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle or Szent-Gyorgyi-Krebs cycle
Anaplerotic reactions are all metabolic reactions feeding into this process, one example of which is the
conversion of glutamate to alpha-ketoglutarate. One molecule of GTP results from the hydrolysis of
succinyl CoA during this process. Early in it, aconitase stereospecifically isomerizes the first product to
yield cis-aconitate, and then the iso- version of this process's namesake compound. The final step is the
conversion of fumarate to malate, which is converted into oxaloacetate before this process begins again. For
10 points, identify this cycle, also called the citric acid cycle, which follows glycolysis during cellular
respiration.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [accept tricarboxylic acid or TCA; accept citric acid cycle before mentioned]
The first step of this process, an aldol condensation, is followed by two reactions mediated by Aconitase.
The only irreversible reaction in this process is a decarboxylation which yields the product alpha-
Ketoglutarate. Another substrate in this process is Succinyl-CoA, while Coenzyme Q is an electron acceptor
in a reaction that yields fumarate. Occurring in the mitochondrion matrix before oxidative phosphorylation
and after glycolysis, this process produces NADH, protons, and a net yield of approximately 30 ATP. Also
known as the citric acid cycle, FTP, what is this respiration cycle into carbon dioxide and water?
ANSWER: Krebs cycle or TCA cycle (accept citric acid cycle before it is mentioned)
One of the starting products of this process is produced by a multienzyme complex that consists of TPP and
the enzymes E1, E2, and E3. Aconitase catalyzes an isomerization reaction in this process. NADH is one of
the major inhibitors of this process, which includes a dehydrogenation process in which succinate is reacted
to form fumarate. In the final step of this process, malate is oxidized to regenerate oxalate. That oxalate is
initially consumed in this reaction's first step in a process catalyzed by acetyl CoA to form citrate. For 10
points, name this metabolic process sometimes referred to as the citric acid cycle.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [or tricarboxylic acid cycle; or TCA cycle; accept citric acid cycle before mentioned]
The convergence of the carbohydrate, protein, and fat catabolic pathways upon this process suggests that it
originated abiogenically. Calcium activates several dehydrogenase complexes in order to increase reaction
rate during this process, and Albert Szent-Gyorgi received a 1937 Nobel Prize for discovering a major
component of this cycle, fumaric acid. Alpha-ketogluterate is an intermediate in this process, and the escape
of protons through the mitochondrial membrane reduces the yield of this process. Name this process that
follows glycolysis and yields 30-38 ATP per glucose molecule processed.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [accept citric acid cycle]
Irreversible steps in this pathway include the decarboxylation of alpha-ketoglutarate. Near the end of this
pathway, the cofactor FAD helps ubiquinone oxidate succinate to fumarate. The products of this pathway
include three NADH molecules and one GTP molecule. The first reaction in this pathway uses oxaloacetate
and the acetyl CoA produced by glycolysis. This pathway is followed by the electron transport chain. For
10 points, name this cycle central to cellular respiration.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [or citric acid cycle]
In the later part of this cycle, one of its products is oxidized into fumurate and also reduces FAD to FADH2.
Malate is formed when water is added to the fumurate thereby activating the fumerase enzyme. Its starting
materials are synthesized when a three carbon compound from a previous pathway undergoes a
dehydrogenase reaction, producing acetyl-CoA. Occurring in the matrix of the mitochondria, FTP name this
metabolic pathway in cellular respiration that can follow glycolysis.
ANSWER: citric-acid cycle or Krebs cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle or Szent-Gyorgyi-Krebs cycle
Anaplerotic reactions supply the molecules used in this reaction. The rate limiting step in this process
is the decarboxylation of oxalosuccinate, producing alpha-Ketoglutarate, and another step involves
the reduction of ubiquinone by (*) FAD, after which fumarate is converted to malate. It begins with the
reaction of oxaloacetate with acetyl CoA from pyruvate produced in an earlier process. NAD+ is converted
to NADH in this process which succeeds glycolysis. For ten points, name this step in cellular respiration,
also known as the citric acid cycle.
ANSWER: Szent-Gyorgyi-Krebs cycle (accept citric acid cycle before mentioned)
This process can be regulated by calcium's activation of isocitrate dehydrogenase. In its third step,
two molecules of carbon dioxide leave to form alpha-ketoglutarate. At the beginning of this process,
two molecules of carbon dioxide are stripped to form an [*] acetaldehyde intermediate, which later
becomes acetyl-CoA, and the last step of this process uses FAD to transform two molecules of fumarate to
malate. Beginning with two molecules of pyruvate and producing NADH, for 10 points, identify this
component of cell respiration between glycolysis and electron transport, sometimes known as the citric acid
cycle.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [accept citric acid cycle until read]
The elements that enter this process cannot be followed past its fifth step because the products are
symmetric. An isomerism step in this reaction is catalyzed by an enzyme which contains an iron-sulfur center. 
The aspartate-arginino-succinate shunt of this process is coupled with the Urea cycle
in a process known as its discoverer's "bi-cycle." FAD is reduced to FADH2 in a step that also
produces (*) fumarate in this process. Aconitase is an early enzyme in this process, one of whose names
refers to the fact that its first product has three carboxyl groups. Two decarboxylations in this cycle release
carbon dioxide. For 10 points, name this process that follows pyruvate dehydrogenase's production of
Acetyl-CoA, which was elucidated by Hans Krebs.
ANSWER: citric acid cycle [accept TCA cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle until "carboxyl" ; accept SzentGyorgyi-Krebs cycle until mentioned]
One enzyme in this pathway is mutated in the endochondroma-causing Ollier's disease. The fact
that one intermediate in this process is prochiral allows an iron-sulfur enzyme to stereospecifically
isomerize it through a cis-aconitate intermediate. Its first step sees (*) oxaloacetate combine with
acetyl-CoA and happens in the mitochondria. For 10 points, name this cycle important in respiration, which
occurs after glycolysis and before the electron transport chain.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [or Citric acid cycle or citrate cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle or TCA cycle]
In this pathway, fluoroacetate can form a derivative that permanently binds to a certain enzyme, leading to
arrest of this pathway. One step involves a dehydrogenase catalyzing the formation of the anion alpha-
ketoglutarate. That anion is produced in two steps, with a decarboxylation from oxalosuccinate following an
oxidation from the iso- form of the first product of this process. Later in this process, flavin adenine
dinucleotide or FAD is used to produce malate from fumarate. It is preceded by the conversion of pyruvate
to acetyl-CoA, which combines with oxaloacetate to yield citrate. For 10 points, name this cycle, also called
the citric acid cycle, which follows glycolysis in cellular respiration.
ANSWER: Szent-Gyorgyi-Krebs cycle [or citric acid cycle before mentioned; or TCA/tricarboxylic acid cycle]
The intermediates in this process are replenished in anapleurotic reactions. One intermediate in
this pathway combines with glycine in porphyrin synthesis. A key enzyme in this process uses an iron
sulfur cluster to move a hydroxyl group and is known as aconitase. In its first step, oxaloacetate
combines with (*) acetyl-CoA, a reaction catalyzed by citrate synthase. It occurs in the mitochondria after
glycolysis. For 10 points, name this cycle important in generating ATP.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle or citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle
This process includes substrate-level phosphorylation during the creation of succinate from succinyl CoA.
The step after that one features the formation of fumarate. At the end of it, malate is converted into
oxaloacetate, allowing the cycle to continue, and NAD+ is reduced to NADH. Just before it, pyruvate is
transformed into acetyl coenzyme A, and it produces one molecule of ATP and a host of molecules used in
the electron transport chain. Also called the citric acid cycle, for 10 points, name this cycle of cellular
respiration occurring in the mitochondria.
ANSWER: Krebs Cycle [accept Citric Acid Cycle before mentioned]
The glyoxylate cycle uses many of the same enzymes that are involved in this process. Several
neurodegenerative diseases show a reduction of function of alpha-ketoglutarate dehygrogenase, an
enzyme complex in this process. Two molecules of carbon dioxide and one molecule of FADH2 result
from this process. In its first step, oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA combine to form citrate. This process
occurs in the matrix of the (*) mitochondria and precedes the electron transport chain. For 10 points,
name this cycle that follows glycolysis in cellular respiration.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [or tricarboxylic acid cycle; or TCA cycle; or citric acid cycle]
One intermediate in this pathway is also used by ALA synthase, where that compound is combined with
glycine to yield aminolevulinic acid, and an enzyme in this pathway is involved in a shuttle which uses the
transamination of aspartate to "transport" NADH across a membrane. Another enzyme in this pathway, like
the PDHC, uses thiamine pyrophosphate and a dihydrolipoamide succinyl-transferase. Yet another step in
this pathway sees the isomerization of an intermediate via aconitase, while the succinate dehydrogenase in
this pathway is alternatively called "complex II" in the electron transport chain. Preceded by the
decarboxylation of pyruvate, this is, for 10 points, which cycle of cellular respiration which sees a molecule
of acetyl coA yield several high energy electron carriers, sometimes named for the citrate intermediate
formed at its beginning?
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [accept: Citric acid cycle or Tri Carboxylic Acid cycle until "citrate" is mentioned]
Although it does not involve derivatives of malonic acid, the input to this pathway is formed by a
complex containing many copies of the enzymes dihydrolipoyl transacetylase and E1, the latter of
which requires the cofactor TPP. The iron-sulfur protein aconitase catalyzes the isomerization of one
molecule in this process to its iso- form. An intermediate in this process inhibits phosphofructokinase,
and calcium upregulates this process by activating alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. In one step of this
process, succinate is oxidized to form fumarate. Acetyl-CoA reacts with oxaloacetate in the first step of this
process, which occurs in the mitochondrial matrix and generates much of the NADH subsequently used for
oxidative phosphorylation. For 10 points, name this process that succeeds glycolysis and is sometimes
known as the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
ANSWER: Szent-Gyorgyi-Krebs cycle [or citric acid cycle; or tricarboxylic acid cycle or TCA cycle until it is read]
In this process, calcium activates isocitrate dehydrogensase and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
In this process, succinate dehydrogenase turns succinate into fumarate. Electrons produced in this
process transform [*] FAD+ into FADH2, which re-donates those electrons in a later process. NADH also
stores electrons from this process that begins with the reaction of oxaloacetate with acetyl CoA, which is
created before this process from pyruvate. Succeeding glycolysis and preceding the electron transport chain,
for 10 points, name this cycle also known as the citric acid cycle, part of cellular respiration.
ANSWER: Szent-Gyorgyi-Krebs cycle [accept "citric acid cycle" before mentioned; or tricarboxylic acid cycle]
A form of this pathway which essentially runs in reverse is known as the reductive form and is
carried out by green sulfur bacteria. One enzyme used in this process is aconitase. In another step in
this process, malate is formed by adding a water molecule to fumarate, which itself is formed a step
earlier when succinate is oxidized by (*) FAD to form FADH2. In the first step of this pathway,
oxaloacetic acid is combined with acetyl-CoA, which enters this pathway after being converted from
pyruvate. For 10 points, name this part of aerobic respiration that precedes the electron transport chain and
occurs in the matrix of mitochondria.
ANSWER: Szent-Gyrgyi-Krebs cycle [or citric acid cycle; or tricarboxylic acid cycle; or TCA cycle]
Malic acid is used as a catalyst for this because it consumes pyruvic acid without building up lactic acid. It
consists of a series of 8 reactions, and, in the first, carbon atoms enter as acetyl-CoA, and the last reaction
results in the regeneration of oxaloacetate. This cycle is both catabolic and anabolic. From each pyruvate
molecule inserted, 3 Carbon Dioxide, 1 FADH2, 3 NADH and ATP molecule are produced. FTP, name this
cycle that occurs in the mitochondria and uses oxygen in cellular respiration, also known as the Citric Acid
Cycle.
ANSWER: Krebs Cycle (Accept Citric Acid Cycle before stated)
Phosphofructokinase-1 is allosterically inhibited by the first intermediate in this pathway. Fatty acids enter
this pathway following beta-oxidation. Aspartate can enter this pathway after being catabolized to fumarate.
The input to this pathway is generated by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Coenzyme A is separated
from acetyl, which is then added to oxaloacetate to form citric acid at the beginning of this pathway, which
yields three NADH molecules and occurs in the mitochondrial matrix. The NADH is then sent to the
electron transport chain in the mitochondria to complete the process of respiration. For 10 points, name this
cycle that follows glycolysis in aerobic respiration.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [or tricarboxylic acid cycle; or TCA cycle; or citric acid cycle until "citric acid" is read]
One enzyme in this process known as acontinase is involved in a rehydration reaction after a dehydration
one. Ubiquinone is degraded in one step by a protein using a FADH2 cofactor, and fumarate is formed in
the only membrane-bound step of this process. This process takes place in the mitochondrial matrix after
pyruvate decarboxylation forms acetyl coenzyme A, and it produces NADH. For 10 points, name this
metabolic pathway that is followed by the electron transport chain, an anaerobic process central to cellular
respiration.
ANSWER: Krebs Cycle [accept citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle or TCA]
One step in this process produces one molecule of both succinate and GTP. The beta oxidation of
fatty acids produces one reactant in this process as well as energy, and the enzyme pyruvate
dehydrogenase acts on molecules just before entering this process. The first step of this process sees
acetyl coenzyme A add to (*) oxoloacetate to form a namesake six carbon product, and each circuit
produces three molecules of NADH2 plus and one molecule of FADH2 for the electron transport chain.
For 10 points, name this mitochondrial process following glycolysis in cellular respiration sometimes
named the citric acid cycle.
ANSWER: Krebs Cycle [accept Citric Acid Cycle before mentioned]
This process begins with an aldol condensation of a thioester to form cis-aconitate. Plants use glyoxylate
rather than undergoing the two consecutive decarboxylations which transform a tricarboxylic acid into
succinate during this process. Flavin adenine dinucleotide, or FAD, is doubly reduced in this pathway. In
this process' first step, acetyl coenzyme A reacts with oxaloacetate to form this pathway's namesake
compound, which is oxidized several times to produces NADH for the electron transport chain. For 10
points, name this metabolic cycle which occurs in the mitochondrial matrix during cellular respiration.
ANSWER: Szent-Gyorgi-Krebs cycle [Accept citric acid cycle; accept tricarboxylic acid cycle before it's mentioned, prompt after.]
A molecule important in this process is formed when beta-oxidation breaks down fatty acids, and one step
in it produces L-malate from fumarate. Beginning when oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA react, it sends
succinate, FADH2, and NADH to the electron transport chain. Pyruvate from glycolysis starts this pathway
that occurs in the matrix of the mitochondrion. For 10 points, name this second stage of cellular respiration,
often named for a German-born biologist.
ANSWER: Szent-Gyorgyi-Krebs cycle [or Krebs-Szent-Gyorgi cycle; accept citric acid cycle or citrate cycle; prompt on tricarboxylic acid cycle]
One step in this process is the reaction of succinate and ubiquinone, while an enzyme key to another step is
fumarase. Another step in this set of reactions is an aldol condensation of oxaloacetic acid to give a
namesake six-carbon compound. This process, which follows glycolysis, begins by converting pyruvate to
acetyl CoA, and some reactions require FADH2 as a prosthetic group. Its end products include two net
ATP, and it is carried out in the mitochondrial matrix. For 10 points, name this stage of cellular respiration
also called the citric acid cycle.
ANSWER: Krebs cycle [or citric acid cycle before the end]
This structure's activity can be measured by the breakdown of ONPG and formation of the yellow
orthonitrophenol. One mutation in it is tested for using phenyl-Gal. Two of its structural elements
produce a detoxifying transacetylase and a permease. CAP forms a complex with cAMP to allow (*)
RNA polymerase to bind to its weak promoter; this allows glucose to downregulate its activity. The
repressor produced by this element's I gene is inhibited by the allo- form of the sugar that beta-
galactosidase, one of its gene products, breaks down. For 10 points, name this operon that regulates the
catabolism of a sugar found in milk.
ANSWER: lac operon
pUC19 [pr. "puck 19"] cloning vectors contain ampicillin resistance and a gene named for this structure. A
protein encoded by this structure cleaves ONPG into yellow ortho-nitrophenol, and its activity is measured
in blue-white screening tests, when colonies are plated on X-gal. IPTG induces the activity of this structure.
It can only be bound by a heterodimer of CAP and cAMP in a common example of catabolite repression.
This structure's Z, Y, and A subunits encode a transacetylase, a permease, and a beta-galactosidase.
According to the Jacob-Monot model of this structure, it is a negative inducible system, repressed at high
levels of glucose, which places three genes under the control of one promoter. For 10 points, name this
operon that produces enzymes which break down milk sugar.
ANSWER: lac operon [or lacA; or lacZ; or lacY; or lacI; or lac promoter; or lac repressor; or betagalactosidase before it is read; prompt on "operons"]
This structure encodes a tetrameric protein that binds to O1, O2, and O3 sites. One part of this
system is joined to the UAS sequence in a common two-hybrid assay reporter. It is activated using
IPTG. It is positively regulated by the Catabolite Activator Protein, which binds to cAMP. Its
mutations include one which stops the binding of a repressor protein, leading to constitutive
activation, and a super-repressor mutation in which the repressor fails to disassociate. It encodes a
(*) transacetylase, permease, and galactosidase as part of a polycistronic RNA. It is minimally activated
when glucose is high. It was first characterized by Jacob and Monod in E. Coli. For 10 points, name this
prototypical gene expression system which regulates lactose metabolism.
ANSWER: lac operon [prompt on "operon" or "lac"; accept LacZ, LacA, LacY, or LacI]
One assay for measuring this entity's activity involves production of the yellow byproduct orthonitrophenol
from ONPG. In vivo, IPTG can be used to directly induce this entity's activity, which can then be
monitored by breakdown of X-gal. This entity's structural elements produce permease and transacetylase
enzymes. Cyclic AMP binds to catabolite activator protein in the positive regulation of this genetic
construct, which also produces the enzyme beta-galactosidase. Its activity is negated in the presence of large
amounts of glucose because glucose can substitute as a carbon source for its namesake sugar. For 10 points,
identify this operon regulating the breakdown of that sugar, which is found in milk.
ANSWER: lac operon [accept beta-galactosidase until "induce"]
One protein in this system is a homotetramer with each component consisting of an alpha and omega chain,
and uses Glu-537 as a nucleophile, while another contains four helix-turn-helix motifs. Enzyme IIA must be
phosphorylated in order for it to function. It can be artificially induced using IPTG and its activity in a broth
is observed using ONPG. Mutants like O-c and I-S in this system were characterized using
complementation testing, and the CAP protein activates it by binding to cyclic AMP in a form of catabolite
repression. It codes for a polycistronic mRNA that translates into transacetylase, permease, and beta-
galactosidase. Discovered by Jacob and Monod and consisting of Z, Y, and A genes, for 10 points, name
this cluster of genes responsible for breaking down lactose.
ANSWER: Lac operon
Alfred Donne discovered what he called "granular bodies" in a substance secreted during this process,
colostrum. Mastitis may occur if a newborn undergoes an irregular form of this action, known as
galactorrhea. The product of this process in humans contains high levels of immunoglobulin A, lysozymes
and casein ("CAY-sin"), and this action is maintained by PRL and oxytocin, which cause a positive
feedback mechanism. This action begins after progesterone levels lower and prolactin levels rise,
stimulating the mammary glands. Breasts or udders facilitate, for 10 points, this action of secreting milk for
the nourishment of offspring.
ANSWER: lactation [accept nursing or breast feeding; accept things like milk production before mention]
Cotton blue, a dye used to classify fungal spores, is usually used in a solution of this molecule. MCT1
governs the uptake of this molecule by tumor cells. A landmark study altering one hypothesis about its
function was performed by George Brooks. Copolymers of this molecule and another slightly smaller
molecule are commonly used as a synthetic, biodegradable extracellular matrix. Buchner and Mesenheimer
failed to convert this molecule into alcohol and carbon dioxide, hampering their theory that it is an
intermediate in alcoholic fermentation; however, a different type of fermentation, often used by muscle
cells, converts glucose into this molecule. For 10 points, name this acid, long thought to be the cause of
delayed muscle soreness.
ANSWER: lactic acid [accept lactate until "acid"]
Diabetic patients taking metformin may see a buildup of this substance, and that buildup can inhibit
phosphofructokinase. Cardiac muscle is highly permeable to this compound, where it is burned as a source
of fuel. It can be converted to glucose in the liver by the Cori cycle. It is typically produced from pyruvate
in the absence of sufficient oxygen. Common in sour or fermented dairy products like yogurt, for 10 points,
identify this metabolic product, mirrored by ethanol in plants, the result of a fermentation pathway.
ANSWER: lactic acid or lactate
28 milli-equivalents of this substance are found in Ringer's solution. Two molecules of this substance are
shuttled to the liver to eventually undergo gluconeogenesis in the Cori cycle. This substance is essentially
propionic acid with an extra hydroxyl group at the alpha carbon. This substance's namesake dehydrogenase
produces it in order to regenerate NAD+; that process, which generates this substance from pyruvate, is
anaerobic fermentation. For 10 points, name this acid that builds up in muscle during heavy exercise.
ANSWER: lactate [or lactic acid]
In addition to sodium and calcium, this molecule's conjugate base appears in a solution named for
Hartmann. The diabetic drug Metformin can cause abdominal pain and tachycardia in an acidosis named for
this molecule. The heart can fuel itself with this molecule, which is converted to pyruvate in the liver to
eventually reform glucose. That process, in which this molecule participates as an intermediate, is the Cori
Cycle. In the absence of sufficient oxygen, the human body converts pyruvate to this molecule using its
namesake dehydrogenase. For 10 points, name this product of fermentation that causes athletes pain and is
often found in sour milk.
ANSWER: lactic acid [or CH3CH(OH)COOH; or lactate; or C3H6O3; or CH3CH(OH)COO _ ; or milk acid; or 2-hydroxypropanoic acid]
ALP and the enzyme that oxidizes this substance are the most common markers for dysgerminoma. MCTs
can transport molecules of it and a related oxidized substance across membranes. MELAS disease and
tissue hypoxia can lead to increased levels of this substance in the blood, a namesake acidosis. In the liver,
one molecule of NAD+ is reduced to oxidize its alpha-hydroxyl group, generating pyruvate and starting off
gluconeogenesis. This compound is the result of the simplest alternative to cellular respiration. For 10
points, name this compound which is a byproduct of fermentation associated with a lack of oxygen in
muscles, which also can be found in sour milk.
ANSWER: lactate [or lactic acid]
This substance is the third most concentrated ingredient behind sodium and chloride in Hartmann's and
Ringer's solutions, which can be administered through an IV. Stannous octoate catalysts are used to create a
polymer of this chemical, which is produced by L. casei and L. brevis. MCTs are needed to pump this
substance out of the cell. This substance moves to the liver where it is turned into glucose in the Cori cycle.
Its namesake dehydrogenase can from it in the body from pyruvate, and it is used to create ATP when
oxygen is unavailable to run the electron transport chain in a form of fermentation. For 10 points, name this
substance traditionally viewed to cause acidosis during extreme exercise.
ANSWER: lactic acid [or lactate; or 2-hydroxypropanoic acid; or milk acid]
Along with glycolic acid, this molecule forms a synthetic polymer used in tissue engineering. This
molecule is recycled in the Cori Cycle. Unlike in another pathway, the most common pathway for
producing this molecule does not produce carbon dioxide along with ATP; in addition to (*) ethanol,
this molecule is a common result of fermentation. This molecule is produced by muscles under anaerobic
conditions. For 10 points, name this acid found in sour milk.
ANSWER: lactic acid [or lactate]
A polymer of it has uses in biodegradable plastics, and a buildup of it in the bloodstream will lead to
symptoms of excessive sweating, rapid breathing, and cool and clammy skin. Higher measurements of it can
be a result of dehydration, and more of it is located in veinous blood than in arterial blood. When being
tested for this, it is advised not to exercise before blood is drawn. It is naturally produced in red blood cells
and in muscles when they operate with a lack of oxygen. FTP, name this organic acid with chemical formula
C3H6O3, that builds up in the muscles during a strenuous anaerobic workout, notably found in sour milk.
ANSWER: Lactic Acid (accept Lactate)
Soviet scientist Ivan Michurin was a proponent of this scientist's theories, which he passed on to Trofim
Lysenko. This scientist coined the term invertebrates and developed a system of classification for them. A
student of the Comte de Buffon, he proposed that giraffes stretching out their necks passed on that trait to
their children. For 10 points, name this French naturalist who proposed a theory of inheritance of acquired
traits.
ANSWER: Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
Some of his first research was on worms and insects, and he is credited with coining the word
"invertebrates". He identified two forces for evolution, noting how the complexifying force will produce
new organs while the adaptive force will strengthen the most used organs through evolution, and that time
and favorable conditions were the two means that nature has given for evolution. An example of that is
young giraffes having slightly longer necks than their parents to reach the higher leaves to support his
theory of evolution. FTP, identify this man who created the first coherent theory of evolution, famous for
his basic use and disuse theory and the inheritance of acquired characteristics.
ANSWER: Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
The first DNA ever sequenced consisted of 12 base pairs belonging to this organism. The replication of this
organism is triggered by the production of recA protease, which can be induced by ultraviolet light or other
stresses. This organism's R gene results in a product that degrades the peptidoglycan of the cell wall, while
its S gene protein allows for the transport of that product. Initial infection by this organism results in the
transcription of cro and N genes, and the prevalence of CII protein causes repression of lytic functions.
Unlike T4 and T7, replication is encoded in only two positions, O and P, in this virus, which uses the
synthesis of CI repressor from PRM to cause lysogeny. Infecting E. coli by targeting its lamB receptor, for
ten points, identify this temperate phage discovered by Esther and Joshua Lederberg, which is denoted by a
Greek letter.
ANSWER: lambda phage
Diabetes insipidus has occasionally been confused with a "Histiocytosis" of cells named after this man.
Those cells are a subclass of antigen-presenting cells also known as dendritic cells. A better known
structure named after this man produces such hormones as ghrelin in its epsilon cells and somatostatin
in its delta cells, while the better-known alpha and beta cells produce glucagon and insulin. For 10
points, name this German anatomist whose namesake "islets" are found in the pancreas.
ANSWER: Paul Langerhans
Gardner syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder of this organ, which is also the site of infection by
parasitic whipworms. The formation of pouches in this organ can lead to diverticulosis, and it is the main
site for synthesis of vitamins B-12 and K. The most distal region of this organ is called the sigmoid, and
among its most common diseases are pre-cancerous polyps and Crohn's, both of which are diagnosed by
colonoscopy. Prone to constipation due to inadequate fiber in the diet, this organ consists of the cecum
(SEE-kum) and colon. Responsible for reabsorbing water from indigestible waste, name this organ of the
digestive system which is attached to the end of the small intestine.
ANSWER: large intestine [prompt on colon or intestine]
This organ is found at the level of the upper cervical vertebrae in newborns, but descends later in life. The
two sides of the analogous structure in birds are connected by the pessulus. Three paired and three unpaired
cartilages, nine in total, support this organ, including the ladle-shaped arytenoid and ring-shaped cricoid
cartilages. This organ rises during swallowing, by raising one cartilage to close off the glottis. The acute
form of its inflammation can result from a cold or prolonged shouting. It is found beneath the pharynx and
houses the vocal folds. For 10 points, name this respiratory system organ also known as the "voice box."
ANSWER: larynx [prompt on "voice box" before it is mentioned]
This non-bone structure is depressed with the aid of four strap muscles. When diphtheria spreads to this
structure, it results in a higher than average fever and the greatest chance of complications. This structure
has three paired cartilages and three single ones, including the cricoid and the thyroid. As an infant grows
into an adult, this structure lowers from the C2-C3 vertebrae to the C3-C6. This structure sits atop the hyoid
bone and lies directly below the epiglottis, which prevents substances from entering it. This structure's main
function is known as phonation and is accomplished by the vibration of some folds. For 10 points, name
this structure that houses the vocal cords, commonly known as the voice box.
ANSWER: larynx [accept voice box before it is mentioned]
Defects in the NPXY sorting signal prevent this molecule's receptor from binding a clathrin/AP2
pit, leading to a disease abbreviated FH. SREBP activates transcription of this particle's receptor, a
protein that Brown and Goldstein won Nobel Prizes for characterizing. This molecule's oxidized
product accumulates in macrophages called foam cells. A massive 4536-residue monomer called (*)
ApoB-100 is one of its components. These particles have a much lower concentration of triglycerides than
do chylomicrons. A high concentration of these particles in blood vessels can lead to atherosclerosis. For
10 points, name these lipoproteins that transport cholesterol from the liver to the tissues, erroneously
known as "bad cholesterol."
ANSWER: LDL [or low-density lipoprotein; or very low-density lipoprotein or VLDL; prompt on partial answer; prompt on cholesterol before it is read]
Plants in which this structure disappears into the petiole are called phyllodes. This organ contains
small hair-like structures called trichomes [TRY-kohmz] on its epidermis. Transpiration rate and
moisture content are maintained by this organ's waxy (*) cuticle, and gas exchange in this organ is
regulated by the stomata. Pine needles and palm fronds are examples of, for 10 points, what flat plant
organs in which photosynthesis takes place?
ANSWER: leaf or leaves (accept foliage)
One type of cell in these structures has S-type and R-type anion channels which open to depolarize the
membrane after an influx of potassium ions causes a conformational shift. These structures contain a
spongy, permeable membrane below the upper palisade layer of cells. Stipules are attached near the petiole
of these structures. The first step of C4 carbon fixation occurs in mesophyll cells in these structures.
Reticulate veins in these structures are indicative of dicots. A cuticle on these structures prevents excess
water loss through transpiration, which occurs in their stomata. For 10 points, name these plant structures
where photosynthesis takes place.
ANSWER: leaves [prompt on "plants"; prompt on "stomata"; prompt on "guard cells"]
Venation of these structures can be classified as craspedodromous and camptodromous, and
trichomes are hair-like appendages on these structures. Stipules can be found near the base of these
structures. Their sessile types lack a petiole, and a layer of cylindrical cells called the (*) palisade layer
can be found above the spongy layer in these structures. Large, divided types of these structures are called
fronds, and those of monocots generally have parallel veins. Transpiration occurs through pores called
stomata on the underside of these features, which are usually green due to the chlorophyll in their
mesophyll. Petals are modified forms of, for ten points, which part of a plant that is found on the stem?
ANSWER: leaf (accept leaves)
These structures are incredibly resistant to water in the "lotus effect." These organs contain a
petiole, which connects to the larger organism at the axil. These organs are "succulent," in CAM
metabolism. Their structure consists of a (*) cuticle, an upper epidermis, two layers of mesophyll, and a
lower epidermis that contains openings called stomata. Transpiration occurs through these organs, which
also contain vascular material like xylem and phloem. For 10 points, name this organ specialized for
carrying out photosynthesis, a flat green part of a plant.
ANSWER: leaf [or leaves]
Unilacunar and trilacunar describe whether a stripule is present on these structures. Their high
resistance to water is epitomized in the Lotus effect. Connected to a petiole, microscopic cylindrical
shapes known as (*) palisade cells are located within its mesophyll. Their guard cells can be found in the
stomata, which are openings that allow for the intake of carbon dioxide and the release of oxygen. For 10
points, name these venous organs of plants that are the location for photosynthesis and turn different colors
during autumn.
ANSWER: leaf [or leaves]
The tips or edges of these structures exude water in guttation (GOO-tay-shun), and they are held
to the body by petioles. They fall off in a process known as abscission. Their internal structure
contains a palisade mesophyll (MEH-soh-fill) on top of a spongy mesophyll. Their waxy (*) cuticle
prevents water loss, and they also have small openings called stomata, which permit transpiration. For 10
points, name these chlorophyll-rich plant structures, which often change color in the fall.
ANSWER: leaf
The Lotus effect represents the adaptation of this structure to extreme moisture, and arums often
contain spathes, which are large bracts, which are a modified form of these. Floccose and bearded are
two words commonly used to describe their trichomes, or their "hairs". Directly below their adaxial
epidermis lies the series of cylindrical cells known as the palisade layer, and in angiosperms, they come
with lamina and petioles. Analogous to the frond of the fern, for 10 points, name this plant organ which
also has guard cells and stomata, the site of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: leaf [or leaves]
Although the cuticle surrounds this structure to prevent water loss, it also emits excessive water through
guttation. The epidermal layer on its lower surface is interrupted by openings called stomata, surrounded by
guard cells, which control transpiration. Some plants lose this structure through abscission. For 10 points,
name this plant organ where photosynthesis takes place and, because of high concentration of chloroplasts,
often looks green.
ANSWER: leaf
Rhyncobdellida species of this animal are jawless and therefore must insert a needle-like proboscis into the
body of the host to feed. In addition, they secrete an enzyme, hemetin which dissolves clots once they have
formed. The Australian species of this creature is unique in that it has only two jaws instead of the normal
three and it will make a V-shaped incision. Those who are bitten by this annelid can see a bite mark that is
in a Y-shape. Belonging to the subclass Hirudinea, FTP name these animals, who bloodsucking habit can
often be seen used for medicinal purposes.
ANSWER: leeches
Aphakia (uh-FAY-key-uh) is an absence of this structure, which is often displaced in a type of ectopia
suffered by people with Marfan's syndrome. The hyaloid artery supplies this structure in infants, and its
fibers contain alpha, beta, and gamma-crystallin. This structure is held in place by the zonule fibers, which
attach to the ciliary muscle. It is responsible for accommodation when it is stretched and is clouded by
cataracts. For 10 points, name this structure that focuses light in the eye along with the cornea.
ANSWER: crystalline lens [prompt on eye]
The creator of this experiment posited a form of adaptive gene loss in the Black Queen Hypothesis. In
one instance, this experiment showed the contingency of pykF and nadR polymorphisms. By using a
gene duplication of the CitT gene under the control of an mk promoter, several subjects of this
experiment gained the ability to metabolize (*) citrate. The setup of this experiment contains half Ara
plus and half Ara minus strains and relies on daily 1:100 serial dilution in DM25 medium. The subjects of
this experiment are contained in twelve
flasks and have undergone over fifty thousand generations of reproduction. For 10 points, name this
experiment in which a common laboratory strain of bacteria has been subjected to 20 years of evolution.
ANSWER: Lenski's longterm E. coli evolution experiment [accept anything mentioning the long term evolution of E. Coli]
This scientist's complete misunderstanding of the female reproductive system was due to the fact that all his
dissections were of dead drunks, who were generally male. This man was the first to correctly depict the 
S-shaped curve of the spine. This man's studies of birds flying inspired a sketch of an ornithopter, with a man
lying on a plank using pulleys to flap its wings. His most famous scientific drawing is named for the author
of De Architectura and shows a man with four arms touching edges of a square and four legs touching the
circumference of a circle. For 10 points, identify this polymath who drew the Vitruvian Man and painted the
Mona Lisa.
ANSWER: Leonardo [di Ser Piero] da Vinci [accept either underlined portion]
This order includes the commercially important species Bombyx mori, which largely feed on the
genus Morus, which is part of the Moraceae family. Large numbers of individuals in this order were
discovered by Catalina Trail and Kenny Brugger, who confirmed the theories developed by Fred
Urquhart. Bernard (*) Kettlewell studied the impact of dark soot on members of this order in industrial
England. The ontogeny of this order includes a chrysalis stage. One member of this order develops its
toxicity by consuming milkweed leaves in a juvenile stage as a caterpillar. For 10 points, name this order
that includes the Viceroy and Monarchs in addition to other moths and butterflies.
ANSWER: Lepidoptera
A popular model organism in this order is Manduca sexta. This order can be divided, based on the
relationship between the ovipore and copulatory pore in females, into montrysians, exoporians, and
ditrysians. Organisms in this order have four wings, each of which are covered in scales. Some organisms in
this phylum can synthesize hydrogen cyanide. One species in this order, Biston betularia, exhibited a
marked shift in the ratio of its light and dark forms during the Industrial Revolution. Larvae in this order
include tent worms, armyworms, and inchworms, as well as the most common form, caterpillars. For 10
points, giant silk worms and monarchs belong to which order of insects consisting of moths and butterflies?
ANSWER: Lepidoptera
The agent of this disease binds to laminin-2 on Schwann cells, resulting in its namesake neuritis of the
peripheral nervous system. Granuloma of the mucous membranes in the upper respiratory tract is a
primary internal symptom of this disease. Depending on whether it is multibacillary or
paucibacillary, this disease is commonly treated with some mix of clofazimine, rifampicin and
dapsone in multidrug therapy, or MDT. (*) Armadillos are the only other known sufferers of this disease,
and its characteristic symptoms include skin lesions. For 10 points, name this disease caused by a
mycobacterium whose sufferers were exiled to its namesake colonies.
ANSWER: leprosy [Accept Hansen's disease]
One complication of it is called Lucio's phenomenon and results in necrosis of arteriole endothelial tissue.
Erythema nodosum is another complication of its diffuse type, which histologically resembles
leukocytoclastic vasculitis and can be a response to a Herxheimer reaction. The diffuse type can cause
smoothening of wrinkles, while other varieties of it include neuritic, borderline, and tuberculoid. Standard
treatment includes rifampicin, dapsone, and clofazimine, and G. H. A. Hansen discovered the
mycobacterium responsible for it. Largely found in developing countries like Brazil and India, this is, for 10
points, what disease that causes severe skin lesions and nerve damage and the mistakenly believed to result
in limbs falling off?
ANSWER: leprosy (accept Hansen's disease until stated)
The main treatment for this disease, often referred to as MDT, contains both clofazimine and
rifampicin.The Ridley-Jopling system classifies this disease, which can also be classified into paucibacillary
and multibacillary forms. This disease can be treated with Dapsone and is known for causing macules and
papules, two different types of skin lesions. Caused by the Myobacterium genus, for 10 points, name this
disease sometimes referred to as Hansen's disease whose severity and highly contagious nature have led
sufferers of it to be quarantined to namesake colonies.
ANSWER: leprosy
The Mitsuda test describes of the ability of a body to participate in a cell mediated immune response against
this disease, and preparations named for Dharmendra are used in that test. Lucio's name is appended to an
acute form of it. It can be classified into paucibacillary and mutlibacillary based upon skin smear results,
and the tuberculoid form of it results in localized skin lesions. Armadillos also harbor its causative agent,
and it is sometimes named for Hansen. Resulting in skin lesions and nerve damage, for 10 points, name this
disease which, like tuberculosis, is caused by a mycobacterium, and is also associated with certain
"colonies" where its patients were isolated.
ANSWER: leprosy [accept: Hansen's disease until mentioned; accept lepromin until "this disease"]
Clofazimine, rifampin, and dapsone are common medicines used in a multi-drug treatment against
this disease, and other medicines used include prednisone and thalidomide. 95% of humans are
naturally immune to this disease caused by a (*) mycobacterium whose only other known carrier in the
animal kingdom is the armadillo. For 10 points, name this disease, also known as Hansen's disease,
characterized by skin lesions and whose sufferers have historically been sent to namesake "colonies."
ANSWER: leprosy [accept Hansen's disease before mention]
Alpha dystroglycan proteins in Schwann cells serve as receptors for this disease's causative agent. The skin
test for this disease uses preparations named for Dharmendra, and carbol fuschin is necessary to stain for its
causative agent. One study showed that the microbe that causes this disease has lost functionality in nearly
fifty percent of its genome. Armadillos are thought to be the only non-humans susceptible to this disease,
which is often treated with dapsone. Like tuberculosis, it is caused by a microbacterium. For 10 points,
name this illness also known as "Hansen's disease" that causes nerve damage and skin lesions, sufferers of
which were often sequestered to "colonies."
ANSWER: leprosy [or Hansen's disease until mention]
The pathogen responsible for this disease can bind the laminin-2-dystroglycan complex, allowing it
to attack Schwann cells. One test for disease looks for phenolic glycolipid I antibodies. The symptoms
of this disease are determined by whether type one or type two helper T cells dominate the response.
This disease can infect only one (*) animal besides humans, armadillos. For 10 points, name this disease
which includes skin lesions, whose sufferers used to be exiled into namesake colonies.
ANSWER: leprosy [or Hansen's disease]
In addition to Parkinson's, this disease has been shown to be linked to the genes PACRG and
PARK2. The Fernandez reaction indicates a positive result in one test for this disease, an acute form
of which is named after Lucio. This disease is classified into paucibacillary and multibacillary forms,
the latter of which is cured with doses of (*) clofazimine, rifampicin, and dapsone. Also susceptible to
armadillos, this disease causes nerve damage and, most notably, skin lesions. For 10 points, identify this
affliction also known as Hanson's Disease, whose sufferers have historically been segregated into
namesake, isolated "colonies."
ANSWER: leprosy [accept Hanson's Disease on early buzz]
It's not tuberculosis, but this disease's causative agent is a Mycobacterium. Baldwin IV of Jerusalem was
known as the "king" of this disease. The tzaraath that Moses's sister Miriam was afflicted with is commonly
held to be this disease. This disease was first named by Gerhard Hansen and its victims were cared for by
Father Damian on the island of Molokai. For 10 points, name this skin disease whose suffers were
quarantined in namesake colonies.
ANSWER: leprosy [or Hansen's disease before mention]
Like methionine, a diazirine derivative of this amino acid is a photo-activateable crosslinker.
A small type of proteoglycan rich in this amino acid includes decorin and lumican. Ribonuclease
inhibitor contains a domain rich in repeats of it, which is also found in toll-like receptors. Like
amino acids labelled I and V, this amino acid cannot be processed in sufferers of maple syrup
urine disease. This amino acid is also the namesake of a domain found in c-Fos, c-Jun, and other
transcription factors that allows them to form dimers; that domain is its namesake zipper. For 10
points, name this amino acid which contains an isobutyl side chain and whose one-letter
abbreviation is L.
ANSWER: leucine [or L until it is read]
One form of this disease sees the ABL and BCR genes juxtaposed as a result of a translocation between
chromosomes 9 and 22, which is called the Philadelphia chromosome. In another form of this disease,
projections from affected cells result in a "hairy" appearance. This disease is characterized in part
by whether it affects myeloid [MY-uh-loyd] tissue, lymphocytes or lymphoblasts. This disease is often
diagnosed with a bone marrow examination as the disease begins in the marrow. Name this cancer
that results in a very high white blood cell count.
ANSWER: leukemia [prompt on cancer]
Ludwig Gross was able to inoculate this disease into neonatal mice, proving that there existed a virus
for it in that organism. One form of this disease involves the translocation of chromosomes 9 and 22,
resulting in the so-called Philadelphia chromosome. This disease might be caused by the retrovirus
HTLV-1 or by exposure to (*) benzene. This disease comes in varieties like "chronic myelogenous" and
one named for the appearance of "hairy cells" under a microscope. It starts at the bone marrow and was
common among children who survived the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic blasts. For 10 points, name this
cancer which sees an increase in white blood cell count.
ANSWER: leukemia [accept specific forms mentioned in this question, such as chronic myelogenous leukemia or CML; and hairy cell leukemia; prompt on cancer]
Screening for this disease may include molecular tests to look for mutations in FLT3-R and NPM-1,
as well as BM bx with flow cytometry. Staining of myeloperoxidase can be used to test for the acute
form of this disease and it is the presence of myeloperoxidase that is responsible for the green color of
chloromas, which are most often found in patients with this disease. (*) One abnormality linked to this
disease makes a BCR-ABL gene by reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22. That is the
Philadelphia Chromosome and often results in the chronic myelogenous form of this disease. In addition to
that form, this disease has a lymphocytic variety which most often affects B-cells. For 10 points, name this
cancer of the blood or marrow where non-functional white blood cells replicate out of control.
ANSWER: leukemia (accept lymphoma until myeloperoxidase)
Two types of this disease are divided according to the French-American-British, or FAB, classification
system. A rare type of this disease is characterized by fine projections on cells, which look like hairs.
Several types of this disease results from the creation of a BCR-ABL fusion gene. That gene is created by
reciprocal translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22, forming the Philadelphia
chromosome, and people with it respond to treatment with imatinib. Most commonly, linear groupings of
primary granules, called Auer rods, are characteristic of one type of this disease. It can be diagnosed with
complete blood counts or bone marrow aspirations. It can be classified based on the presence of abnormal
mature or immature cells, and also comes in myelogenous and lymphocytic types. For 10 points, name this
disease that can be acute or chronic, a cancer in which nonfunctional white blood cells accumulate.
ANSWER: leukemia [do not accept or prompt on "lymphoma"]
BRCA1 was incorrectly believed to have post-transcriptionally modified a gene responsible for
Fanconi anemia, a risk factor for the acute myelogenous form of this class of diseases. The spleen
enlarges in one neoplasm of it, a namesake "hairy cell" version, and patients with most forms of it can
experience petechiae, or pinprick bleeds. One type of it predominately affects myeloid tissue, or bone
marrow, and the acute form of it must be given immediate treatment. For 10 points, name this cancer
characterized by the abnormal proliferation of white blood cells.
ANSWER: leukemia
One variety of this disease is diagnosed by staining for tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase and shows
hairlike projections. Another subtype is distinguished by the presence of Auer rods, and is treated with
ATRA due to the presence of a PML-RAR-alpha fusion protein. Imatinib treats another variety of this
disease expressing BCR-ABL from the Philadelphia chromosome; that variety evolves into a "blast crisis".
Patients with this disease often develop pinprick bleeds. People with Down syndrome are at higher risk for
the most common type of this disease. Subtypes include acute lymphoblastic and chronic myelogenous.
Acute types of this disease are characterized by a buildup of immature blood cells. For 10 points, name this
cancer of the bone marrow.
ANSWER: leukemia [do NOT accept "lymphoma"]
For some reason, these organisms name a condition in which white spots cause scarring around female
genitalia. The oldest fossil of this organism, Winfrenatia, probably existed before they could choose to
reproduce either asexually via isidia or via spores called apothecia. The thallus of these organisms consists
of four interlaced filaments underneath a cortex which may be porous in the case of some Parmeliacaea
species. These organisms are classified as fruticose, foliose, or crustose depending on whether or not they
have branched, leafy, or flat and painted growth forms. These organisms were largely a mystery until
botanist Simon Schwendener proposed the "dual theory" that explained that they consist of a fungus and
photosynthetic form. For 10 points, name this mutualistic composite organism.
ANSWER: lichens
Corticated outgrowths of these organisms' thalli that are used in reproduction are called isidia, and soredia
are another of their reproductive structures. Spore body types found in these organisms include apothecia,
perithecia, and pycnidia. One genus of these organisms with a porous thallus is Parmelia. Different types of
these organisms have either leafy, flat and painted, or branched growth forms. Those describe the fruticose,
foliose and crustose types of these organisms. They consist of a mycobiont and a phycobiont, the latter of
which may be cyanobacteria but is more commonly an alga. For 10 points, name these symbiotic organisms
that consist of a fungus and a photosynthetic lifeform.
ANSWER: lichens [prompt on "fungus"]
The reproduction of these organisms is often undertaken by releasing diaspores, usually either in the soredia
or isidia form. They were previously placed in the phylum mycophycophyta, and they are typically
classified by growth forms such as "crustose," "filamentous," and "fruticose." They can subsist in extreme
environments, but their extreme susceptibility to pollution makes them useful gauges of air quality and
ozone depletion. One of them known as R. tinctoria is boiled to yield the pH indicator litmus. For 10 points,
name these organisms that are symbiotic combinations of a fungus and an alga.
ANSWER: lichens
NGC 3582 is of interest to astronomers due to the presence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which
could lead to the emergence of this. The Gosper glider gun was the first pattern to grow indefinitely in a
game named after this, which is the most notable cellular automaton. The Miller-Urey experiment proved
that spontaneous abiogenesis is a viable theory for the emergence of this, while viruses are generally not
considered a form of this due to their need for host cells and lack of metabolism. SETI searches for
intelligent forms of this. Identify this characteristic which ceases upon death.
ANSWER: life
This term can also refer to folds of the peritoneum membrane as well as the remnants of tubular
structures form the fetal period of life. Composed of collagen fibers, they tend to be arranged in crossing
patterns that prevent too much looseness, although the ones in people with hyperlaxity who are
double-jointed tend to be longer. For 10 points, name the slightly stretchy, connective tissues similar to
fasciae and tendons that hold bones together.
ANSWER: ligaments
An insufficient amount of this phenomenon causes lengthening of internodes and chlorosis, which are
two parts of etiolation. Using agar blocks, Fritz Went showed that auxins were responsible for triggering
growth in the direction of this phenomenon. The Calvin cycle occurs independently of this phenomenon.
This phenomenon is responsible for the excitation of P680 and P700 reaction centers within the thylakoid
membrane of a chrloroplast. For 10 points, name this energy source which plants use to drive
photosynthesis.
ANSWER: light [accept photosynthesis till mention]
In the field of chronobiology, this thing is considered a powerful entrainer. This thing is generated by GFP,
making that protein suitable as a reporter. As proven by an experiment conducted with shoots of grass with
their coleoptiles mutilated or removed, auxin was found to control the tropic ("troh-pick") response to this
phenomenon. When rhodopsin interacts with this thing, rhodopsin is bleached. By disrupting melatonin
secretion, it interferes with circadian rhythms. P680 and P700, in the photosystems, are designed to capture
this thing. For 10 points, name this phenomenon which interacts with chlorophyll to initiate photosynthesis.
ANSWER: light [or photons; or obvious equivalents]
The Grotthuss-Draper (GROW-tiss DRAY-per) law states that a reaction can only occur when a target
molecule is affected by this phenomenon. On a Feynman (FINE-man) diagram, this phenomenon is
represented by a wavy line in the center. Albert Einstein was awarded his Nobel when he demonstrated that
this phenomenon was quantized. When 7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin is exposed to this phenomenon,
vitamin D is synthesized. Two organs in the human body detect this phenomenon using rod and cone cells.
For 10 points, identify this phenomenon which stimulates phototropism in plants.
ANSWER: visible light [or photons; or UV radiation; prompt on "electromagnetic radiation"]
The presence of this phenomenon causes an 11-cis isomer to become all-trans, causing transducin to
break down cGMP by action of rhodopsin. In plants, a cycle dependent on this phenomenon occurs at the
stroma and thylakoid membrane, while another which doesn't require it uses RuBisCO. Exposure to this
form of radiation inhibits melatonin and helps trigger vitamin D synthesis. For 10 points, name this
electromagnetic radiation in the visible spectrum.
ANSWER: visible sunlight [prompt on photons]
They are often characterized by the Z scheme, and one of the first steps is the reduction of
plastoquinone. Other minor proteins involved in them include plastocyanin and ferrodoxin. A byproduct
of these reactions is NADPH, which is used in a subsequent reaction that may be delayed in space or
time, as in C4 and CAM plants. Starting when photons excite photosystem I and photosystem II, for 10
points, name these reactions whose products enter the Calvin Cycle.
ANSWER: light reactions [prompt on electron transport before end of first sentence; do not accept or prompt on "photosynthesis"]
In one step of this process, plastocyanin receives an electron transferred from plastoquinone to the
cytochrome b6f complex, and two reaction centers are associated with the molecules P680 and P700. Two
electrons from a molecule's namesake ferredoxin reductase reduce NADP+ to NADPH, and a proton
gradient across the thylakoid membrane allows the production of ATP. Including photosystems I and II and
followed by the Calvin cycle, For 10 points, name this first stage of photosynthesis initiated by the titular
type of energy provided by the Sun.
ANSWER: Light Reactions [accept Light-Dependent Reactions; prompt on Photosynthesis]
This material is similar to suberin in that they are both irregular polymer phenylpropanoids, and it can be
used to create aromatic compounds. This material has industrial uses when it contains sulfur, and it can be
separated from cellulose and hemicellulose using 2-MTHF, though the separation is usually done using the
Kraft process. This compound is responsible for many cells being impermeable to water, and it exists
naturally with cellulose in secondary cell walls in tissue such as xylem. Name this compound largely
responsible for the texture of wood.
ANSWER: lignin
When analyzing yeast haploids, this phenomenon is likely if the parental ditype is found in excess of
the nonparental ditype. This phenomenon is more likely the higher the logarithm of the odds, or
LOD, score is. The terms coupling and repulsion are used when this phenomenon involves two
dominant alleles and one dominant and one recessive allele. The unit of distance of this
phenomenon's namesake map is the centimorgan, which corresponds to one percent recombination. This
phenomenon was discovered by Bateson and Punnett and violates Mendel's law of independent assortment.
For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which proximal, nonallelic genes on a chromosome tend to be
inherited together.
ANSWER: genetic linkage [or word forms of "linkage", such as genes are linked]
Seventeen of the brightest of the students of this man, including Carl Peter Thurnburg and Daniel
Solander, were designated by him as his "apostles." This scientist mapped each of the four temperaments to
a different race of mankind. He maintained a large collection of objects from natural history in Uppsala,
where he served as university rector. His Species Plantarum expanded on his magnum opus, whose tenth
edition inaugurated the practice of binomial nomenclature. For ten points, name this author of the Systema
Naturae, a Swede who pioneered modern taxonomy.
ANSWER: Carl Nilsson Linnaeus [or Carolus Linnaeus; or Carolus a Linne; or Carl von Linne]
Followers of this scientist, such as Daniel Rolander and Daniel Solander, were known as his disciples and
spread out around the world to study plant life. He wrote about using plants that flower at different times of
the day to create a flower clock in his work Philosophia Botanica. Some of his work is now outdated
because of his reliance on stamens and pistils, and the natural system he hoped for is now based on
Darwin's theory of evolution. Name this scientist whose Systema Naturae divided living things into three
kingdoms and developed his binomial nomenclature.
ANSWER: Carl (von or a) Linne [or Carolus Linnaeus; accept combinations of names that include Linne or Linnaeus]
Bligh and Dyer pioneered a procedure for extracting this class of molecules from natural sources. Vitamins
E and K are examples of the prenol type of these molecules, one type of which are metabolized by beta-
oxidation. One example of this class of compounds regulates cell membrane fluidity, while another is the
principal component of the cell membrane and contains a phosphate group bound to glycerol at its head. For
ten points, name this group of molecules including fatty acids, triglycerides, and cholesterol.
ANSWER: lipids (Do not accept or prompt on "steroids," since vitamin E and K clues rule them out.)
This type of molecule is involved in a kind of "signaling" which is exemplified by platelet activating
factor, which is this type of molecule. Vitamins A, D, E, and K are isoprene-based forms of this kind of
molecule, and are said to be "soluble" in another molecule of this type. One form of these compounds
oxidizes to produce nine kilocalories per gram, over twice as much as a gram of a carbohydrate. One
molecule of this type is formed from the esterification of three glycerides. Another form of these molecules
are derived from cholesterol, and include steroids. For 10 points, name this group of molecules, examples of
which include waxes and fats.
ANSWER: lipids [prompt on fats before read]
Serine is the precursor to one type of this compound, which is bound to sugar residues in cerebrosides and
gangliosides. The isoprene-based vitamins D, E, A, and K are types of these compounds. One variant of
these compounds includes a phosphate group; that type is the predominant structural element of the cell
membrane. The most familiar type of this compound is a triglyceride, which is also called a fat. For 10
points, name this type of compound, generally made of fatty acids bound to a glycerol.
ANSWER: lipids [or phospholipids, prompt on "fats"]
One member of this class of molecules undergoes hydrolysis to produce the second messengers DAG and
inositol [ih-NOH-sih-tawl] tris-phosphate. One class of these molecules includes ceramide as a member and
is composed of sphingosine [SFING-guh-seen]. The transport proteins HDL and LDL are named for their
binding to this class of molecules, whose members are generally soluble in alcohol and insoluble in water.
A bilayer composed of one member of this class is a major component of cell membranes, and another
member is made up of glycerol and fatty acids. For 10 points, name this class of molecules that includes
waxes, steroids, and fats.
ANSWER: lipids [anti-prompt on "fats" or "phospholipids" or other too specific answers]
One type of these substances are metabolic derivatives of terpenes, and another type of these substances,
sphingomyelins, leads to Multiple Sclerosis when they are lost. These substances are hydrophobic, causing
them to form membranes and their namesake bilayers. These substances consist of a glycerol molecule
bonded by an ester linkage to fatty acids, which can cause these substances to be saturated. For 10 points,
name these substances that include fats, oils, steroids, and waxes.
ANSWER: lipids [or steroids until "another type"]
This man is the namesake of an intercellular bacterium that causes nervous system infections and grows
in soft cheese and unpasteurized milk. This man published a series of six articles in The Lancet about
treating a boy with a bone fracture with no risk of suppuration. This man began the use of carbolic acid on
wounds and instruments, greatly decreasing his patients' complication rates. For 10 points, name this
British surgeon who promoted antiseptic surgery.
ANSWER: Joseph Lister
The effects of Alagille syndrome on this organ result in xanthomas, and this organ's blood flow is
blocked in Budd-Chiari syndrome. Transplant of cells in this organ has been experimentally verified
to treat Crigler-Najjar syndrome, and high levels of alanine and aspartate transaminases are key
diagnostic markers pertaining to it. Bisected by the falciform ligament, it contains fat-storing (*) Ito
cells in its spaces of Disse. Macrophages called Kupffer cells are also found in this organ, where sinusoids
rather than capillaries conduct blood delivered from the portal vein. The urea cycle and gluconeogenesis
both occur in it, and it is responsible for the production of bile. For 10 points, name this organ that can be
afflicted by diseases such as hepatitis and cirrhosis.
ANSWER: liver
Budd-Chiari syndrome can affect this structure surrounded by Glisson's capsule. Containing macrophages
called Kupffer cells, it synthesizes C-reactive protein, fibrinogen, and albumin. Attached to the body wall
by the falciform ligament, this organ converts ammonia to urea, stores glycogen, and is fed by the portal
vein. The only human internal organ capable of regeneration, its scars cause cirrhosis. High levels of
bilirubin cause jaundice, a symptom of injuries to this organ, such as hepatitis. For 10 points, name this
organ that detoxifies blood and secretes bile.
ANSWER: liver
The caudate lobe is found on the right portion of this organ. This organ contains a group of
macrophages called Kupffer cells. Gluconeogenesis and cholesterol synthesis both largely occur in
this organ which is also responsible for hemoglobin degradation. Additionally, this organ produces a
fluid used in lipid digestion called (*) bile. Alcoholism can cause a degeneration of this organ in cirrhosis,
and this organ is inflamed in a condition called hepatitis. For 10 points, name this largest internal organ
which plays a key role in detoxification in the body.
ANSWER: liver
In first-trimester fetuses, this organ is the site of erythrocyte production, while in all humans it synthesizes
serum albumin and cholesterol and is the site of most glycogen storage. It receives blood from the
intestines through the hepatic portal vein and is connected to the gallbladder by the common bile duct. For
10 points, name this vital internal organ that is divided into four lobes, exhibits cirrhosis with chronic
alcoholism.
ANSWER: liver
Serum levels of alanine aminotransferase and gamma-glutamyl-transferase, which are largely produced in
this organ, are elevated in Turner syndrome. In Wilson's disease, copper accumulates both in the iris of the
eye and in this organ. It is responsible for the synthesis of the compounds fibrinogen and prothrombin.
Coprine, found in the inky cap mushroom, prevents this organ from oxidizing acetaldehyde. This organ's
Kupffer cells are specialized macrophages that break down red blood cells. Bilirubin is broken down in this
organ, which also metabolizes ammonia to urea. For 10 points, identify this largest internal organ of the
human body, susceptible to diseases like hepatitis.
ANSWER: liver
In a Tylenol overdose, this organ is destroyed by N-A-Q-P-I. Among its functions includes
synthesizing IGF-1 (I-G-F-one) in response to growth hormone and creating clotting factors. The
portal vein empties into it and glycogen (GLY-koh-gen) is stored here. The gallbladder is located
immediately underneath this organ. This organ produces (*) bile (BY-uhl) and is damaged in hepatitis.
It is also responsible for detoxification. For 10 points, name this organ in the abdomen which is damaged
by alcoholic cirrhosis (sir-ROH-sis).
ANSWER: liver
Its cells may accumulate lipofuscin when lysosomes accumulate residue over time, whereas vitamin A and
fat are stored in cells that lie beneath the endothelial cells in this organ. Along with the aforementioned Ito
cells found in the space of Disse, other cells in this organ are star-shaped macrophages that release
cytokines and reactive oxygen species. Besides storing hemosiderin, they mainly act as macrophages in the
sinusoids of this organ and are called Kupffer cells. Having cells arranged in cords, this organ can degrade
estrogen and insulin along with metabolizing heme into bilirubin. Aflotoxin toxicity compounds the
likelihood of disease in, for 10 points, this organ that is afflicted by cirrhosis and hepatitis.
ANSWER: liver
Councilman bodies are cells of this organ which undergo apoptosis, and this organ is surrounded by
Glisson's capsule. The falciform ligament runs down the middle of this organ, and erythrocytes can
be broken down by its Kupffer cells. This organ contains high levels of copper in Wilson's Disease,
and it also adds glucuronic acid to (*) bilirubin. The site of gluconeogenesis and cholesterol synthesis,
this organ also produces an enzyme which emulsifies fats and is stored in the gallbladder. Diseases in this
organ, such as hepatitis, often cause jaundice, and scarring of this organ, or cirrhosis, can be caused by
alcoholism. Bile is produced by, for ten points, what largest internal organ, which also plays a vital role in
detoxification?
ANSWER: liver
This organ is attached to the body by the falciform (FAL-si-form) ligament, which borders what remains of
a person's umbilical vein. This produces the most abundant blood plasma protein, albumin, and this is
where albumin (al-BYOO-min) and bilirubin (BIL-ee-roo-bin) are made water soluble, preventing jaundice.
One of its sections is the caudate lobe, and it is located above the gallbladder, which stores the bile created
by this organ. Name this organ directly affected by the hepatitis virus whose advanced degeneration is
known as cirrhosis.
ANSWER: liver
The Ito [EE-toe] cells of this organ are located in the space of Disse and hold vitamin A. The function
of this organ is tested by measuring serum albumin level, and it possesses special macrophages called
Kupffer cells. It is able to take pyruvic [*] acid to perform the reverse reaction of glycolysis, gluco-
neogenesis. The failure of this organ to metabolize bilirubin leads to jaundice. This organ's cirrhosis can occur
as from hepatitis, but it is capable of regeneration. For 10 points, name the largest internal organ in human
body, which people abuse by drinking lots of alcohol.
ANSWER: Liver
Cholangiocytes in this organ are damaged in biliary atresia, and hemochromatosis causes a buildup of iron
in this organ. Its failure can lead to massive ascites, and this organ synthesizes the coagulation factors
fibrinogen and prothrombin. It is divided into left and right anatomical lobes by the falciform ligament, and
it stores glycogen and vitamin K. The gallbladder is located directly underneath it, and inflammation of this
organ is called hepatitis and can lead to cirrhosis or scarring. For 10 points, name this bile-producing organ
that detoxifies the blood and is often damaged in alcoholics.
ANSWER: Liver
Specialized phagocytes in this organ split hemoglobin molecules and are known as Kupffer cells. In the
Cori Cycle, this organ combines lactate with pyruvate to form glucose via a process known as
gluconeogenesis. This organ creates a product that is stored in the gallbladder, and is divided into four
lobes. Chronic alcohol consumption can impair this organ's ability to regenerate and can cause cirrhosis, a
disease of this organ. For 10 points, name this organ that produces bile.
ANSWER: liver
This organ is the terminus of the portal vein, which ends in capillary-like vessels known as
sinusoids that are home to specialized macrophages called Kupffer cells. In the absence of the spleen,
this organ destroys old red blood cells. This is the main site of the production of glucuronic acid from
bilirubin. Fibrosis and scarring of this organ can be caused by hepatitis and is known as (*) cirrhosis.
This organ is divided into four lobes and produces bile. For 10 points, name this organ that can regenerate
itself.
ANSWER: liver
This organ contains the perisinusoidal space, also known as the space of Disse, contain fat-storing cells
called Ito cells. Other cells in this organ include specialized stellate macrophages known as Kupffer cells.
This organ connects to the diaphragm at its "bare area." Blood is conducted to this organ by the hepatic
portal vein, and cirrhosis of this organ is commonly caused by alcoholism. For 10 points, identify this vital
organ which produces bile.
ANSWER: the liver
In this part of the body, Vitamin K is utilized to form coagulation factors and Vitamin A is stored in
the stellate cells. Haemoglobin is processed for use of its iron content, the phagocytosis of microbes as
well as cytokine production are performed by the Kupfer cells. In addition to the muscle, the Cori
cycle also takes place in this organ, which is comprised of hexagonal functional units called lobules.
Angiotensinogen is relased by this organ to raise blood pressure. This organ converts lactate to glucose,
acetyl-co-A to fatty acids to triglycerides, ammonia to urea, as well as glucose into glycogen. Located just
below the diaphragm, For ten points, name this four lobed organ that metabolizes toxins found in alcohol
and drugs; the site of hepatitis that produces bile.
ANSWER: liver
Like the lung, this organ is destroyed in patients with alpha-one-anti-trypsin deficiency, and backup of
blood flow through this organ can cause esophageal varices and caput medusa. This organ has a lot of
smooth endoplasmic reticulum and half its blood comes from the portal vein. This organ, which has four
lobes, is triangular and serves to detoxify blood. For 10 points, name this abdominal organ which is
damaged in people with alcoholic cirrhosis.
ANSWER: liver
One disease where certain vessels in this organ are blocked due to inflammation is PSC. A value that
can be used to help determine the cause of a disease of this organ compares the ratio between AST
and ALT, and is sometimes named for De Ritis. Upon damage to this non pancreas organ, its
namesake stellate cells activate and secrete scar tissue. This organ processes a compound made from
the catabolism of (*) heme to make it water soluble, and that compound, bilirubin, causes the yellowness
seen as a sign of many diseases of this organ, jaundice. When this organ is sufficiently damaged, its
functional tissue is replaced by fibers and scars in cirrhosis. For 10 points, name this organ which is often
damaged in alcoholics due to its function in detoxification.
ANSWER: Liver
This structure's bare area is the only part of it not covered by visceral peritoneum. This organ's tissue
contains lots of catalase due to the abundance of peroxisomes, and the ligamentum venosum separates its
left and caudate lobes. Part of the Cori cycle occurs here when it takes in lactate for gluconeogenesis. Its
Kupffer cells act on blood received through the portal vein. It produces albumin, stores glycogen, detoxifies
blood, and connects, via the bile duct, to the gallbladder. For 10 points, name this large internal organ
which can suffer hepatitis or fail to regenerate when it develops cirrhosis in alcoholics.
ANSWER: liver
Ducts in this organ become inflamed in primary sclerosing cholangitis. Glisson's capsule surrounds
this organ, and two of its sections are separated by the falciform ligament. People with Wilson's
disease cannot excrete copper properly from this organ, and it features star-shaped cells responsible
for removing particulate (*) contaminants from blood known as Kuppfer cells. Other functions include
the storing of iron. Jaundice, cirrhosis, and hepatitis are diseases of this organ that secretes bile. For 10
points, name this largest organ inside the human body.
ANSWER: liver
Fanconi-Bickel syndrome is associated with the protein GLUT2 of this organ, responsible for most of its
glucose export. In one pathway in this organ, glucose-1-phosphate is converted into UDPG, which is then
used by a branching enzyme. Macrophages called Kupffer cells break down red blood cells in it, where Ito
cells in its space of Disse store Vitamin A. Metformin, a diabetes drug, targets cells in this organ, which
receives blood via a portal vein and can be the site of cirrhosis or hepatitis. The site of gluconeogenesis is,
for 10 points, this four-lobed organ that detoxifies the blood and secretes bile.
ANSWER: liver
The reaction of chloroyl-CoA with glycine is one step in the glycine conjugation pathway conducted in this
organ. Those cells store Vitamin A in lipid globules in this organ, and another class of cells in this organ
create glucuronic acid or sulfate through a conjugation of a free open-chain pyrrole. Gaps between
fenestrated epithelia and cords in this organ are called spaces of Disse, through which blood plasma flows.
This organ's Ito cells are supported by its sinusoids, which make use of macrophages called Kupffer cells.
Blood is supplied to this organ from the splenic and mesenteric arteries via the portal vein. For 10 points,
name this organ responsible for bile secretion that helps remove waste products from the body and which
can be scarred due to alcohol abuse in cases of cirrhosis.
ANSWER: liver
Its canals of Hering may be the location of bipotent stem cells. Dysfunction of this organ causing it to retain
copper occurs in Wilson's disease. Veins leading from it are occluded in Budd-Chiari syndrome, and
Gilbert syndrome features compromised bilirubin metabolism. This producer of bile and site of
gluconeogenesis can be damaged by alcohol consumption in cirrhosis. For ten points, name this largest
internal organ.
ANSWER: liver
This organ converts some triglycerides [try-GLIS-uh-"rides"] and cholesterols into very low-density
lipoproteins and produces water-soluble proteins found in blood plasma known as albumins. It is where the
combination of albumin and bilirubin [bil-ee-ROOB-in] becomes soluble in water, and disease in this organ
affects the ratio of those substances, causing swelling and jaundice [JAWN-dis]. This organ covers the
gallbladder, and until bone marrow takes over, during most of gestation it produces red blood cells in the
embryo. Name this primary location of the urea cycle, an organ that produces bile and that becomes scarred
by cirrhosis or inflamed by hepatitis.
ANSWER: liver
Aside from the "bare area" of this organ, it is covered entirely by visceral peritoneum. This organ
synthesizes angiotensinogen and, along with the kidney, is a major site of thrombopoeitin production. It
stores glycogen and, like muscles, it can also breaks down glycogen to glucose. It can be entirely
regenerated with as little as 25% of its original tissue, and it helps to emulsify fat by producing a liquid
stored in the nearby gallbladder. An important organ in detoxification and digestion, for 10 points, identify
this organ that produces bile and can be affected by diseases such as cirrhosis and hepatitis.
ANSWER: liver
In first trimester fetuses, this organ is the primary producer of red blood cells. As blood flows into this
organ through the portal vein, sugars are converted into glycogen which is stored until needed. These
organs in polar bears contain toxic amounts of retinol. It secretes about a quart of bile, and a yellowness of
the skin called jaundice can occur when it malfunctions. Excessive alcohol consumption can cause cirrhosis
of this organ. For 10 points, name this largest gland in the body, which removes toxins from the blood.
ANSWER: liver
Along with the heart, this organ is severely damaged in Alagille syndrome, which results from the
deletion of a gene coding for the JAG1 protein. The Child-Pugh scale is used to evaluate damage to
this organ, which can also occur when veins leading to it are occluded in Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Morrison's pouch lies behind this this organ, which is suspended by the coronary ligament. It is one
of the major sites of damage as a result of copper accumulation in Wilson's disease, and it is attached to
the diaphragm and anterior abdominal wall by the falciform ligament. Red blood cells are broken down in
this organ by macrophages called Kupffer cells, and this organ receives blood through the portal vein
system. For 10 points, identify this site of gluconeogenesis, a four-lobed, bile-secreting organ.
ANSWER: Liver
This organ contains specialized macrophages known as Kupffer cells, and it is the site of albumin
production. This organ is responsible for converting ammonia into urea, and it is the site of
gluconeogenesis. This organ is also the site of lipid and cholesterol synthesis, and this organ also produces
bile. For 10 points, identify this organ which can be afflicted by hepatitis, and which can be afflicted by
cirrhosis in cases of alcoholism.
ANSWER: liver
Scientific controversy exists over whether a caecum found in lancelets is analogous to this organ.
Elevated levels of aspartate and alanine transaminase enzymes indicate damage to this organ, whose
function is evaluated by the Child-Pugh score. Oxaloacetate is converted to PEP by PEP-CK in a
process in this organ that synthesizes non-carbohydrates into glucose, gluconeogenesis. Lactate
produced in glycolysis is sent to this organ in the (*) Cori cycle. The falciform ligament anchors this
organ, which is covered by Glisson's capsule and contains Ito and Kupffer cells. Fed by the portal vein, this
organ produces bilirubin, stores glycogen, and can experience cirrhosis. For 10 points, name this largest
organ in the human body, mainly responsible for detoxification and damaged in hepatitis.
ANSWER: liver
This organ is attached to the body cavity by the falciform (FALL-sih-form) ligament. Gluconeogenesis
(GLUE-ko-NEE-oh-JEN-uh-sis) and cholesterol synthesis occur in this organ. One of two major blood
vessels connected to this organ is the portal vein. The gallbladder stores bile produced by this larger organ.
Failure of this organ causes skin and eyes to yellow in a condition called jaundice (JOHN-diss). For 10
points, name this organ afflicted by diseases like hepatitis and cirrhosis (sih-ROW-sis), which filters poisons
from the body.
ANSWER: liver
Alpha fetoprotein and alpha-one globulin are often used to diagnose cancer in this organ. Kupffer
cells are found in this organ, and other cells in this organ have an unusual level of polyploidy.
Cholesterol is synthesized in this organ, as well albumin, clotting factors, and angiotensinogen. One
pathway in the organ synthesizes pyruvic acid from lactic acid and is called the (*) Cori cycle. The
portal vein enters this structure where it spreads into vascular channels called sinusoids, and this organ
shares the billiary tree with the nearby gall bladder. Hepatocytes store glycogen in, for 10 points, this
largest gland which filters alcohol from blood and secretes bile.
ANSWER: Liver
The hydroxylation of DHEA-sulfate occurs in this organ, which is the location of Councilman bodies. This
organ is covered by Glisson's capsule, and during the Cori cycle, lactate travels to it. A toxic accumulation
of copper in this organ characterizes Wilson's disease, and it is home to the phagocytic Kupffer cells.
Connected to the anterior abdominal wall and diaphragm by the falciform ligament, this organ is the
primary site of gluconeogenesis. The portal vein carries blood to this organ, which produces urea and
secretes bile. FTP name this organ that is prone to hepatitis and cirrhosis in alcoholics such as Chris
Borglum.
ANSWER: liver
One disease that affects this entity comes in a primary biliary form, which results in xanthoma.
This entity includes cavities such as the Space of Mall and the Space of Disse. Kuppfer cells in this
organ degrade red blood cells. Scar tissue replaces functional tissue in (*) cirrhosis, a disease of this
organ that can be caused by excessive alcohol use. For 10 points, hepatic veins drain blood from what
organ, useful for detoxifying the blood?
ANSWER: liver
An autoimmune disease of this organ is characterized by antibodies to selenium transferase and is
associated with anti-smooth muscle antibodies. A cancer of it can be caused by aflatoxin. Backflow in
this organ can cause the appearance of caput medusae, and this organ's outflow is blocked in Budd-
Chiari syndrome. Angiotensinogen, C-reactive protein, and fibrinogen are all produced in this organ.
Feathery degeneration and ballooning degeneration are two forms of apoptosis undergone by this
organ's (*) namesake cells, many of which are multinucleated. Kupffer cells are the resident macrophages
of this organ, which also contains fenestrated blood vessels called sinusoids. The functional unit of this
organ consists of a namesake triad of an artery, a vein, and a duct, and this four-lobed organ is fed by the
portal vein. For 10 points, name this organ damaged in cirrhosis.
ANSWER: the liver
Kupffer cells in this organ break down red blood cells. This organ is the site of hemoglobin metabolism
into bilirubin, and the gluconeogenesis pathway occurs here. Blood drained from the gastrointestinal tract
enters this organ through the hepatic portal vein. The gallbladder stores bile produced in this organ. Chronic
infection with hepatitis C, or chronic alcohol use, can cause cirrhosis, a disease of this organ. For 10 points,
name this largest internal organ and largest gland of the body, which serves to detoxify the blood.
ANSWER: liver
One genetic disorder affecting this organ causes copper to accumulate in tissues and is known as
Wilson's disease. Most gluconeogenesis (gloo-kon-nee-oh-GEH-neh-sis) occurs in this organ which is also
the site of bile production. Most of this organ's blood supply is carried by the hepatic portal vein. The bare
area of this organ is connected to the diaphragm by areolar (ah-ree-OH-lar) tissue, and alcoholism can lead
to cirrhosis (sih-ROH-sis) of this organ. For 10 points, identify this organ which detoxifies the blood.
ANSWER: the liver
Elevated ALT levels signal damage to this organ. The left triangular ligament connects it to the
diaphragm. It is the site of synthesis insulin growth factor and of an enzyme cleaved by renin,
angiotensinogen. This organ is bisected by the falciform ligament, and the (*) transverse fissure
separates its caudate and quadrate portions. This organ, which is the site of processes like gluconeogenesis,
is fed in large part by the portal vein, and cholesterol and lipid synthesis also occur in it. Viruses like
hepatitis lead to this organ's scarring, or cirrhosis. For 10 points, name this organ that filters and detoxifies
the blood.
ANSWER: liver
This organ contains macrophages called Kupffer Cells, and it is also the primary site of gluconeogenesis.
Prior to the bone marrow taking over, this organ creates red blood cells. Another function of this organ is
the degradation of insulin, and it stores glycogen, along with secreting bile that is stored in the gallbladder.
Alcohol leads to scarring in this organ, a condition known as cirrhosis. For 10 points, name this largest
internal organ, responsible for detoxification and affected by hepatitis.
ANSWER: Liver
This organ is held in place by the falciform [FAL-suh-form] ligament, and its round ligament is a remnant
of the umbilical vein. Hemosiderin [hee-moe-SIH-deh-rin] is stored in this organ's Kupffer cells. This organ
contains glucuronic [gloo-kyuh-RAH-nik] acid, which is used to make bilirubin [BIH-lee-roo-bin] soluble
in water, which then goes to the gallbladder within bile. When this organ does not function, people's skin
turns yellowish, a condition known as jaundice. Name this organ that filters blood and which is damaged in
people with cirrhosis [sir-ROE-sis] or hepatitis.
ANSWER: liver
One part of this organ is known as the bare area, since it is not covered by the peritoneum. This organ is
the main site of red blood cell production before the bone marrow takes over, and gluconeogenesis takes
place primarily in this organ. It is the site of the degradation of insulin, and it stores glycogen. It produces a
substance which is stored in the gallbladder, bile. For 10 points, name this organ which can be afflicted by
cirrhosis and hepatitis.
ANSWER: liver
The working name of this discovery was AL 288-1, and a similar, more complete discovery was
nicknamed "Ardi." The reconstruction of this discovery had to be redone because of discrepancies in the
pelvic girdle. It was found near the Awash River in the Hadar Formation in the Afar Triangle. Donald
Johanson and Tim White unearthed this organism, a specimen from the Australopithecus afarensis species.
For ten points, identify this fossil found in Ethiopia and named after a Beatles song.
ANSWER: Lucy [prompt on Australopithecus afarensis]
It is estimated to be 3.2 million years old and is 40% complete. Its Amharic name, Dinkenesh, translates to
"You are beautiful" in English. Found at Hadar on the southern edge of the Danakil Depression, the first
parts of it seen were an arm bone fragment and part of the skull. A valgus knee and a lumbar curve
possessed by it indicates that it walked upright. FTP, name this skeleton of a female hominid found in
Ethiopia that became world-famous upon its discovery and whose name comes from a song that was played
loudly and repeatedly back at the discoverers' camp.
ANSWER: Lucy
A triangular depression called the hilum can be found in these structures, which are the primary locations
where ACE converts angiotensin I to angiotensin II. Their total capacity is the sum of their residual and
vital capacities, which can be measured with a spirometer. These organs are enclosed by serous membranes
called pleura. Cystic fibrosis causes thick mucus to form in these organs, which are partially destroyed in
emphysema. For 10 points, alveoli are structures in what respiratory organs found in the chest?
ANSWER: lungs
These organs can grow a calcified lesion called a Ghon's [gons] complex, and the presence of several cysts
[sists] on these organs is called honeycombing. One of these has a lingula, and these organs contain Clara
cells and a cardiac notch. In humans, these organs consist of three right lobes and two left lobes, and these
are surrounded by pleura [PLOO-ruh]. Name these organs just below the trachea [TRAY-kee-uh] which
contain alveoli [al-vee-OH-lie] that exchange carbon dioxide and oxygen during respiration.
ANSWER: lungs
One section of this organ contains Clara cells. One tumor of this organ comes from neuroendocrine cells
named for Feyrter and has an oat-cell appearance, while adenocarcinomas of this organ stain positive with
TTF-1. Release of vasoactive mediators in this organ results in ARDS, and this organ is also the site of
silicosis, berylliosis, and ferruginous bodies resulting from asbestos exposure. Cancers of this organ are
divided into small-cell and non-small-cell varieties, and in humans one half of this organ has three lobes
while the other has two. Spirometry is used to measure functional capacity in this organ, which turns black
in people exposed to coal dust. For 10 points, name this organ which contains alveoli and is damaged by
smoking, used to exchange air.
ANSWER: lungs
P. jirovicii is a fungus that attacks this organ in patients with AIDS. Tidal volume and vital capacity
are values relevant to these organs, which may house over 20 generations of a certain "tree".
Angiotensin I is converted to Angiotensin II in these organs. Structures in them secrete a surfactant
that prevents their collapse, and these organs are covered by a thin tissue called the (*) pleural
membrane. Diseases that can affect these organs include pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema and asthma.
Containing bronchioles and alveoli, for 10 points, name these respiratory organs that exchange oxygen and
carbon dioxide with blood.
ANSWER: lungs
Reduced expression of SEMA3F protein is identified with the formation of tumors in this organ.
Though it is not the kidney, the hilum is the spot where nerves and other vessels enter this organ. The
mediastinum separates the pleural cavities that house the left and right of these organs. The horizontal
fissure is present in the right one but not the left, so the right one contains a middle lobe in addition to
the superior and inferior lobes found in the left one. For 10 points, identify this organ containing sacs
called alveoli which allow for exchange of gases.
ANSWER: lungs
Clara cells are found in this organ. Minor functions of this organ include conversion of angiotensin I to
angiotensin II, and the lecithin to sphingomyelin ratio gives a measure of the development of this organ.
One quantity associated with this organ is measured by a spirometer, and this organ contains small cavities
known as alveoli in its parenchyma. For 10 points, identify these organs for respiration located within the
ribcage which are damaged by usage of cigarettes.
ANSWER: the lungs
One disease affecting this organ is its namesake "pinprick condition." Angiotensin-converting enzyme is
primarily found in this organ. This organ's capacity can be measured using tidal volume, and its function
can be measured using spirometry. Diseases affecting it include cystic fibrosis and emphysema. This organ
is covered by a membrane called the pleura, and gas exchange in this organ takes place in the alveoli. For
10 points, name these organs of respiration.
ANSWER: lungs
One set of cells in this organ are named for a Nazi chief of anatomy at Leipzig; those are Clara cells.
The first human-to-human transplant of this organ was performed by James Hardy, and Ibn al-Nafis
described the circulation to this organ. Phillip Drinker invented a device to replace the function of this
organ. Doll, Winder, and Hill performed the first major cohort study on a disease of these organs, which
they succeeded in linking to smoking. For ten points, name these organs, which Galen believed were
responsible for cooling the body by exchanging air.
ANSWER: lung
One disease affecting this organ arises from alpha 1-antitrypsin (ONE AN-tie-TRIP-sin) deficiency. This
organ is served by divisions of the trachea (TRAY-key-uh) called bronchi (BRAWN-kye), which divide
into bronchioles (BRAWN-key-oles). Alveoli (al-vee-OH-lye) are where blood provided to this organ by
the pulmonary artery exchanges oxygen for carbon dioxide. The left of these organs, which is degraded in
emphysema (EM-fuh-ZEE-muh), has one fewer lobe than the right. For 10 points, name these organs used
in breathing.
ANSWER: lungs
A condition in which this organ undergoes severe fibrosis commonly occurs in chemotherapy
patients taking Busulfan or Bleomycin. One disease that affects this organ causes Ranke and
Ghon complexes to appear in it, and also causes caseating necrosis of this organ via granuloma
formation. V/Q scans are commonly used to evaluate the function of this organ. A cancer of this
organ's neuroendocrine cells sometimes causes the syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
and increased ACTH levels, and was formerly called oat cell carcinoma. Diseases of this organ
are commonly sorted by their FEV1 to FVC ratio into either restrictive or obstructive, and
hyaline membranes appear in this organ in infants who do not produce enough surfactant. For 10
points, name this organ which contains a series of tiny sacs called alveoli.
ANSWER: lungs
Cancers of this organ are, like the pancreas, treated by the drug erlotinib. It is at this organ that ACE
converts angiotensin I to angiotensin II. Some arachnids possess structures analogous to this organ called
"book" these, and the membrane that surrounds them is the pleura. This structure contains sacs made up of
alveoli that are fed by tubes called bronchi. For 10 points, name this respiratory organ that exchanges
oxygen and carbon dioxide with the blood.
ANSWER: lungs
In AIDS patients, the Aspergillus fungus creates diffuse filaments in this organ, and edema of the
vasculature of this organ produces rales. The somatic form of angiotensin converting enzyme is
mostly expressed in this organ. In some congenital diseases, the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas
aeruginosa colonizes and forms biofilms in this organ. PEF, TV, and DLCO are important measures
of the function of this organ. Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency causes a progressive disease of this organ,
whose left part contains only two lobes while its right contains three. A buildup of mucus in this organ is the
hallmark of cystic fibrosis, and it is surrounded by the pleura. For 10 points, name this organ affected by
emphysema, which is commonly infected in pneumonia. ANSWER: Lungs
Austin Hill and Richard Doll performed one of the first studies on the causes of this disease, and a more
extensive examination looked at its prevalence among British doctors. Fritz Lickint led a Nazi German
campaign to eradicate this disease. Though the rate of male deaths from this disease has decreased strongly
since 1990, the rate for females has increased. For 10 points, name this disease, which causes more deaths
than any other cancer in the U.S. and is twenty times as prevalent among smokers.
ANSWER: lung cancer [or non-small cell lung cancer; or NSCLC; prompt on cancer]
One protein component of this substance is a binding partner of DMBT1. This substance is believed
to have some innate immune function due to the presence of collectins SP-A and SP-D in it. Synthetic
versions of this substance include Venticute and KL-4. The production of this substance can be
assayed by measuring the lecithin-to-sphingomyelin ratio of amniotic fluid, and its production can be
accelerated by cortisol. This substance primarily contains DPPC and other phospholipids. This
substance prevents atelectasis [at-UH-lec-tuh-sis], and a condition in which this compound is insufficiently
produced shows characteristic hyaline membranes on autopsy and is known as infantile RDS. This
substance is often under-produced in premature infants, leading to the collapse of alveoli. For 10 points,
name this surface-tension-lowering substance important for lung function.
ANSWER: Lung surfactant
The skin basement membrane of sufferers of this disease often shows a band of IgM. The presence of a
protein named for and associated with this disease is found via the Dilute Russell's viper venom time.
People with slow N-acetyltransferase are susceptible to a form of this disease caused by drugs like
procainamide. This disease causes Libman-Sacks endocarditis and a form of nephritis with wire-loop
abnormalities. This disease is partly caused by a break in tolerance caused by continuous exposure to
apoptotic products of lymphocytes. This disease often presents with anti-Smith and anti-nuclear antibodies,
and patients are hypersensitive to sunlight. For 10 points, name this autoimmune disease with a
characteristic butterfly rash on the face.
ANSWER: lupus [accept systemic lupus erythromatosis or SLE]
Tim Raines is a noted person with this disease, whose symptoms include arthritis, fever, and
inflammation in various organs of the body, which helps lead to its classification as a "Great Imitator."
This disorder, which affects nine times as many women as men, can be drug-induced resulting from
hypersensitivity to a medication. One of the prominent diagnostic indicators for this disease is the presence
of a "butterfly rash" which gets worse in sunlight. Name, for ten points, this chronic autoimmune disorder,
abbreviated SLE, which is never the actual cause of disease according to Dr. Gregory House.
ANSWER: Systemic lupus erythematosus
One treatment of prostate cancer lowers the pituitary gland production of this hormone. In men, high levels
of prolactin [proe-LAK-tin] enhance the main purpose of this hormone, which is to cause Leydig [LEE-dig]
cells to create testosterone. Breastfeeding women produce very little of this hormone, which explains why
they rarely become pregnant. This hormone, whose name resembles the name of the second half of a
menstrual cycle, surges during the middle of the cycle around the same time as follicle stimulating hormone.
Name this hormone that triggers the release of eggs.
ANSWER: Luteinizing hormone (accept LH)
This disease's vector is responsible for carrying the causative agents of babesiosis and human
granulocytic anaplasmosis. This disease's causative agent mutates its VlsE protein to dodge the immune
system. When this disease reaches the brain, it causes astrogliosis. Its causative agent shares a genus with
the agent that causes masters disease. A late complication of this disease is an arthritis caused by an
immune reaction to OspA. Caused by the microaerophile spirochete known as Borrelia burgdorferi, one
symptom of this disease is a red bullseye rash. This disease, which is carried by Ixodes ticks, is
characterized by fever and headache. For 10 points, name this disease carried by deer ticks named for a
Connecticut town.
ANSWER: Lyme disease
This disease is quickly diagnosed by the presence of erythema migrans. The "chronic" form of this
disease is controversially treated by high-dose, long-term antibiotics. This disease is commonly found
along the mid-Atlantic seaboard and in western (*) Wisconsin, whose forests are home to infected mice
and deer. A "bulls-eye" shaped rash indicates, for 10 points, what bacterial disease spread by ticks?
ANSWER: Lyme disease
Somites 34-41 in the embryos of birds develop into a "heart" named for this substance, found in
the tail. This substance moves easily through the subcapsular sinus. This substance is combined with
emulsified fats to form a milky-colored mixture called chyle, which is transported by capillaries
called lacteals. Near the left jugular, the left subclavian vein receives this substance from the thoracic
duct. This material (*) accumulates in the lower legs in elephantiasis. This substance is formed from
material that doesn't enter the venules from capillary beds in tissues. For 10 points, name this substance that
contains waste interstitial fluid and flows past namesake "nodes" which swell during infection.
ANSWER: lymph
One tissue of this type is useful in differentiating the ileum from the duodenum and jejunum, while
the namesake virus of another example of this tissue shares a protein receptor with the hilariously-
named coxsackievirus and had its serotype 36 linked to chicken obesity. Mucosa-associated Peyer's
Patches and Waldeyer's ring are composed of this tissue, where Castleman's disease originates.
Winterbottom's Sign in this kind of tissue indicates Sleeping Sickness, while other anomalies can
suggest toxoplasmosis. The most notable (*) clusters of this tissue exhibit B-cell proliferation in their
Germinal Centers after antigen presentation, and structures composed of it are the usual origination point
for cancers like Hodgkin's disease. Adenoids, or tonsils, are a form of, for 10 points, what bodily tissue
whose name derives from its role as a reservoir to mature white blood cells and whose "nodes" in the head
and neck may swell during infections.
ANSWER: (Secondary) Lymphoid Tissue [be lenient and accept things like "Lymphatic System" or other demonstrations of reasonably clear knowledge like "Lymph Nodes;" do not accept "Lymphocytes"]
In a process called ecotaxis, cells in this tissue position themselves based on interactions with VLA
proteins. This tissue is the target of VEGF-C. Activation-induced cytidine deaminase acts on cells in
germinal centers in this tissue. High endothelial venules allow this tissue to interface with the blood.
Paracortices in one structure made of this tissue contain cells that express CD8. One cancer of this
tissue is characterized by multinucleated (*) Reed-Sternberg leukocytes. The ileum can be distinguished
from the rest of the small intestine by Peyer's patches, which are made of this tissue. Brugia nematodes
cause a type of filariasis in this tissue, leading to fluid buildup that can manifest as elephantiasis. For 10
points, name this tissue whose namesake nodes store immune cells, including T and B cells.
ANSWER: lymphoid tissue [accept (secondary) lymphoid organs or lymph nodes or pretty much anything having to do with lymph; do not accept "lymphocytes"]
Troisier's sign is an example of a hardened one of these structures, one of which is named for Virchow.
CCL21 is a cytokine most commonly expressed in them, and ones located between the pectoralis major and
pectoralis minor muscles are named for Rotter. B lymphocytes are localized in follicles that make up its
outer cortex, while T cells are distributed in the paracortical area. The adaptive immune response begins
here, where antigen-presenting cells and antigens are delivered. For 10 points, name these organs that often
enlarge when fighting infections.
ANSWER: lymph nodes
Efferent vessels attach to these structures at the hilum. The subcapsular and trabecular sinuses are located in
these structures, which may act as germinal centers, where isotype switching occurs. Peyer's patches are
analogous to these structures in the small intestines. These structures are the "N" in TNM, an important
acronym involved in cancer staging. These structures are infected in Hodgkin's disease, and their swelling
is a telltale symptom of AIDS. Humans have more than five hundred of these structures in the body, each
storing macrophages and lymphocytes. Tonsils are large examples of, for 10 points, what "nodes" storing
white blood cells?
ANSWER: lymph nodes [prompt on "nodes"; prompt on "lymphoid tissue"]
The presence of parasitic worms in this system can cause elephantiasis, which involves the swelling of skin
and tissues. It's not the immune system, but one of its organs exhibits one of the few examples of involution
and gets slowly replaced by fat after puberty. Another organ in this system contains the Cords of Bilroth and
is separated by the marginal zone into red and white pulp. This system primarily uses the thoracic duct for
draining interstitial fluid and includes both the thymus and the spleen. For 10 points, name this subsystem of
the circulatory system that has
namesake nodes that filter and recycle blood plasma and defend against infection.
ANSWER: lymphatic system [Prompt on immune system before mention.]
This process can be induced in cells by sodium deoxycholate or NP-40. In another context, the Rz and Rz1
proteins help induce this process. Gram-positive bacteria undergo this process when acted upon by an
enzyme present in hen egg white also known as muramidase. In protists, this process is continually averted
by the action of acidocalcisomes in tandem with contractile vacuoles. This process occurs when a cell is
placed in an excessively hypotonic solution. A viral reproduction cycle named for the fact that it causes the
host cell to undergo this process is contrasted with the lysogenic cycle. For 10 points, name this general
process in which a cell is destroyed via the rupturing of its membrane.
ANSWER: lysis [or cytolysis; or osmotic lysis; or lytic cycle; prompt on "bursting" or "cell disruption"]
A failure of this organelle to properly process glycogen is called Pompe's disease. Molecules intended
to be sent to this structure are given a targeting molecule called mannose-6-phosphate. Molecules are
directed to this structure via the Golgi apparatus through a compartment called the endosome. One
enzyme found in this organelle, hexosaminidase A, is deficient in patients with Tay-Sachs disease.
These organelles operate at a pH of about 4.5 and perform a task known as autophagy, using a variety of
degradative enzymes in a process that should not be confused with apoptosis. For 10 points, name these
organelles that destroy worn out cell components.
ANSWER: lysosome
This organelle can malfunction in a disease sometimes called acid maltase deficiency in which it fails to
break down glycogen. Another disease associated with this organelle may be treated by letting sialidase
metabolize GM2 gangliosides. Proteins destined for this organelle are tagged with mannose-6-phosphate. A
disease caused by a hexosaminidase A deficiency in this organelle results in a retinal red spot and death by
the age of four, Tay-Sachs. It uses membrane proton pumps to keep its internal pH at 5. For 10 points, name
these digestive organelles.
ANSWER: lysosome
A mutation on chromosome 15 in the HEXA gene renders an enzyme present in this organelle
defective, causing Tay-Sachs disease. The proteases and lipases within this organelle function
optimally in an (*) acidic environment, protecting the alkaline cytosol if the membranes of these are
damaged and leak. For 10 points, name these organelles containing hydrolytic enzymes that digest old
cellular organelles and break down macromolecules.
ANSWER: lysosomes
The X-linked illness Fabry disease is caused by malfunction of these organelles, and other diseases
involving their malfunction include Pompe and Niemann-Pick. One compound found in these
organelles hydrolyzes 1-4-beta glycosidic linkages commonly found in cell walls, and that namesake
enzyme is also present in (*) albumin. Compounds destined for these organelles are tagged with mannose-6-
phosphate. Chloride channels and hydrogen ion pumps allow them to maintain their pH of approximately
4.5, which permits the function of acid hydrolases and other digestive enzymes. For 10 points, name these
organelles that break down macromolecules and cellular waste.
ANSWER: lysosomes
One disorder involving this organelle is caused by a mutation in E325K on the NAGA gene, called
Schindler disease. One method of transporting molecules to it involves an hsc70-containing chaperone
complex. Another disorder results in enzyme transport to the extracellular space rather than this organelle
and is called I-cell disease. Proteins are marked for this structure with mannose-6-phosphate, and proton
pump activity in this organelle maintains the acidic pH necessary for its primary function. One genetic
defect results in ganglioside buildup in this organelle and thus causes Tay-Sachs disease. For 10 points,
identify this cellular organelle that breaks down macromolecules with the aid of acid hydrolases.
ANSWER: lysosome
Fabry disease and Hunter syndrome affect this organelle, whose pH is typically around 4.8, as does a
condition due to a chromosome 15 mutation in the HEXA gene that is characterized by a red retinal spot.
That disease of storage in this organelle occurs at very high rates in Ashkenazi Jews and is called Tay-Sachs.
 Material tagged with mannose-6-phosphate is directed here. These organelles are often especially
necessary following autophagy or endocytosis. For ten points, name this organelle that breaks down cellular
wastes.
ANSWER: lysosome
LAMP glycoproteins localize to this organelle. They mature from multivesicular bodies and their
membranes contain a V-type ATPase. One protein contained in them is mutated in Pompe's disease, and
the cell uses mannose-6-phosphate to target proteins here. These organelles fuse with the products of
phagocytosis in order to kill foreign bodies. They contain proteases and hydrolases and have an pH less
than 5. For 10 points, name these organelles that cells use to digest things.
ANSWER: lysosome
An X-linked recessive disease that affects storage in these structures is called Fabry's disease. A
disease that causes enzyme transport to the extracellular space instead of these structures is called
inclusion cell disease. Enzymes targeted for these structures are tagged with (*) mannose-6-phosphate,
and a lack of hexosaminidase A in these structures results in ganglioside buildup in Tay-Sachs disease.
Proton pumps maintain a 4.8 pH and these structures sometimes fuse with vacuoles to carry out their
primary function. For 10 points identify these organelles containing hydrolase enzymes, which digest
macromolecules and cellular waste.
ANSWER: lysosomes
Decreased concentrations of a compound in this organelle result in Wolman disease, while on the other
hand this organelle contains acid phosphatase, which has an elevated concentration in people with
Gaucher's disease. It inherits molecules containing mannose-6-phosphate, and it is very acidic. This
organelle also contains phosphoric acid, protease (PROH-tee-ase), amylase (A-muh-lase), and lipase (LYE-
pase). Name this organelle, the animal counterpart to vacuoles in plants, which digests macromolecules,
membranes, and other organelles.
ANSWER: lysosomes
A disease related to this organelle is caused by a lack of hexosaminidase (HEX-ose-am-IN-ih-dace) A,
characterized by a red spot in the iris, and called Tay-Sachs disease. Mannose-6-phosphate tags proteins
destined for this organelle. This organelle contains namesake hydrolases and can absorb material via
autophagy. This organelle's V-class proton pumps create an acidic environment to carry out its main
function. For 10 points, name this organelle that breaks down macromolecules and cellular waste.
ANSWER: lysosome
These organelles are the target location of structures whose formation is mediated by P13K. They
malfunction in Niemann-Pick disease, and swelling of the liver and spleen may result from a deficiency of
LAL, an enzyme that hydrolyses cholesterol esters in these organelles. One disease of these organelles
results in the accumulation of gangliosides. Mannose-6-phosphate targets proteins to these organelles,
which may malfunction in Tay-Sachs disease and are the site of autophagy. They use proton pumps to
maintain an internal pH of 4.8 and contain lipases and hydrolases. For 10 points, name these digestive
organelles that break down cell components.
ANSWER: lysosomes
I-cell disease results in these organelles being empty, and Pompe's (pom-PAY) disease occurs due
to a mutation in a protein found here. They use V-ATPases ("A-T-P-ay-suhs) to pump in protons and
use mannose-6-phosphate to transport products in a compartment called an endosome
(EN-doh-sohm). Their internal pH is around (*) 4.5. They contain the enzymes sulfatases
(SUHL-fuh-tay-suhs), lipases (LIE-pay-suhs), and hydrolases (HIGH-droh-lay-suhs). For 10 points, name
these cellular organelles that break down wastes.
ANSWER: lysosome
Two diseases associated with these structures are caused by glucosyl-ceramidase and hexosamin-idase
deficiency. Materials destined for these organelles are tagged with mannose-6-phosphate, and failures of
these organelles are the cause of Tay-Sachs disease. They are created when enzyme-filled compartments
break off from the Golgi apparatus. These organelles maintain a pH of about 5, which is ideal for their
lipases, amylases, and proteases. They fuse with vacuoles to hydrolyze the material inside of them. For 10
points, name these organelles that digest wastes and ingested matter.
ANSWER: lysosomes
Along with microtubules, these entities are recruited to facilitate the invasion of the host cell by the parasite
T. Cruzi, and the protein hVam6p is responsible for the clustering of these entities in humans. Glycogen
buildup in these entities in muscle cells results in Pompe's disease, and the lack of fat-metabolizing enzymes
in it is the cause of Tay-Sachs disease. Mannose-6-phospate is tagged to proteins bound for this organelle,
which pumps protons into itself for maintaining an acidic environment. For 10 points, identify these
organelles that are important in the autolysis of cells.
ANSWER: lysosomes
Their dysfunction may cause Hurler syndrome, which arises from an iduronidase deficiency in these
organelles. A severe form of mucolipidosis, also called i-cell disease, occurs due to improper
phosphorylation of a mannose sugar tag applied to objects destined for them. Better known for failures that
cause Tay-Sachs disease, they contain several acid hydrolases which work within their acidic environments.
For 10 points, identify these organelles, named for their function of breaking down macromolecules
acquired from phagocytosis.
ANSWER: lysosomes
A failure of the enzyme that takes apart sphingolipids in this organelle may cause Gaucher's disease.
Failures in these organelles can also cause Mucopolysaccharidosis I, which is caused by the lack of
function by the enzyme L-iduronidase, and these organelles have a pH of (*) 5. Tay-Sachs disease is
also caused by a failure in these organelles, which are nicknamed "suicide sacs" due to their critical role in
autolysis. For ten points, name this organelles which digest macromolecules and are made by the Golgi
apparatus.
ANSWER: Lysosome
When these organelles cannot receive mannose-marked proteins, inclusion-cell disease occurs. The
improper metabolism of sphingolipids in these organelles causes Gaucher's disease. Another disease
associated with this organelle is caused when hexosaminidase A is not produced at high enough levels, and
is called Tay-Sachs disease. These organelles are responsible for a type of programmed cell death called
autophagy, and they utilize hydrolases and proteases. For 10 points, name these digestive organelles whose
function is to break down cellular waste.
ANSWER: Lysosomes
Analysis of individuals with I-cell disease led to the discovery that proteins headed to this organelle are
tagged with mannose-6-phosphate. Enveloping an organelle with a double-membraned vesicle is the first
step in autophagy, which occurs in this organelle. Hydrogen pumps on its surface are responsible for
maintaining its pH of about 5. For 10 points, name this organelle that breaks down unneeded molecules.
ANSWER: lysosomes
After Hrs recruits ESCRT to form a multivesicular body, the late endosome fuses with this structure. A
mutation in the GLA gene causes an enzyme in this organelle, alpha-galactosidase, to stop functioning
properly. I-cell diseases affect this organelle, a class of its namesake "storage diseases." Monoubiquitinated
proteins localized to this structure are often also tagged with mannose-6-phosphate by the Golgi apparatus.
Autophagmosomes fuse with these organelles during autophagy, and they have an internal pH of around 5
that allows their acid hydrolase enzymes to function. For 10 points, name these organelles called "suicide
sacks" which break down cellular waste.
ANSWER: lysosomes
Although mannose-6-phosphate tagged molecules are sent to this organelle, its failure results in I-cell
disease, characterized by the formation of inclusion bodies. Niemann-Pick disease and Gaucher's
disease are results of malfunction in it, while sphingo-lipid buildup around it occurs in [*] Tay-Sachs
disease. Its namesake enzymes are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum, though this organelle itself buds
off from the Golgi apparatus. Its membrane maintains an acidic environment in the interior, necessary for
hydrolases to function. For 10 points, what organelle uses autophagy to consume old organelles and digest
macromolecules?
ANSWER: lysosome
Inclusion-cell disease is caused by a defect in these structures, resulting from faulty mannose
phosphorylation. Substances bound for these organelles are marked by mannose-6-phosphate. They bud off
from the trans-golgi network and are found only in eukaryotic cells. Tay-Sachs disease is caused by the
malfunction of an enzyme contained in these organelles. They fuse with vacuoles to release their lipases,
proteases, and amylases. They maintain a pH of 4.8 to provide their enzymes with an acidic environment.
For 10 points, name these digestive organelles.
ANSWER: lysosomes
Mannose-6-phosphate tags enzymes headed to this organelle. Pompe's disease, Hurler syndrome, Fabry
disease, and I-cell disease can all be caused by malfunctions within this organelle. The storage of
ganglioside within this organelle in neuronal cells can cause Tay-Sachs disease, and they were discovered
by Christian de Duve. The membrane around this organelle allows it to maintain the 4.5 pH level that it
requires for operation. This is, for 10 points, what organelle that serves to digest waste and food within a
cell?
ANSWER: Lysosomes
A disease related to this organelle is caused by a lack of hexosaminidase (HEX-ose-am-IN-ih-dace) A,
characterized by a red spot in the iris, and called Tay-Sachs disease. Mannose-6-phosphate tags proteins
destined for this organelle. This organelle contains namesake hydrolases and can absorb material via
autophagy. This organelle's V-class proton pumps create an acidic environment to carry out its main
function. For 10 points, name this organelle that breaks down macromolecules and cellular waste.
ANSWER: lysosome
Vesicles fuse with cytoplasmic endosomes on the pathway to this organelle. Diseases caused by the
improper functioning of this organelle include Hurler's syndrome and Tay-Sachs disease, which arises
from insufficient hexosaminidase A activity. The targets of phagocytosis are sent to this organelle, which
uses acid hydrolases to carry out its primary function. For 10 points, name this organelle responsible for the
digestion of microorganisms and macromolecules.
ANSWER: lysosome
This structure's namesake trafficking regulator gene is mutated in sufferers of Chediak-Higashi syndrome,
in which these structures are both abnormally enlarged and reduced in number. Proteins targeted to this
organelle have mannose 6-phosphate residues. Tay-Sachs disease is characterized by the accumulation of
gangliosides in these organelles, which can fuse with phagosomes. Found only in animal cells, these
organelles have a pH of approximately five, and are prone to storage diseases. FTP name this cell organelle
that has digestive enzymes for breaking down certain cell parts.
ANSWER: lysosomes
Its residual body can form a lipofuscin pigment granule, and proteins like AP1 and GAAT are necessary for
its function. An enlargement of it that causes damage to muscle cells is called Pompe (pom-PAY) disease,
while a defect in sugar metabolism causes it to malfunction in Hurler's syndrome. The home to V-class
pumps, it takes in triskelion shaped clathrin-bound vesicles, and proteins tagged by mannose-6-phosphate
are bound for it. Critical for autolysis, FTP name this organelle that uses proton pumps to generate an
acidic environment where its hydrolases can act to digest material.
ANSWER: lysosome
Defects in these structures cause Gaucher's [go-SHAYZ] disease, and another disease affecting them causes
the buildup of GM2 gangliosides due to misshapen hexosaminidase [hex-oh-sah-MIN-i-dayz] A. These
organelles affected by Tay-Sachs disease use proton pumps to maintain an internal pH of 4.8 and fuse with
vacuoles to aid digestion. For 10 points, name these organelles, containing hydrolases and proteases, which
break down cellular waste.
ANSWER: lysosomes
It was discovered by Christian Rene de Duve, and it is surrounded in the cell by a membrane with a proton
pump that maintains its acidic environment. Identify this organelle, which is responsible for breaking down
macromolecules with its array of hydrolytic enzymes, and which originates by budding from the trans-Golgi
membrane.
ANSWER: lysosome
The biogenesis of this organelle is regulated by transcription factor EB and Rab7. One disease
affecting these organelles causes xanthomatosis and adrenal gland calcification, while another is
marked by tissue-paper macrophages and Erlenmeyer flask deformity in the femur. Those diseases
are caused by mutations in LAL and glucocerebrosidase and are named for Wolman and Gaucher. I-cell
disease causes these organelles to be empty due to a mutation in the (*) M6P receptor, while
another namesake storage disease of this organelle is similar to Sandhoff's disease and is caused by a
mutation in HEXA. These organelles have V-type ATPases in their membranes and contain sulfatases,
lipases, and proteases stored at pH 4.5. For 10 points, name these organelles that degrade waste products in
the cell.
ANSWER: lysosome
When TFEB translocates to the nucleus, it results in a corresponding increase in the number of these
organelles. A glycosphingolipid in this organelle, iGb3, is necessary for the production of natural killer
cells. P-type lectins direct enzymes that have been tagged with mannose-6-phosphate to this organelle.
Christian Rene de Duve discovered this organelle after centrifuging liver cells and discovering an
abnormally high amount of acid phosphatase. Malfunction of this organelle can lead to a buildup of
gangliosides in Tay-Sachs disease. For 10 points, name these organelles that perform autophagy by
digesting unneeded or excess cellular materials.
ANSWER: lysosomes
Saposins are proteins localized to this organelle. Gaucher's disease result from the dysfunction of
this organelle and when Hexosaminidase A, a protein found in this organelle, is non-functioning, (*)
gangliosides build up in neurons. Proteins bound for it are targeted using mannose-6-phosphate and in it,
acid hydrolases process and breakdown items imported from endocytosis. For 10 points, name this acidic
organelles that degrade unwanted cellular components and materials.
ANSWER: lysosome
A malfunction in one protein found in these organelles results in Pompe's disease. They were
discovered in 1949 by Christian de Duve after he homogenized animal cells in an ultracentrifuge. These
objects form as vesicles budding from the Golgi network fuse with endosomes. Since these organelles can
release destructive enzymes into the cytoplasm, they are sometimes referred to as "suicide sacs." For 10
points, name these organelles in animal cells which break down waste materials.
ANSWER: lysosomes
Metachromatic leukodystrophy is caused by a problem in one enzyme of this organelle. One genetic
disorder in trafficking proteins here is I-cell disease. That trafficking uses the mannose-6-phosphate
modification. Pompe's disease and Tay-Sachs disease result when one of its proteins are missing. In order
for its enzymes to function, it has a pH that is much more acidic than its surroundings. One type of
programmed cell death occurs when these bodies process old organelles and proteins and is called
autophagy. It will often fuse with a vacuole to digest the contents of it. For 10 points, name this organelle
which helps the cell to break up debris and food obtained from phagocytosis.
ANSWER: lysosomes
This protein's F57I and W64R mutants are associated with familial renal amyloidosis. The
mechanism of this enzyme was solved by Volcado et al using bi-fluorinated substrates, which
determined that this enzyme uses an SN2 reaction to displace its second product. The active site of
this enzyme contains glutamate-35 and asparagine-52, and the mechanism of this enzyme was
originally posited to have a glycosyl carbocation intermediate by David (*) Phillips. Structural studies
of this enzyme often use its hen's egg white variety. This enzyme breaks the beta-one-four linkages between
N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid found in peptidoglycan, and like penicillin was originally
discovered by Alexander Fleming. For 10 points, name this enzyme found in milk, saliva, and tears, which
breaks down bacterial cell walls.
ANSWER: lysozyme
Inhibited by Pseudomonas and E. coli Ivy proteins, this protein's active site requires the E35 and D52 acidic
residues. Because it can be purified in large quantities, it was the first protein to be characterized at a 2
Angstrom level, by Lord David Phillips in 1965. In a classic example of convergent evolution, Alexander
Fleming showed that the bacterial form of this enzyme has no sequence or structural elements in common
with the hen egg variety, which is frequently used as a model source of peptides for inducing antibodies or
cytotoxic T cell responses. It hydrolyzes 1-4-beta-glycosidic linkages in polysaccharides that make up chitin
and bacterial cell walls, protecting the body surface of mammals and some insects from infections. For 10
points, name this enzyme, which along with defensins is released by the granules of white blood cells, and is
also found in tears, saliva and inside lysosomes.
ANSWER: lysozyme [accept hen egg lysozyme early]
The Abi class proteins are known to inhibit this process by reducing the efficiency of plaquing, and
expression of MYB results in transativation of RTA, which is a promoter of this process in KSHV. The
expression of BGLF5 was implicated in inducing host shutoff at the beginning of this process, which leads
to reduced expression of antigen presenting complexes, which aids in evasion of T Cells. Its first stage
involves penetration of the plasma membrane through receptors on its surface or mechanical force and its
last stage liquid entering the cell until the cell bursts. For 10 points, identify this form of viral reproduction
employed by the Epstein-Barr virus that typically results in the destruction of the host cell as opposed to the
lysogenic cycle.
ANSWER: Lytic cycle
Expression of the cro gene promotes this process, which is catalyzed by alkalines and makes up the first
step in extracting plasmid DNA during miniprep. An enzyme named for this phenomenon hydrolyzes N-
acetylmuramic acid and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine glycosidic linkages in peptidoglycan. Sonication causes
this process. Because it can occur when a cell is placed in a hypotonic solution, paramecia have contractile
vacuoles to prevent this process. Beta-lactam antibiotics cause bacterial cells to undergo this, which names
a class of phages that undergo a cycle contrasted with the lysogenic one. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which a cell bursts open.
ANSWER: lysis [or lytic cycle; or lysozyme; or cytolysis; prompt on "killing cells" or similar answers]
Recent research suggests that c-Jun N-terminal kinases are important for the development of these entities, a
specific type of which, lacis cells, help to form an apparatus that controls blood pressure. These entities also
have a large cytokine-secretion profile that includes tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-8. Some
cytokines released by these cells are important in activating natural killer cells, and others play a role in
activating the acute-phase response. Specific ones of these local to the liver are called Kupffer cells, while
those local to the kidney are called mesangial cells. Descendants of monocytes, these cells mature when
entering damaged tissue through the process of leukocyte extravasation. For 10 points, name these myeloid-
lineage cells of the innate immune system that possess a name meaning "big eaters."
ANSWER: macrophages
The Yops virulence factors released by Yersinia pestis allow it to divide inside these cells during early
stages of infection. In atherosclerosis, these cells become filled with lipids and become known as foam
cells. These cells release interleukin-1 beta to mediate the inammatory response, and specialized forms of
these cells include the microglia and Kupffer cells. Along with dendritic cells, these derivatives of
monocytes present antigens to helper T-cells. These cells, which live longer than neutrophils, move
primarily by amoeboid movement. For ten points, name these white blood cells that use phagocytosis to
engulf harmful pathogens.
ANSWER: macrophage
These cells take on a tissue-paper appearance in patients who cannot break down
glucocerebrosides in a condition named for Gaucher. Langhans giant cells are generated by fusing
several of these cells together. These cells are responsible for storing iron in the form of hemosiderin.
These cells express CD68 and MAC-1 on their surface. In atherosclerosis, these cells turn into foam
cells, and those present in the liver are a key part of the reticulo-endothelial system and are named
for (*) Kupffer. These cells originate from peripheral blood monocytes, and like dendritic cells they are
responsible for using MHC class II to present antigens to helper T cells. For 10 points, name these immune
cells whose name means "large eaters".
ANSWER: macrophages
In smokers, the alveolar (al-vee-OH-lar) type of these cells develop characteristic inclusions of
brown pigments, and varieties of these cells include dust cells, foam cells, and Kupffer (CUP-fur)
cells. These cells express CD14 and CD68 proteins function. They are enhanced by opsonization, and
they develop from circulating monocytes (MOHN-on-sites) that move into tissue. These granulocytes
(GRAN-yoo-loh-sites) can function to present (*) antigens to T cells. For 10 points, name these white
blood cells which devour debris and pathogens, and whose name means "big eater".
ANSWER: macrophages [prompt on white blood cells before mentioned; prompt on leukocytes (LOO-koh-sites)]
In one process, objects are coated with fragments like C3B or IgG, which can then be recognized by
these cells' CR1 receptors. That process is opsonization. The Cords of Billroth contain large numbers
of the precursors of these cells, a precursor which they share with dendritic cells. Tuberculosis-
causing mycobacteria replicate in endosomes of these cells and may remain dormant for years due to
the formation of (*) granulomas, which are mostly composed of these cells. In the liver they differentiate
to Kupffer cells and break red blood cells and their colony stimulating factor causes their differentiation
into osteoclasts which absorb and digest bone tissue. Monocytes differentiate into, for 10 points, what large
cells which eat and digest debris and infectious agents.
ANSWER: macrophages
The anti-EMR1 monoclonal antibody binds specifically to these cells, and they also express CD68 and
CD14. So-called "Heart Failure Cells" are created when these cells become laden with hemosiderin, and in
atherosclerotic [ah-thuh-ROH-skleh-RAW-tik] plaques they become foam cells. One variant of these cells
line the walls of liver sinusoids and are called Kupffer cells, and these cells' main function is triggered by
activation of toll-like receptors, followed by actin polymerization. These cells differentiate from
monocytes. They express MHC class II, which with they present antigens to helper T cells. For 10 points,
name these immune cells which phagocytize [FAG-uh-seye-tize] debris and pathogens, whose name is
Greek for "big eaters".
ANSWER: macrophages
These cells turn into multinucleated giant cells upon infection by pathogens such as herpes. They become
foam cells when they participate in the formation of an atherosclerotic plaque. These cells and dendritic
cells use MHC class II molecules to display antigens to other immune cells. Mycobacterium tuberculosis is
not killed by these cells and can live inside them. In the brain, they are called microglia, and in the liver,
they are called Kupffer cells. They contain large numbers of lysosomes in order to digest foreign material.
For ten points, name this type of white blood cell that engulfs and destroys pathogens and cellular debris.
ANSWER: macrophages
Early onset forms of this condition include Stargardt's disease and Best's disease. Recent studies have
indicated that mutations in factors H and B and protein C3 of the complement system play important roles
in the progression of this disease, leading to problems with glycosaminoglycans in areas like Bruch's
membrane. The build-up of material in that membrane leads to Drusen, a sign of this disease that can be
monitored with the Amsler Grid Test. Anti-angiogenics may hold promise for treatment of its "wet" form.
For 10 points, name this normally age-related condition that causes central vision loss due to the destruction
of the namesake area of the retina.
ANSWER: macular degeneration
Mutation of ABC R cause a rare juvenile form of this condition caused by lipofuschin buildup, known as
Stargardt' disease. Mutations in fibulin-5 and complement factor H have been associated with this disease,
which can be diagnosed using the Amsler Grid Test. Lucentis and Avastatin treat it by inhibiting VEGF,
and this disease is caused by aberrant growth of blood vessels in the choroid. Drusen are another symptom
of this disease, whose sufferers also experience scotomas, or floaters. It comes in wet and dry forms, and its
hallmark symptom is breakdown of the namesake region of the retina. For 10 points, name this condition
which causes loss of central vision, a leading cause of blindness.
ANSWER: Macular degeneration
This element blocks the flow of calcium through NMDA channels, while compounds containing this metal
are used to treat eclampsia. The hairpin ribozyme requires this metal to fold, and the the CorA protein
transports this element across bacterial membranes. It is weakly bonded to the terminal phosphate groups
of ATP. EDTA is used to chelate this metal, and it is found in a compound that contains a phytol side chain.
Its stabilizing effect on the backbones of nucleic acids makes it a necessary cofactor for DNA polymerase,
meaning its chloride is used in PCR reactions. Also found at the center of the porphyrin ring of chlorophyll,
for 10 points, name this metal present as a +2 ion in solution, with atomic number 12 and symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium
A deficiency of this element may cause eclampsia, and kieserite is a hydrated form of a sulfate of this
element. The equilibrium of a class of compounds containing this metal is named for Schlenk. Ions of
this metal block NMDA receptors, and a class of compounds in which this element is bonded to a
halogen are used to form (*) carbon-carbon bonds. This metal's chloride is often added to PCR mixes to
increase the stability of single stranded DNA. This element is bonded to bromine in Grignard reagents, and
is found in the center of the chlorin ring of chlorophyll. The sulfate of this element is Epsom salt. For 10
points, name this element with atomic number 12 and symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium [accept Mg before mentioned]
This element blocks NMDA receptors, and it forms a salt with citrate used as an extremely strong
laxative. In liquid form, this element is used to make titanium in the Kroll process. Eclampsia
(eh-CLAMP-see-uh) is treated with its sulfate, which is called Epsom salt. It forms a complex with
phosphate groups in ATP, and it initiates the Calvin cycle by binding to RuBisCo. It is found in Grignard
(GRIN-yard) reagents and the porphyrin ring of chlorophyll. For 10 points, name this alkaline earth metal
with symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium
The flow of this element from the thylakoid compartment to the stroma aids in the regulation of the
Calvin cycle. A complex of this element and (*) ATP is the substrate for kinase enzymes in glycolysis. Its
divalent ion aids in hammerhead ribozyme activity and Vitamin D aids in the absorption of the element
along with calcium. Epsom salts are composed of this element's sulfate. For 10 points, name this alkaline
earth metal located within the porphyrin ring of chlorophyll.
ANSWER: magnesium (or Mg2+)
The CorA protein transports this substance across the cell membranes of bacteria. This substance is
often administered to prevent convulsions in women with pre-eclampsia. It isn't potassium, but its
deficiency can lead to torsades de pointes. Long-term potentiation requires the displacement of this
ion from an NMDA receptor. Hexokinase and phosphofructokinase both utilize this ion as a cofactor,
and its chloride salt is added to stabilize PCR products. This cation binds to a (*) carbamylated lysine
in an enzyme that catalyzes the formation of two molecules of PGA from carbon dioxide and RuBP, which
is
RuBisCO. Epsom salts are commonly used to pharmaceutically deliver this cation. For 10 points, name this
divalent cation found complexed with cytosolic ATP and in the center of chlorophyll.
ANSWER: magnesium ion [or Mg2+]
Chronic nephritis has been found to be associated with mutations in the gene for Claudin-16, which
facilitates paracellular transport of this substance. In bacteria, the CorA protein is used for
transmembrane transport of it, and complexes identified in humans for transport of this substance
include SLC41 and TRPM6. Low blood levels of this element may result when chemotherapy drugs
like Cisplatin are administered, and preeclampsia can also lower levels of it. The presence of this
element helps initiate the Calvin cycle when it binds the active site of RuBisCO. For 10 points, identify this
element that is coordinated and chlorophyll and that complexes with phosphate groups of ATP, a metal with
symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium [or Mg]
This element tightly binds to NMDA receptor pores and acts as an ion channel block. This element is often
used to prevent seizure convulsion in eclampsia. Because this element binds to the alpha phosphates of
dNTPs, buffers used in PCR require the addition of this element as a cofactor for DNA polymerase. After
oxygen, this element makes up the greatest percentage of the mantle by weight. ATP is nearly always found
coordinated to this metal, which is also a component of Grignard reagents. A chlorin surrounds an ion of
this element in chlorophyll. For 10 points, name this alkaline earth metal located above calcium on the
Periodic Table, with symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium [or Mg before mention]
The lack of Duffy antigens confers immunity to the vivax species of this disease. This disease can lead to
intracranial pressure that often causes abnormal posturing; in severe cases, kidney failure can leak
hemoglobin into the urine. Hypnozoites can overwinter, in some cases, remaining dormant in infected liver
cells, though generally an infection moves quickly to erythrocytes. Individuals heterozygous for sickle-cell
anemia are resistant to, FTP, this disease caused by four species of Plasmodium, spread by the Anopheles
mosquito.
ANSWER: malaria
The knowlesi form of this disease can infect macaques and, like the vivax type, uses Duffy antigens as
a receptor. The agents that cause this disease have merozite and sporozite stages. A deficiency in glucose 6
phosphate can protect you against this disease. Another substance that protects against this disease comes
from the bark of the cinchona tree and is called quinine. The alleles for sickle cell anemia confer resistance
to this disease that is caused by Plasmodia. For 10 points, what disease, prominent in Africa, is commonly
carried by mosquitoes?
ANSWER: malaria
JBS Haldane's hypothesis about this disease suggests that it does not affect patients with favism.
Cells infected by this disease express projections called knobs and may show rosetting. Crystallized
heme called hemozoin forms in this disease. Henry Heimlich infamously advocated using this disease
to treat HIV. The quotidian fever, for which this disease sometimes gets its name, consists of a cold
stage, a hot stage, and a sweating stage, which (*) repeats every 48 hours in a paroxysm. Artemisinin
derivatives treat this disease. In an example of heterozygote advantage, carriers of the gene for sickle cell
anemia are resistant to this disease. For 10 points, name this disease caused by Plasmodium, carried by the
Anopheles mosquito.
ANSWER: malaria
Drugs containing a compound called artemisinin (AR-tuh-mih-SINE-in) are used to treat this disease,
whose severity is lessened in individuals with thalassaemias (THAL-uh-SEEM-ee-uhs). Those who
completely lack receptor proteins called Duffy antigens are immune to one form of this disease. Individuals
who are heterozygous for the mutated allele for sickle cell anemia are at far less risk for this disease. Its
longtime treatment was derived from Cinchona (sin-CHO-nuh) bark. For 10 points, the parasite
Plasmodium causes what disease that was once treated by quinine (KWY-nine) and is spread by
mosquitoes?
ANSWER: malaria
Sir Ronald Ross won the 1902 Nobel Prize for his study of this disease, as did Charles Laveran five
years later. Medicines against this disease include dapsome and doxycycline, and its most severe case
is designated P. falciparum, while Thalassaemia and (*) Duffy antigens can provide resistance to this
disease. The transmitting vector of this disease has schizont, sporozoite, and merozonite stages. The first
effective cure for it was found in Peru, where a drug was extracted from a cinchona tree. For ten points,
quinine treats which disease carried by Anopheles mosquitoes that is caused by the protozoan Plasmodium?
ANSWER: malaria
The RTS,S (R-T-S-comma-S) vaccine is currently under development to protect against this disease,
whose most dangerous form is caused by species falciparum. The gene which causes sickle-cell anemia also
provides resistance to this disease. Female members of the genus Anopheles are vectors for this disease,
which can be treated with quinine. For 10 points, name this disease caused by parasites of the genus
Plasmodium, which is transmitted by mosquitoes and whose name comes from the "bad air" originally
thought to cause it.
ANSWER: malaria
The most common species of this disease is vivax, while the deadliest is falciparum. The sporozites of
this disease become schizonts, which become merozites, which destroy red blood cells. Artemisinin
(AR-tuh-MIS-uh-nin) has replaced quinine (KWHY-nine) as the preferred drug to treat this disease, which
is characterized by recurrent fevers. Caused by Plasmodium protozoa, it is prevented by spraying DDT and
hanging nets around beds. For 10 points, name this disease spread by mosquitoes.
ANSWER: malaria
Doxycycline can been used to prevent this disease, which has been known to cause metabolic
deficiencies in lactate dehydrogenase in the nervous system. People who lack the Duffy antigen are
resistant to one microorganism that causes this disease, and this disease makes the cells it infects
more like to sickle if someone has the sickle cell trait. This disease is caused by five species of
Plasmodium. For 10 points, identify this parasitic disease, prominent in tropical regions, transmitted by the
female Anopheles mosquito.
ANSWER: malaria
The standard treatment for this disease uses a drug which may act by generating high-valent iron in this
disease's pathogen from a porphyrin derivative. That drug is artemisinin. Some species of this disease's
pathogen, such as vivax, can remain dormant in the liver in hypnozoite form, others such as P. falciparum
cannot. Its pathogen sequesters insoluble hemozoin; the conversion of hemozoin back to heme is the
mechanism by means of which cinchona derivatives like quinine act to combat this disease. People with at
least one gene for sickle-cell disease are resistant to it. For 10 points, name this disease caused by
Plasmodium and transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito.
ANSWER: malaria [prompt on "Plasmodium" before "pathogen" is read]
Drugs like mefloquine and doxycyclin are used prophylactically to prevent this disease, which was first
treated in the nineteenth century with drugs extracted from cinchona. Resistance to this illness is observed
in carriers of another disease caused by the replacement of a glutamate by valine in hemoglobin; that
disease is sickle cell anemia. This illness is caused by the destruction of red blood cells by the sporozoite
form of a parasite of genus Plasmodium. For 10 points, name this disease that is transmitted by the
Anopheles mosquito and treated with quinine.
ANSWER: malaria
During this disease, proteins with the VTS motif will be produced. A similar condition to this one is caused
in Gorillas by members of clade Laverania. A combination of sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine is used to
treat this condition. A deficiency in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase can confer protection against this
disease. PfEMP1 antigens can be found in sufferers of this disease. Patients who lack the Duffy antigen are
resistant to the vivax caused form of this disease. Artemisinin is a recent drug for treating this disease. Its
causative agent has merozoite and sporozoite stages. It can be caused by falciparum, and quinine is used to
treat this disease. For 10 points, name this disease transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito.
ANSWER: Malaria
A newly found form of this disease uses the knowlesi [no-LEHS-ee] species as a parasite, and the most
deadly type is based on the falciparum [fal-SI-pahr-um] species. The parasites mature in a person's liver
and then enter red blood cells, which they cause to break open, causing anemia, blackwater fever, and other
symptoms. It is often treated with chloroquine [KLOR-uh-queen], and the traditional medicine for it, which
unfortunately destroys blood platelets, is quinine [KWI-neen]. Name this disease caused by plasmodium
[plas-MOH-dee-um] that is often carried by mosquitos.
ANSWER: malaria
Species responsible for mild forms of this ailment include vivax and knowlesi, the latter of which primarily
affects macacas, while most serious forms of it are caused by the species falciparum. Extracts from
Artemisia annua are used to combat this disease, whose pathogenesis involves merozoite spores infecting
red blood cells. Its key vector is a member of genus Anopheles, and heterozygous alleles for sickle cell
anemia confer a degree of resistance to this disease. Traditionally, the strongest treatment for it is a
medicine derived from cinchona bark, quinine. For 10 points, identify this disease carried by mosquitoes
and caused by Plasmodia that comes from Italian for "bad air".
ANSWER: malaria
Individuals who lack the Duffy antigens are immune to the vivax form of this disease. This disease is
sometimes diagnosed through Wolbach's tissue stain, though the Giemsa stain is more commonly used.
A canonical example of the heterozygote advantage occurs because sickle-cell heterozygotes are
resistant to this disease. For 10 points, name this disease, treatable by quinine, which is caused by the
plasmodium parasite and transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito.
ANSWER: malaria
Individuals without the Duffy antigen system are believed to be immune to this disease. This disease is
usually treated with quinines, and controversy surrounds whether nations should use DDT to prevent the
spread of this disease. Heterozygous sickle-cell carriers have a certain degree of protection from, for 10
points, what disease carried by Anopheles mosquitoes, and caused by the protozoan Plasmodium?
ANSWER: malaria
A common effective target for antibodies produced for fighting this disease is MSP1. Pyrimethamine and
sulfadoxine are used together to treat this disease, while another drug used to fight it is Artemisinin. Its
causative agent has a dormant form called a hypnozoite. This disease can be categorized as uncomplicated
or severe. It is caused by species called ovale, vivex, and falciparum. The organism behind it has schizont,
sporozoite, and merozoite stages. This disease was historically treated by quinine. For 10 points, name this
disease caused by protists in the genus Plasmodium which are spread by the Anopheles mosquito.
ANSWER: malaria [or Plasmodium before "caused by species"]
In an effort to fight this disease, Lowell Wood invented a device consisting of multiple lasers called a
"photonic fence." The nature of its transmission was discovered by Carlos Finlay and Ronald Ross, and it
was first effectively treated by cinchona bark-derived quinine. Its vector is the female Anopheles, and it is
caused by the protist Plasmodium. For 10 points, name this mosquito-borne tropical virus.
ANSWER: malaria [or Roman fever; prompt on ague]
Charles Laveran won a Nobel in Medicine for identifying the cause of this disease. One medicine
against this disease is called artemisinin. There are seven simian-infecting and five human-infecting
species of the causative agent of this disease, with the falciparum variety accounting for most of the
mortality. Resistance to this disease caused by (*) Plasmodium is possessed by patients of sickle-cell
anemia. This disease can be treated by chewing on cinchona bark, which contains quinine. For 10 points,
identify this disease spread by mosquitoes.
ANSWER: malaria
Genetic resistance to this disease is conferred by G6PD deficiency and a lack of Duffy antigens. This
disease causes abnormal posturing and hemoglobinuria, and its ovale and vivax strains are less virulent than
its falciparum strain. A heterozygote advantage confers resistance to this disease upon carriers of sickle cell
anemia. Carried by female members of genus Anopheles, it is treated with quinine and caused by protozoans
of the genus Plasmodium. For 10 points, name this disease prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, transmitted by
mosquitoes.
ANSWER: malaria
One complication of this disease is an autoimmune reaction called Blackwater fever, which causes
kidney failure. It is treated with artemisinin. Duffy antigens and G6PD deficiency offer some
resistance to it. People heterozygous for (*) sickle-cell anemia are resistant to it. This disease is caused
by a parasite carried by the anopheles mosquito, and it recently has grown resistant to quinine. For 10
points, name this disease caused by the plasmodium parasite.
ANSWER: Malaria [accept Plasmodium before mention]
Drugs containing a compound called artemisinin (AR-tuh-mih-SINE-in) are used to treat this disease,
whose severity is lessened in individuals with thalassaemias (THAL-uh-SEEM-ee-uhs). Those who
completely lack receptor proteins called Duffy antigens are immune to one form of this disease. Individuals
who are heterozygous for the mutated allele for sickle cell anemia are at far less risk for this disease. Its
longtime treatment was derived from Cinchona (sin-CHO-nuh) bark. For 10 points, the parasite
Plasmodium causes what disease that was once treated by quinine (KWY-nine) and is spread by
mosquitoes?
ANSWER: malaria
This disease can be treated by a compound whose structure consists of a unique peroxide bridge and
is known as Artemisinin. Humans that lack Duffy antigens are thought to be immune to this disease.
The source of infection can be pointed at the species ovale and falciparum and the genus Anopheles,
while people at a (*) lower risk for this disease are heterozygous for sickle-cell anemia. For 10 points,
name this disease caused by the bacteria Plasmodium and its transmission by mosquitoes.
ANSWER: malaria
Susan Bell and Malcolm McKenna published an influential higher-level taxonomy of this class. The early
Jurassic Sinoconodon is one of the most basal members of this class; the therapsids comprise this extant
class and its close relatives. This class is distinguished by having a dentary-squamosal jaw joint and three
middle ear bones. This class includes the eutherians as well as monotremes and marsupials. For 10 points,
name this vertebrate class whose members have hair and produce milk for their young.
ANSWER: Mammalia [or mammals]
Malcolm McKenna and Susan Bell developed a scheme for organizing this class of organisms. It is
divided into the subclasses Theria and Prototheria, and one of its largest orders, Chiroptera, uses
echolocation to find food. Organisms in this class feature a structure primarily made of pyramidal neurons,
the neocortex. This class includes monotremes and rodents, and most of them give birth to their young live.
For 10 points, name this class of vertebrates whose members have a set of namesake milk-producing
glands.
ANSWER: Mammalia [or mammals]
One clade in this group of organisms, xenarthra, only has one species naturally found in the United States.
This group of organisms contain two bones important in sensing that are derived from the quadrate and
articular bones of a related group of vertebrate. In addition to comprising all known amniotes with reptiles,
they contain a temporal fenestra, which labels them as synapsids. Convergent evolution resulted in
similarities between the two largest clades of this class, the eutherians and (*) marsupials. For ten points,
name this vertebrate class whose members are characterized by hair and milk production.
ANSWER: Mammalia or mammals
Unlike the one in the ulna, the coronoid process of this bone is at the top of one of its rami and attaches to
the masseter and temporalis muscles. This bone contains holes that allow passage of the mental
nerves, and its upper front section is the alveolar process. It articulates with the temporal bone, and it is
sometimes called the submaxilla. It is U shaped and holds the lower teeth. Name this bone
commonly called the jawbone.
ANSWER: mandible (accept submaxilla before it's mentioned, prompt on "skull" or "jaw" or "jawbone")
This element is necessary for proper activation of glutamine synthetase in astrocytes, and this
element is also given to patients suffering from prolidase deficiency. The enzyme catalase in
Lactobacillus plantarum uses this element as a cofactor, while another enzyme containing this element
catalyzes the formation of ornithine in the final step of the urea cycle; that enzyme is arginase. In
eukaryotic mitochondria, a dismutase complex containing this element's cation oxidizes superoxide to
form O2, and the oxygen evolving complex in plant chloroplasts has a notable metalloenzyme core
containing calcium and this metal. However, this element may be better known for having a (*) plus 7
oxidation state as part of a potassium compound known to be a strong oxidizing agent in chemistry labs. For
10 points, name this trace nutrient and transition metal with symbol Mn.
ANSWER: manganese (accept Mn before mention)
Thomas Sturgill and his postdoc Bryan Ray discovered the first of these proteins after stimulating it
with insulin. These proteins interact with their targets by recognizing the "docking", or "D", motifs.
Ste5 (S T E 5) and KSR are scaffold proteins that enable the activation of these enzymes. c-Raf serves
as a gatekeeper in the best-known pathway involving these enzymes. In asthma and COPD, the p38
enzymes of this type are more active. The classical example of these enzymes, which must be
phosphorylated (*) twice before they can phosphorylate stuff, appear in the ERK 1/2 pathway. JNKs
(junks)
belong to this family of enzymes. For 10 points, name this family of serine/threonine kinases that appear in
many cell signaling cascades, including those activated in mitosis.
ANSWER: MAP kinase [or mitogen-activated protein kinase; or MAPKKK (up to 3 "K"); or MAP2K; or MAP3K; or MAP kinase kinase kinase (up to 3 "kinase"); prompt on "(serine-threonine) kinases"]
In the high-osmolarity glycerol pathway, one of these proline-directed molecules lies immediately
downstream from the scaffold Psb2. Proteins in this group are differentiated from one another near
residue 180, at the phosphorylation lip, Persistent activation of one of these proteins is implicated in
late-phase long-term potentiation. Ras exhibits its oncogenic effects via a pathway named for this
enzyme. These proteins are activated at threonine and tyrosine residues by dual-specificity kinases,
such as (*) MEK1, which phosphorylates ERK, a member of this group. The JNK and p38 members of this
group of enzymes relay signals from cytokines and other stressors. For 10 points, name this class of
serine/threonine kinases that participates in namesake cascades.
ANSWER: MAP kinases [or mitogen-activated protein kinases; do not accept "MAP kinase kinase" or "MAP kinase kinase kinase" or "MAP kinase kinase kinase kinase"]
The causal gene for this disease was identified by Francesco Ramirez in 1991. It is caused by a
defect in the production of the glycoprotein fibrillin-1, which is needed in the genesis of elastin fibers.
This disease affects all connective tissue, but its most common symptoms include a dilated (*) aorta
and abnormally long, slender extremities. For 10 points, Michael Phelps and Abraham Lincoln are
commonly misidentified as sufferers of what syndrome?
ANSWER: Marfan Syndrome
Most of the symptoms of this disease are caused by Transforming growth factor beta, which is the reason
that it shares many phenotypes with Loeys-Deitz Syndrome. It is caused by a mutation in the FBN1 gene,
whose associated fibrillin-1 protein is a component of the extracellular matrix responsible for elastic fiber
maintenance. Valve prolapse and arrhythmia are the most serious symptoms, along with aortic aneurysm
and lung collapse. For 10 points, name this autosomal dominant disease named for a French doctor with
symptoms including elongated fingers and tall stature, which may have afflicted Abe Lincoln.
ANSWER: Marfan syndrome
This tissue is suppressed in a debilitating side effect of azathioprine, and examination of this
tissue is required for diagnosis of HLH. One group of cells found in this tissue secrete
colony-stimulating factors. Normoblasts are normally found in this tissue, and, like adipose tissue,
the stroma of this substance contains mesenchymal stem cells. This substance is harvested from the
illiac crest, which is near the hip. (*) Transplants of this substance require total body irradiation and are
often used to treat leukemia. This substance comes in yellow and red varieties, the latter of which contains
hematopoetic stem cells. For 10 points, name this substance in which blood cells are synthesized, a fatty
tissue found within bones.
ANSWER: bone marrow
X GM-CSF stimulates stem cells in this tissue to differentiate into four types of cells, three of which
contain azurophils. One symptom of CAMT is the congenital absence of one type of cells normally present
in this tissue; when present, those cells produce TPO. Those polyploid cells extrude cytoplasmic extensions
through sinusoids in this tissue to produce objects that in turn produce vWF. This primary lymphoid organ
is often housed in a medullary cavity and surrounded by endosteum. While T cells in this tissue are the
cause of GVHD, B cells become immunocompetent here. One type of cancer that originates in this tissue is
Kahler's disease, while another is leukemia. For 10 points, identify this sometimes-hematopoietic tissue
which comes in red and yellow varieties, found in the interior of most bones.
ANSWER: bone marrow [accept red marrow or yellow marrow]
These organisms have a unique mu T cell receptor and have epipubic bones. They can be classified
based on whether they are diprotodont or polyprotodont. Some families of them have paired sperm, most
notably the Didelphidae family, and most of them have biphid reproductive organs. A namesake facial
tumor disease is threatening the largest extant carnivore in this group of organisms. Their milk can change
composition, one of the consequences of increased importance of the lactation phase in development.
Extinct organisms in this group include the thylacine, variously known as a certain island's "tiger" or
"wolf." For 10 points, name this group of mammals, most of which have their young develop in a pouch.
ANSWER: marsupials [prompt on Metatheria]
Prehistoric species belonging to this order include Palorchestes (PAL-or-KESS-teez) and Diprotodon
(dye-PRO-tow-don). Due to convergent evolution, this order contains the cat-like quoll (KWOLL) and the
wolf-like thylacine (THY-lah-seen). The only North American species in this order is the opossum. For 10
points, name this order of mammals that carry their young in a pouch, which include Australian species
such as the wombat (WAHM-bat) and kangaroo.
ANSWER: Marsupialia [or marsupials]
This group of mammals contains the order Microbiotheria (MY-kro-BYE-oh-THAIR-ee-uh), whose only
species, monito del monte (mo-NEE-toe del MON-tay), is found in South America. Like monotremes,
organisms in this order lack a corpus callosum (CORE-pus kuh-LOSS-um). Although they give birth live,
their short gestation period forces their young to fully develop for up to several months in their most
distinctive feature. For 10 points, name this group of mammals known for their distinctive pouch, which
includes koala bears and kangaroos.
ANSWER: marsupials [or Marsupialia]
These animals make up most of the metatherians. An extinct example, the thylacine, is similar to a wolf, and
its monito del monte is located primarily in Chile. Females in this infraclass have two uteri, and these
mammals are characterized by the immaturity of their newborns. Often contrasted with monotremes and
placental mammals, the examples native to North America are opossums. Other examples include
Tasmanian devils, wombats, and koalas. Name these mammals whose infants, known as joeys, live in their
mothers' pouches.
ANSWER: marsupial
The cascade to activate these cells begins with the secretion of antigen-specific immunoglobulin E and
proceeds with the binding of capital I lowercase g capital E to an allergen, forming a complex that then
binds to the surface of this type of cell to initiate an inflammatory response. Originally thought to be
responsible for nourishing surrounding tissues, these cells originate from bone marrow precursors that
express the CD34 molecule and are characteristically found near blood vessels and nerves as well as in the
mucosa linings of the lungs and digestive tract. They were first described by Paul Ehrlich in 1878 and are
closely related to basophil granulocytes, a class of white blood cell. For ten points, name these cells that are
primarily responsible for the production of histamine and that share their name with a pole that you might
find sails attached to on a ship.
ANSWER: Mast cells (also accept Mastzellen cells).
Darier's sign is observed when tumors consisting of these cells form, and some diseases caused by
their proliferation involve a mutation of c-kit cells and are divided into systemic and cutaneous types,
such as urticaria pigmentosa. These cells, which are stabilized with cromoglicate, secrete (*) serine
proteases such as tryptase and the FC epsilon RI receptor binds these cells strongly to the IgE antibody.
Vasodilation due to degranulation of these cells can lead to anaphylaxis, though they are not found in the
blood stream, unlike basophils. Also implicated in various allergic reactions, for 10 points, name these cells
which release heparin and histamine.
ANSWER: Mast cells
Studying blackbirds, Gordon Orians proposed that territory quality created a threshold between
two systems of this behavior. Emlen and Oring hypothesized that one system of this behavior
occurred most frequently at highly clumped resources and total asynchronous temporal availability.
The hotshot and hotspot hypotheses explain why individuals congregate at leks in the leadup to this
(*) behavior. RA Fisher proposed "runaway selection" of traits that led to this behavior. The
Hardy-Weinberg principle assumes that this behavior is random. Pair bonding is exhibited in species using
the monogamous system of this behavior. For 10 points, name this behavior which is required for sexual
reproduction.
ANSWER: mating [or word forms; prompt on sexual reproduction; prompt on polygyny or polygamy or monogamy]
After her PhD in botany from Cornell, she moved to the University of Missouri before settling at Cold
Spring Harbor Lab. While there, she studied mosaicism in the coloration of maize kernels and identified the
genetic loci Dissociator (Ds) and Activator (Ac). However, by 1953, she stopped publishing papers
regarding these "controlling elements" due to rejection of the concept by her fellow geneticists. Along with
Harry Creighton, she demonstrated the physical basis for crossing over, though she is far more famous for
discovering transposons. FTP, name this winner of the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physiology of Medicine.
ANSWER: Barbara McClintock
This scientist identified the first ring chromosome, and also noticed that its structure would be lost at
meiosis. Along with Blumenschein and Kato, this scientist published a landmark evolutionary study on
their favorite model organism, and this scientist also characterized the suppressor-mutator or SPM element.
This biologist discovered the nucleolar-organizing region in an early experiment, and in a more famous
experiment characterized the behavior of the Ac and Ds elements. This biologist noted that changes in
aleurone color from generation to generation could be explained by genomic mutability, but her work was
met with much skepticism. For 10 points, name this biologist who used Zea mays to discover transposons.
ANSWER: Barbara McClintock
Marshall Hall's theory of the reflex action was first put forth in a paper about the reflex function of this
area. Smooth, oval structures that lie on the ventrolateral surface of this area are known as olivary bodies,
while the portion of it between the anterior median fissure and the antero-lateral sulcus is known as the
"pyramid". The foramen magnum is where it enters and exits the skull, while messages between it and the
remainder of the midbrain are transmitted by the pons, which is connected to this area. Continuous with the
spinal cord, this is, FTP, which hindmost part of the brain stem responsible for such autonomic functions as
regulating blood pressure and breathing?
ANSWER: medulla oblongata [prompt on partial answer]
Bidelloid rotifers are unusual in that they do not undergo this process, and in order for this process
to be successful, there must be at least one recombination nodule for each bivalent. It is the opposite
process of syngamy, and in one part of the second stage of this process, dyads are moved to opposite
poles of the cell. Nondisjunction in the process can lead to aneuploidy where entire chromosomes are either
gained or lost. It does not result in DNA synthesis, and in animals it is primarily used to create eggs and
sperm. For 10 points, identify process distinct from mitosis where a cell divides to form gametes.
ANSWER: Meiosis
This process includes the sub-stages pachytene and zygotene. Mistakes during this process can result in
Edward and Turner syndromes, while others are caused by trisomies. Organisms that undergo
parthenogenesis do not carry out this process. The formation and organization of a bivalent is aided by the
protein cohesin in this process. The Laws of (*) Independent Assortment and Segregation pertain to stages
in this process, which sees the formation of spindle fibers and the pairing of homologous chromosomes
during crossing over. For ten points, name this special form of cell division which produces four daughter
cells from one cell.
ANSWER: meiosis (accept prophase 1 until "syndromes")
One protein involved in this process protects Rec8 from being improperly cleaved, and in yeast the
gene MAM1 codes for the protein monopolin, which is necessary for the formation of a specialized
kinetochore in this process. In yeast, Ime2 fools the cell into DNA replication at its first step, resulting in
4n chromosomes; and in female humans this process results in one oocyte and three polar bodies. For
10 points, name this process of producing haploid cells, which takes twice as many steps as mitosis.
ANSWER: meiosis [accept meiosis I before "oocyte"]
The synaptonemal complex disassembles during the diplotene stage of this process, and its pachytene
stage sees the formation of chiasmata. Kinetochore microtubules help in separating homologous
chromosomes and in pulling them towards opposite poles of the cell during this process. This process
sometimes results in the formation of an (*) oocyte and three polar bodies, and one cycle of this process
can produce four sperm. This process produces haploid gametes each with half the genetic content of the
parental cell. For ten points, name process required for sexual reproduction which is often contrasted with
mitosis.
ANSWER: meiosis (accept "prophase" until "Kinetochore")
In females, this process results in the formation of three polar bodies. If nondisjunction occurs during
this process, Klinefelter or Down syndrome could result. In plants, this process marks the beginning of the
gametophyte generation. Homologous chromosomes form chiasmata (kee-AS-muh-tuh) by crossing over in
the first step of this process. For 10 points, name this process that produces haploid gametes, such as sperm
and egg cells.
ANSWER: meiosis [do not accept "mitosis", accept "prophase" or "prophase I" before polar bodies]
The T locus in mice is responsible for a type of "drive" named for this process. In ciliates, the
micronucleus undergoes this process before fusing as part of conjugation. During this process, the
synaptonemal complex forms chiasmata. Nondisjunction during it can result in aneuploidy
(AN-uh-ploy-dee) in offspring, and it is divided into two halves, which allows it to create four haploid cells
from a single diploid precursor. For 10 points, name this type of cell division that occurs in sex cells.
ANSWER: meiosis [or crossing over; do not accept "mitosis"]
The synaptonemal complex assembles during the leptotene stage, a phase in this process during which
chromosomes condense. Its pachytene stage features chromosomal recombination. In females, this process
results in three polar bodies and an oocyte. Monopolin is needed for segregation of homologous
chromosomes during this process, which may result in non-disjunction if poorly executed during anaphase I
or II. For 10 points, name this process of cell division that, unlike mitosis, results in the creation of four
haploid gametes.
ANSWER: meiosis [accept prophase I before "polar bodies"; accept oogenesis before "oocytes"; accept spermatogenesis before "females"]
One of the first sub-stages of this process is the leptotene stage, and in females, this process produces three
polar bodies. Also notable for the creation of tetrads that undergo recombination, or 'crossing over', this is
the only process that forms haploids in animals. Ending with telophase-2 and beginning with prophase-1,
this is, for 10 points, what process used by gendered organisms to form gametes, the splitting of one cell
into four with half the number of chromosomes?
ANSWER: meiosis (accept prophase I before "polar bodies"; prompt on oogenesis before "crossing over")
The synaptonemal complex forms during this process, which does not occur in bdelloids. It features the
pachytene and leptotene stages and produces polar bodies in females. During this process, tetrads form and
establish chiasmata, allowing genes to cross over. Genetic disorders can result from nondisjunction in this
process, which begins with prophase I. In this process accompanying oogenesis and spermatogenesis,
diploid cells divide into four haploid gamete cells. For 10 points, name this process necessary for sexual
reproduction.
ANSWER: meiosis [do not accept "mitosis"]
The first step of this process involves a condensation step called leptotene. A failure of one stage
of this process is known as (*) non-disjunction and results in diseases like Turner or Klinefelter
Syndrome. The end of its first step involves an exchange of material called crossing over. Those conditions
occur when chromosomes fail to properly separate during this process which involves the division of a
diploid cell into four haploid cells. For 10 points, name this process of cell division in which the resulting
daughter cell has half the number of chromosomes unlike mitosis.
ANSWER: meiosis [do not accept "mitosis", accept prophase I before "non-disjunction" is read]
The protein monopolin helps trigger one stage of this process, which never occurs in bdelloids. One step in
this process includes the pachytene and leptotene stages. In some organisms, it creates three polar bodies.
During one part of this process, tetrads form and genes can undergo "crossing over." Polyploidy occurs due
to nondisjunction during this process, which is called oogenesis in females and spermatogenesis in males.
For 10 points, name this process by which a diploid cell divides into four gamete cells with half the original
number of chromosomes.
ANSWER: meiosis [do not accept "mitosis"; accept gametogenesis before "gamete;" prompt on oogenesis or spermatogenesis until read;]
Stages during this event include the leptotene and pachytene. This process sees the creation of a synapsis,
where most of the action occurs. Events that occur during this process include crossing over and genetic
recombination between chromosomes, which occurs during prophase I. This process results in the
production of egg and sperm cells. For 10 points, four haploid cells are produced during what type of cell
division, contrasted with mitosis?
ANSWER: meiosis
This process can result in an uneven distribution of cytoplasm between one large cell and several
smaller polar bodies. "Crossing over" occurs between nonsister chromatids during this process, which also
sees homologous chromosomes zipped up through synapsis. This process begins with one diploid cell and,
through a pathway including two rounds of cytokinesis, results in four haploid cells. For 10 points, name
this form of cell division that produces gametes and is contrasted with mitosis.
ANSWER: meiosis [or oogenesis; or spermatogenesis; prompt on prophase I]
Bdelloid rotifers are notable for losing the ability to carry out this process, and the eukaryote supergroup
excavate contains species such as euglenoids, which do not undergo it. The synaptonemal
complex degrades during its diplotene phase, and one step of it results in a "bouquet" formation due to
telomere orientation. Polyploidy, which in plants results in fertile organisms, is a mistake in it, as are all
forms of nondisjunction. Involving kinetochores, chiasmata, and resulting in four haploid cells, for 10
points, name this type of cell division.
ANSWER: meiosis [do not accept "mitosis"]
One protein structure in this process is composed of a central element and two axial elements which become
lateral elements, and an action called terminalization in this process is defined by the movement of the
chiasmata. This process which includes stages called the pachytene and leptotene sees the disintegration of
the synaptonemal complex after it coordinates synapsis in order to form bivalents. Via crossing over in this
process, chromosomes exchange segments. For 10 points, name this process by which a cell divides into
four haploid gametes in contrast to mitosis.
ANSWER: Meiosis [accept Prophase I before "interkinesis"]
The first step of this process is divided into five named sub-steps, four of which contain the Greek
root for "thread." One version of this process is regulated by folliculogenesis and sees the formation of
three polar bodies in addition to one final product. Failure of separation in this process is known as
nondisjunction. "Crossing over" takes place during Prophase I of this cycle, and the four cells of this
process have half of the DNA of the parent cell. For 10 points, name this process that results in gamete
formation.
ANSWER: meiosis [do not accept "mitosis"; prompt on gamete formation or equivalents; prompt on spermatogensis; prompt on oogenesis; prompt on spore genesis]
Glomeromycota is the only fungal phylum to not undergo this process, which sees the temporary
formation of a Holliday junction. Some cells that undergo this process leave behind polar bodies. Certain
locations known as chiasmata form after synapsis occurs during this process. Errors at two different points
of this process may result in polyploidy and nondisjunction. Crossing over results in genetic recombination
during this process, whose second half is virtually identical to mitosis. For 10 points, name this form of cell
division that results in four haploid cells.
ANSWER: meiosis
This process is called inverted in species with holokinetic systems such as mealybugs, and a major part of it
can be mediated by the
synaptonemal complex. One part of this process ends with diakinesis, which is when the chiasmata (kai-ASmah-tah) 
become visible. Those chiasmata form during the pachytene (PAK-ee-teen) stage and are the
location of crossing over. Abnormal occurrences during this process lead to Klinefelter Syndrome, Down
Syndrome, and several other conditions caused by nondisjunction. This process
creates spores and gametes (GAM-eets). Identify this process of cell division that is often contrasted with
mitosis.
ANSWER: meiosis
The gene DMC1 is only expressed during this process, and the protein Rec8 is degraded near the end of it.
In yeast, the absence of Ime2 and repression of Cln is responsible for an event not happening during the
second half of this process. The first stage in this process is divided into five sub-stages, the first of which is
lepotene. In the first half of this process, the protein monopolin is required for the formation of a
kinetochore. Other events during this process include synapsis and crossing over, which produces
recombination. Two cell divisions produce four daughter cells in this process, and the diploid chromosome
number becomes reduced to haploid. FTP name this type of cell division that is important in sexual
reproduction.
ANSWER: meiosis [do NOT accept "mitosis"]
Aneuploidy is one possible consequence of this process failing. This process takes place during oogenesis
in females, and terminalization and the disintegration of the nuclear envelope occur during its diakinesis
phase. Synaptonemal complexes break down following the pachytene stage of this process that produces
three polar bodies, after which bivalents are held together by chiasmata. Crossing over during this process
adds genetic variation to resulting daughter cells. For 10 points, name this cell division process producing
four gamete cells that occurs during sexual reproduction and is contrasted with mitosis.
ANSWER: Meiosis [accept Nondisjunction before oogenesis]
The primitive kidney produces retinoic acid, which stimulates this process in females and
suppresses it in males. A prolonged resting phase during this process is known as the dictyotene
stage, and the Edward and Klinefelter syndromes result from (*) nondisjunction during it. This process
results in oogenesis and spermatogenesis, and this process as a whole evolved from the binary fission of
prokaryotes. Resulting in the creation of four haploid daughter cells, for 10 points, name this type of cell
division whose second stage is very similar to mitosis.
ANSWER: meiosis
In Arabidopsis, the SOLO DANCERS gene controls the first step of this process, during which the
synaptonemal complex forms. The coefficient of coincidence measures the interference during this process.
One form of this process results in the formation of polar bodies. Nondisjunction during this process can
cause Turner Syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome or trisomy 21. Anaphase I and II (one and two) are parts of
this process. For 10 points, name this form of cell division that takes place during sexual reproduction, often
contrasted with mitosis.
ANSWER: meiosis [accept prophase I before "coincidence"; prompt on spermatogenesis before "polar"; prompt on oogenesis; prompt on gametogenesis]
The most common type in humans is made up of cross-linked DHI and DHICA polymers and has two
types which differ from each other in the pattern of polymer bonds. The second-most-common type
incorporates L-cysteine and is found in greater concentrations in women. This type may also become
carcinogenic when exposed to (*) UV rays. It can be found in the zona reticularis in the adrenal cortex and
the stria vascularis in the inner ear. People of African descent were at a higher risk of developing rickets
before the advent of vitamin D supplements, because their skin contains higher levels of this substance. In
the brain, it causes the distinctive coloration of the locus ceruleus and the substantia nigra. FTP, name this
skin and hair pigment whose deficiency can be caused by albinism.
ANSWER: melanin (accept "eumelanin" until "second-most-common type")
Tyrosinase catalyzes the conversion of tyrosine to this compound via an ortho-quinone. The cancer of cells
that make this compound is diagnosed by the symptom acronym ABCDE. Overproduction of this compound
is the characteristic symptom of Addison's Disease. Thymine dimers often lead to its over-expression while
deafness can result from the under-expression of this compound. Found in high concentrations in the
substantia nigra, it is sometimes prefixed with "pheo" or "eu." This compound is produced in the basal layer
of the epidermis in response to UV-B radiation. For 10 points, name this compound absent in albinos, a
pigment that gives skin its color.
ANSWER: melanin [Accept eumelanin or pheomelanin.]
The cells that produce this compound are depleted in piebaldism. The synthesis of this compound
relies on TYRP1 and DCT, and most forms of this compound are derivatives of polyacetylene. It's
not dopamine, but DOPA is transformed into dopaquinone during its synthesis. The vesicles
containing it are transported by Slac2A and Rab27. Tyrosinase is required for the synthesis of this
compound. The cells that contain this compound are stimulated by an appetite-stimulant hormone
that is synthesized together with ACTH, which is why its levels are increased in (*) Addison's disease.
Sufferers of vitiligo lose this compound in patches. This compound is not produced in albinos. For 10
points, name this compound which gives skin its color.
ANSWER: melanin
A form of this substance that contains cysteine is made of benzothiazine and benzothiazole units. In the
human body, the first step in the synthesis of this substance is the synthesis of dopaquinone from
tyrosine, which is catalyzed by the enzyme tyrosinase. In Parkinson's disease, neurons that contain a form
of this substance are lost in the substantia nigra, which is named for the appearance of those cells. In
piebaldism and vitiligo, cells that produce this substance are unable to transport their products to
keratinocytes. The formation of moles with ragged edges indicates a cancer of cells which produce this
pigment. For 10 points, name this pigment which is produced in the skin in response to sunlight.
ANSWER: melanin
This type of cancer affects the cells that use the enzyme tyrosinase. One type of this, lentigo maligna, very
rarely affects people before they are elderly. The acral lentiginous type has a lower rate among Caucasians
than other groups, while the opposite is true for the most common type, superficial spreading. Doctors
recommend looking for signs that are asymmetric with irregular borders and have a mixture of colors. Name
this cancer that affects cells that produce pigment, sometimes found in the eyes but generally affecting the
skin.
ANSWER: melanomas (prompt on "skin" or "skin cancer")
The antioxidant properties of this molecule were only discovered in 1993, and it is unique in animals
because at least four of its metabolites can also scavenge free radicals. The level of this molecule in the
blood can determine a person's chronotype (KROH-noh-"type"), and in the brain its main function is to
inhibit the production of gonadotropin-releasing (goh-NAA-doh-TROH-pin) hormone by the hypothalamus.
Aaron Lerner found that this molecule can lighten the skin pigmentation of frogs, and when most animals
are placed in the dark the level of this hormone increases, allowing it to control circadian (sir-CAY-dee-un)
rhythms. Derived from seratonin (seh-ruh-TOH-nin) and secreted by the pineal (pih-NEE-ul) gland, name
this hormone that regulates sleep cycles in humans.
ANSWER: melatonin [do not accept "melanin"]
In Miledi's oocyte expression assay, mRNA is injected into Xenopus, and then this quantity is
measured to determine expression levels. The Drosophila Shaker mutation was in a protein that
regulates this value. Proteins that respond to changes in this quantity have six alpha helices and
an N-terminal "ball" or "inactivation segment." Patch clamps measure this quantity. The
Goldman equation gives this quantity as a function of concentration of three ions. This quantity
increases during depolarization, decreases during hyperpolarization, and during the refractory
period, remains below the resting level of negative 60 millivolts. It determines whether or not
potassium channels are open. For 10 points, name this quantity which changes during an action
potential.
ANSWER: membrane potential [or membrane voltage; prompt on partial answer]
Carl Correns helped popularize this figure's discoveries after his terms were appropriated without credit
by Hugo de Vries. This scientist first noted that his F2 group consistently had a 3 to 1 ratio for what he
called "factors." This man's ideas are often explained using a Punnett square diagram, and he devised the
law of independent assortment and the law of segregation. For 10 points, name this Austrian friar whose
experiments on pea plants underlie modern genetics.
ANSWER: Gregor Johann Mendel
R.A. Fisher calculated there was a 7 in 100,000 chance of this man's results meeting theoretical
expectations as well as they did. William Bateson attacked W.R. Weldeon and the biometrician school in a
defense of this man's theories two years after their rediscovery by Correns, Tschermak and de Vries. Based
on the suggestions of Karl von Nageli, this man tried unsuccessfully to replicate those results in
experiments with the Hieracium (high-uh-RAY-see-um) genus. His experiments with the Pisum genus
disproved the pangenesis theory of Darwin and gave evidence for his "law of segregation" and "law of
independent assortment." For 10 points, name this Austrian monk who studied the inheritance patterns of
pea plants.
ANSWER: Gregor Mendel
After this man's death from chronic nephritis, Leos Janacek played the organ at his funeral. He was
inspired by Johann Karl Nestler during his time at the University of Olomouc, and his work was
popularized by William Bateson. His work at the Abbey of St. Thomas in Brno helped him devise the Law
of Segregation and Law of Independent Assortment. He recorded traits like height and seed color. For the
point, name this monk, whose work with pea plants led to the founding of modern genetics.
ANSWER: Gregor Mendel
Carl Correns rediscovered this man's theories after citing his work on hawkweeds. This man
accidentally created a new, dangerous strain of bees after unsuccessfully mating them, and he also
formulated the idea that different traits are not passed along with each other, but rather are
inherited separately. This man also found that offspring receive only one copy of a particular (*) gene
from each parent; those are his Laws of Independent Assortment and Segregation. For ten points, name this
Austrian monk whose breeding of pea plants led him to be known as "The Father of Genetics".
ANSWER: Gregor Mendel
Hugo (de VREEZE) de Vries duplicated the work of this scientist, whose work caused a vigorous debate
among biometricians upon discovery. Most of this man's publications were about meteorology and he also
designed several bee hives as a hobby. This man observed a 9:3:3:1 ratio among the F2 generation in a
dihybrid cross. Thomas Hunt Morgan built on this scientist's ideas to develop linkage; this man's own ideas
include segregation and independent assortment. For 10 points, name this abbot whose experiments with
pea plants led him to become the father of genetics.
ANSWER: Gregor Johann Mendel
One part of it contains the median aperture of Magendie and the lateral aperture of Luschka. Meckels cave
is found in its outer layer, a strong fibrous connective tissue, contains a sickle-shaped partition known as the
falx cerebri. One part of it contains filaments known as trabeculae that transverse the space between the
inner and middle layers. Its three layers are known as dura matter, arachnoid and pia mater and
inflammation of it due to viral or bacterial infection can be detected by a lumbar puncture. For 10 points,
name this system of membranes that protects the central nervous system.
ANSWER: meninges [or meninx; accept arachnoid space until "Meckels"]
One indicator of this condition after death is the migration of neutrophil leucocytes to a certain area of
the body, while one step in the exacerbation of this condition is the release of a large amount of cytokines.
That step in this disease results in greater permeation of the blood-brain barrier, which in turn results in
greater pressure inside the skull. For 10 points, identify this disease, an inflammation of namesake
membranes surrounding the spinal cord and brain.
ANSWER: meningitis
The most common fungal cause of this disease is Cryptococcus, and a common bacterial cause is from the
same genus [JEE-nus] that causes gonorrhea, which is Neisseria [nie-SEHR-ee-uh]. This disease is now less
common due to the influenza B vaccine. The most common causes are viral, and this can be diagnosed by
finding low glucose and high protein and lymphocyte [LIM-foe-site] levels in the fluid drawn from a spinal
tap. This disease generally causes strong headaches and neck stiffness. Name this inflammation of the
membranes around the brain and spinal cord.
ANSWER: meningitis
In one step of this process, antral granulosa cells secrete a compound which suppresses gnRH release at
high concentration and also promotes angiogenesis in the endometrium. One step of this cycle sees the
development of a yellow body which may be preserved by human chorionic gonadotropin. That body,
which is generated in response to FSH and LH, is called the corpus luteum, and secretes progesterone.
During this cycle, the follicle bursts, releasing an ovule which may implant in the uterus. For 10 points,
name this 28-day cycle which occurs in pre-menopausal non-pregnant women and which can end in the
discharge of excess uterine lining via bleeding.
ANSWER: the menstrual cycle [or menstruation; or menses; accept follicular phase before "this cycle" is read; accept ovarian cycle before "yellow body" is read and prompt afterwards; prompt on "period" or other euphemisms; do not prompt on or accept "ovulation"; do not prompt on or accept "uterine cycle"]
In the nucleus of cells in this tissue, the protein Flowering Locus T binds to the transcription factor FD. The
lateral type of this tissue is the same thing as the vascular cambium, and the intercalary type of this tissue is
found at the base of grass blades. This tissue is often found at the tip of the radicle and the plumule when
plants break from their seeds. Because it is often found at the tips of other tissues, this tissue is often given
the adjective apical. Name these undifferentiated cells that exist at the location of plant growth.
ANSWER: meristem
Herbert Taylor used a radioactive tracer in Vicia faba to arrive at the same results that this experiment
more conclusively showed. The year previously, a paper the experimenters co-authored with Vinograd
explained density-gradient centrifugation using cesium chloride, which the experimenters used as the last
step in this "most beautiful experiment in biology." In this pulse-chase experiment, E. coli was grown in a
medium containing nitrogen-15, then transferred to a medium containing nitrogen-14; the experimenters
then observed which strands of DNA contained the heavier isotope of nitrogen. For 10 points, name this
experiment that proved that DNA replication was semiconservative.
ANSWER: Meselson-Stahl experiment
Edward Simon showed that the results of this experiment held in HeLa cells. When reviewing the
manuscript that ultimately published this experiment's results, John Cairns suggested a reason why its
results with salmon sperm were different. Along with Vinograd, the experimenters had the year before
perfected a way of using cesium chloride to establish a density gradient during centrifugation. This pulse-
chase experiment disproved Max Delbruck's ideas about the "unwinding problem." It grew E. coli in
nitrogen-15 labeled media for several generations, then moved it to a nitrogen-14 medium and looked at the
density of DNA in further generations. For 10 points, what doubly-eponymous experiment confirmed the
semiconservative nature of DNA replication?
ANSWER: Meselson-Stahl experiment
Both John Cairns and Cyrus Levinthal called this experiment "the most beautiful" in their field. This
experiment built on possibilities suggested by Gunther Stent and Max Delbruck in a 1956 paper. The
last step of this experiment involved placing the samples in solutions of cesium chloride and
centrifuging them. In this experiment, the F2 generation consisted of two bands: one a mixture of (*)
14 and 15 nitrogen, the other pure 14 nitrogen. This experiment eliminated the dispersive and conservative
hypotheses, instead supporting the semiconservative model. For 10 points, name this experiment which
proved that each new DNA molecule in replication consisted of one strand from the original helix and one
new strand, named for two Caltech researchers.
ANSWER: Meselson-Stahl experiment [or any answer with those names in any order; prompt on partial answer]
One year earlier, J. Herbert Taylor's experiments with Vivia faba came to a similar conclusion as
this experiment. John Cairns used radioactively-labelled thymidine to explain why heat denaturation
in this experiment occurred only with salmon sperm. A density gradient of cesium chloride was used
for the ultracentrifugation step in this experiment. This experiment (*) disproved Max Delbruck's
dispersive hypothesis. This experiment used E. coli grown on nitrogen-15, followed by growth on
nitrogen-14, and found that three-quarters of the second generation was light. For 10 points, name this
experiment that proved DNA replication is semiconservative.
ANSWER: Meselson-Stahl experiment
In C4 plants, the enzyme PEP carboxylase (kar-BAHK-sih-lays) is found in this type of cell, which lies
adjacent to the bundle sheath. In most plants, this type of ground tissue is bounded by the upper and lower
surfaces of the lamina and is divided into regular and loosely arranged cell layers called the palisade and
spongy layers, respectively. Obtaining carbon dioxide through the stomata, name this middle layer of leaf
tissue where most photosynthesis in a plant occurs.
ANSWER: mesophyll
During this period of time, non-decomposed organic matter formed black shale and this period of time
began after the "Great Dying" which occurred at the end of the Permian. The end of this geologic Era is
marked by the K-T extinction event, which according to the Alvarez hypothesis was caused by a large
asteroid. For 10 points, name this geologic era consisting of the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods
also known as the age of the dinosaurs.
ANSWER: Mesozoic Era [accept Triassic period until "K-T" is spoken]
This era saw the development of the first birds and flowering plants, and gymnosperms and other
plants predominated in the first period in this era. The beginning of this era saw life flourish after the
Permian extinction, and the end of this era saw the massive K-T extinction, which wiped out the
dinosaurs. The Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous were the three periods of this era. For 10 points, identify
this geologic era between the Paleozoic and Cenozoic eras.
ANSWER: Mesozoic era
Structural differences in the product of this class of molecules are induced by selenocysteine insertion or
SECIS [SEE-sis] elements. A lariat structure is formed from components of this molecule as a result of the
action of the spliceosome, which serves to remove inactive portions along its sequence. Splicing occurs
after a 7-methylguanosine is added to this molecule's 5-prime end, and polyadenylation generates a poly-A-
tail at its other end to prevent degradation outside the nucleus. For 10 points, identify this molecule formed
during transcription, a type of RNA that carries information from the nucleus to the ribosome.
ANSWER: messenger RNA [or messenger ribonucleic acid; prompt on partial answer]
The ARE region triggers destabilization of this molecule, one part of which is associated with PABP. The
technique SAGE developed by Velculescu enables a sequence tag to identify these molecules. A leader and
trailer region is found in these molecules, a majority of which are polycistronic. Between 50 and 250
adenine nucleotides are located at their three prime ends, and in addition to a poly(A) tail, they contain a
five prime cap. FTP name this type of RNA that is translated by ribosomes, thus serving as a template for
protein synthesis.
ANSWER: messenger RNA [accept mRNA]
Selenium is an essential nutrient for the SECIS element which can appear at one end of this molecule. The
EIF4E protein controls binding of this molecule with another intracellular structure. Northern blotting uses
gel electrophoresis on this molecule, also the object of reverse transcriptase action. The snRNPs bind to this
molecule, which contains two UTR regions. This molecule is modified by adding a polyadenylation signal
as well as a modified guanine to the 5 end. The target of splicing is, for ten points, what molecule that is
transcribed from DNA and translated to produce proteins?
ANSWER: mRNA or messenger RNA (prompt on "RNA")
MPSS and SAGE are two techniques for surveying a population of these entities. AU-rich elements can
decrease their half-lives, and they are the target of nonsense-mediated decay. In bacteria, they can be
polycistronic. RISCs that are already bound to one substrate can target these, causing them to be degraded.
They contain untranslated regions, and precursor ones are modified to have a poly-A tail and a five prime
cap. For 10 points, name these RNA molecules that are transcribed from DNA and carry the protein
blueprint to the ribosome.
ANSWER: mRNAs [or messenger RNA; or messenger ribonucleic acid; or m ribonucleic acid; prompt on RNA or ribonucleic acid]
These molecules are acted upon by the TRAMP complex during their maturation, while many steps of their
degradation occur in P bodies. These molecules are acted upon by spliceosomes during their maturation,
which also involves the addition of a 5 prime to 5 prime methyl-guanosine cap and poly-A tail to prevent
degradation outside of the nucleus. For 10 points, name these molecules which bind to ribosomes and
contain codons, a specific type of RNA responsible for carrying the genetic code from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm.
ANSWER: mRNA [accept messenger ribonucleic acid; accept messenger after "RNA"]
This class of molecules can contain SECIS elements within UTRs, and most examples of this molecule
found in archaeans (ar-KAY-unz) are polycistronic (PAH-lee-sis-TRAHN-ihk). This molecule is degraded
by PIWI 9 ("peewee") proteins, and modification of it is partly achieved by snRNPs (SNURPs). Multiple
expression products can be formed due to alternative splicing of this molecule, which rearranges exons.
Prior to leaving the nucleus, this molecule gains a 5-prime cap and poly-A tail, and its first section to be
read is the AUG ("A-U-G") start codon. Formed by transcription of a DNA strand, name this nucleic acid
that carries the instructions for protein synthesis to the ribosome.
ANSWER: messenger RNA [or mRNA; prompt on RNA; accept ribonucleic acid in place of RNA in any answer or prompt directive]
One pattern sometimes found in this molecule adopts a stem-loop formation and is known as the
SECIS element and aids in the production of selenocysteine. In mammals, this molecule can be
degraded when its AU-rich portions are bound to and in most eukaryotes, this molecule can be
destroyed after being triggered by EJCs, a process known as (*) nonsense mediated decay. This
molecule is capped with a modified guanine at its 5-prime end and its opposite end is dominated by a polyA tail. After this molecule is synthesized, it exits from the nuclear pores into the cytoplasm. Transcribed
directly from a DNA template, FTP, identify this variety of RNA whose codons signal for various amino
acids to be brought to the ribosome by the tRNA.
ANSWER: messenger RNA
A series of two transesterification reactions removes unwanted parts of this molecule via the
spliceosome. This molecule can be monocistronic or polycistronic. 7-methyl-guanosine is added to the five
prime end of this molecule, and a poly-A tail to the three prime end, after this molecule is created in
transcription. This molecule's codons contain uracil instead of the thymine found in DNA. For 10 points,
name this type of RNA that is transported to the ribosome in order to make proteins.
ANSWER: messenger RNA [or mRNA; accept messenger RNA or mRNA after "RNA"]
The enzyme complex that synthesizes this molecule works in tandem with CstF and CPSF, which ensure
that this molecule isn't immediately degraded. Interactions between the U1 and U2 proteins, BBPs and this
molecule change a series of bond structures, and loops known as lariats are formed as a result of that
process. Guanalyl transferase adds 7-methyl guanosine in a a 5' to 5' ("5 prime to 5 prime") linkage to this
molecule. After being synthesized, this molecule undergoes polyadenylation and is acted on by snRNPs
("snurps"), which carry out its splicing. For 10 points, name this molecule, the product of transcription
which carries information from the nucleus to ribosomes.
ANSWER: mRNA [accept messenger RNA or messenger ribonucleic acid, prompt on RNA]
Polycistronic varieties of this molecule appear in archaea, and such proteins as PAP and CstF
enhance it in a process known as polyadenylation. A 5 prime cap is added to it to prevent its degradation by
endonucleases, while another process uses spliceosomes to patch it up after the removal of introns. Its most
well-known intermolecular interaction begins after the activity of a namesake polymerase, and ends when it
reads the terminator region of that molecule. For 10 points, name this RNA molecule involved in DNA
transcription.
ANSWER: messenger RNA [prompt on RNA]
These molecules' turnover is facilitated at P-bodies, and the U2 enzyme recognizes "branch point"
sites on these structures. The enzyme that synthesizes these compounds is more sensitive to alphaamantin than related enzymes and has a C-terminal domain that recruits enzymes that process these
molecules. The activity of these molecules is modulated by a pathway involving the (*) Dicer and
Argonaute complexes. Lariat structures are formed during the processing of these molecules. A sevenmethyl guanine residue is attached to one end of these structures, whereas a poly-A tail is added to their 3prime ends. Ribosomes recognize triplet codons on these molecules, which are translated into peptides. For
10 points, name these molecules that carry genetic information from the DNA to the ribosomes.
ANSWER: messenger RNA [or mRNA; prompt on RNA; accept pre-mRNA]
For some organisms, events in this process can include elongation of the imaginal discs and
chromosome puffing, which are dependent on ecdysone. In some animals, this phenomenon is marked
by a spike in urea cycle enzymes, corresponding to a transition from ammonotelism to ureotelism.
The "complete" form of this action is called (*) holometabolism and confers offspring the advantage of
not having to compete with imagines, or adults, as they occupy different ecological niches. This process is
regulated by prolactin and thyroxine in animals such as Xenopus. Animals undergoing this process are
called pupa, and insects may form a chrysalis or cocoon during it. For 10 points, name this process
observed in flounders, frogs, and butterflies.
ANSWER: metamorphosis
Its pace and duration is dictated by chemicals produced by a pair of glands known as the corpora
allata, which secretes a chemical known as JH until its completion. Species of the superorder
Endopterygota undergo a variety of it known as holometaboly, in which it is guided by patches of
embryonic tissue known as imaginal discs, while its hemimetabolous variety witnesses the gradual
development of instars into the sexually mature imago via regular moultings. Either "complete" or
"incomplete", for ten points, identify this process in which a nymph or pupa transforms into an adult insect.
ANSWER: metamorphosis
The "climax" of this process occurs when TR-RXR dimer concentrations are at their peak. It does
not occur in neotenic Ambystoma, because they lack thyroid-stimulating hormone. This process sees
synthesis of argininosuccinate lyase and carbamoylphosphate synthase, enabling urotelic excretion.
The optic nerves become partially ipsilateralized and porphyropsin is dorsalized in the retina during
it. Chytridiomycosis only occurs in animals in which this process has been completed. Intracellular
metalloproteinase and collagenase levels rise in the caudal region, resulting in (*) apoptosis and
subsequent regression of the tail. Accompanied by a transition from water-breathing to air-breathing, for 10
points, name this developmental process which turns tadpoles into frogs.
ANSWER: amphibian metamorphosis [accept specific names of amphibians, such as "frog metamorphosis"]
The APC/C, or cyclosome, is activated at the end of this process, and cyclin B is attached to ubiquitin,
which marks it to be destroyed by proteasomes. This deactivates maturation-promoting factor. Sister
chromatids are held together by cohesin, and the inhibition of separase through the presence of securin
during this process prevents cohesin from breaking down. A checkpoint during it detects any failure of
fibers from the mitotic spindle to attach to kinetochores. For ten points, name this phase of mitosis in which
the condensed sister chromatids align at the equatorial plate, and occurs between prophase and anaphase.
ANSWER: metaphase
This process includes the Mad2 protein, which binds to Cdc20, an activator for the next stage after this
process. A cell may not progress past this stage if there is not enough tension on spindle fibers. Colchicine
is used to arrest this stage so that karyotypes can be made from it, since chromosomes are at their most
coiled. Before passing the spindle checkpoint during it, each sister chromatid must be attached via a
kinetochore to a spindle fiber. In it, chromosomes line up on the equatorial plate of the cell. For 10 points,
name this middle stage of mitosis succeeded by anaphase.
ANSWER: Metaphase [prompt on mitosis until mentioned]
Probes contained in Yeast Artificial Chromosome are hybridized to denatured chromosomes of this kind in
a form of fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cells can be harvested at this point via the addition of
colcemide. Cells lacking Aurora B kinase are stuck in this stage. This stage ends with dephosphorylation
and ubiquitination of securin, which allows separase to hydrolyze cohesin. Although this stage occupies
only 4% of the total cell cycle, cells can be stuck there for days even with the formation of the namesake
plate. In the stage just before this one, vesicles containing the dissolved nuclear envelope are formed.
During it, the kinetochore microtubules push and pull on the chromosomes until they line up in the middle.
For 10 points, name this mitotic stage followed by anaphase.
ANSWER: metaphase
During this process, p31 is activated by a MAD1/MAD2 complex leading to the release of MAD2
from CDC20. Li and Nicklas showed that this process concluded with the sensation of tension which
then leads to phosphorylation of Aurora B. Scc and Smc proteins form cohesins which are then
cleaved to conclude this process. During this process, securins are ubiquitinated by the the APC/C
complex, which relieves inhibition of separase. The cell (*) cycle can be arrested at this process by
colchicine, during which a karyotype may be taken. At the end of this process, all chromosomes are lined up
at this process's namesake plate and the kinetochore microtubules are able to pull apart sister chromatids.
For 10 points, name this part of mitosis that follows prophase and precedes anaphase.
ANSWER: metaphase [prompt on mitosis]
To analyze this event, Giemsa or Quinacrine staining are used in methods like FISH and as a
hybridization matric for comparative genomic hybridization experiments. The spindle checkpoint of
this period is created through regulation of securin, separase, and a promoting complex. A cell cycle
checkpoint occurs during this event, and classical (*) karyotypes use chromosomes from this event.
Including things such as kinetochores and miotic spindle fibres, the early events of this stage can coincide
with the later events of the preceding stage. One of the aspects of this event involves centromeres conveying
on the equatorial plate, equidistant from the centrosome poles. For 10 points, name this stage of mitosis,
followed immediately by anaphase.
ANSWER: Metaphase
In S. cerevisiae, CIM3 and CIM5 protease mutants arrest cells during this event, which is typically
ended when Esp1associates with Scc1, part of a cascade triggered by APC, which ubiquitinates (*)
cohesins. It is characterized by treadmilling through the constant addition and removal of tubulin, thus
maintaining microtubule length. This stage is followed by microtubule shortening and is immediately
preceded by attachment at the kinetochore, which allows chromosomes to move to its namesake plate. For
10 points, name this stage of mitosis where chromosomes line up along the center of the cell, immediately
preceding anaphase.
ANSWER: metaphase
This process is promoted by a paracrine loop in which the production of EGF by macrophages is
increased by CSF-1. Stephen Paget's "seed and soil" hypothesis explains that cross-talk is vital for
this process' success. Preceding it, over-expression of Snail, Slug, and Twist causes repression of
E-cadherin, and an invadopodium degrades the basement membrane. This process requires an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Intravasation allows cells undergoing this process to (*) cross into
the lymphatic system and the bloodstream. Classically, malignant tumors, but not benign tumors, do this.
For 10 points, name this process responsible for more than 90% of all deaths from cancer, in which tumor
cells spread from a primary tumor to other sites.
ANSWER: metastasis [or word forms]
Huang et al. showed that expression of microRNAs miR-373 and miR-520c promotes this process by
suppressing expression of CD44. Gain of function mutations in the transcription factor Twist can promote
this process by incorrectly inducing the Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition. Activation of matrix
metalloproteases to degrade the basal lamina and facilitates this process, but it is frequently abortive
because the cells are ripped apart by shear forces. In vitro, this process can be analyzed using a trans-well
migration assay and is responsible for 90% of the deaths due to cancer. For ten points, identify this process
by which a tumor leaves the tissue where it developed and colonizes other areas of the body.
ANSWER: metastasis
Adding one of these groups to homocysteine [HOH-moh-SISS-teen] results in
methionine [meh-"THIGH"-uh-nin]. The enzyme MutH ["mute-H"] specifically targets regions
without the presence of this modification, and the enzyme Dam performs this modification on GATC
sites. The formation of tightly packed and transcriptionally inactive heterochromatin is associated
with adding two or three of this group to the lysine at the ninth position on histone ["HISS-tone"] H3.
Barr bodies have large amounts of this modification. In bacteria, this group prevents restriction
enzymes from digesting their hosts' DNA. Name this modification that attaches a group with
formula CH3.
ANSWER: methylation [accept answers mentioning the addition of a methyl group]
Described by Zinkernagel and Doherty, these molecules are divided into a class of beta chain
invariants with 6 different alpha chains, and a class of 12 variants with different alpha and beta
chains that display external proteins digested by the cell. Class I, found on all cells, interacts with
cytotoxic T cells and leads to tissue transplant rejection, while class II, found on macrophages and B cells,
interacts with helper T cells that activate humoral immunity. For ten points, name these protein complexes
that play an important role in immune system activation.
ANSWER: major histocompatibility complex (or) human leukocyte antigen
A protein that complexes with this complex is the causative agent of hemodialysis-associated
amyloidosis. The gene mutated in hemochromatosis is tightly linked to its A locus, while its B27
polymorphism is associated with ankylosing spondylitis. Its maturation requires sequential binding of
calnexin and calreticulin, and a complex of Erp57 and the TAP1/TAP2 heterodimer is used to load
this complex. Claus Wedekind found that this protein mediates mate selection by smell in an
experiment involving sweaty T-shirts. This protein, which binds to CD8 on cytotoxic T-cells, is found
on all cell types and is responsible for (*) presenting viral peptides from the cytoplasm. This heavily
glycosylated polymorphic protein has to be matched between graft and host in organ donation. For 10
points, name this surface protein used to distinguish self from non-self.
ANSWER: MHC Class I [accept MHC or Major Histocompatibility Complex, do not accept "MHC class II"; accept HLA or Human Leukocyte Antigen]
The splotch mutation in this organism affects Pax3, which is expressed in their cardiac neural crest cells.
Genic selection in this organism promotes high frequencies of the t-allele, which affects deme extinction
and is a prominent example of meiotic drive. When females of this organism possess mutated copies of
fosB, they become negligent mothers. The link between leptin and obesity was found in a study of them. In
the first experiment to demonstrate bacterial transformation, this organism was injected with pneumococcus
by Frederick Griffiths. Capecchi, Smithies and Evans pioneered a technique in this organism in which
embryonic stem cells inactivate a gene by homologous recombination. That technique is "knock out." For
10 points, identify this laboratory rodent.
ANSWER: mice [or mouse; or Mus musculus domesticus; or Mus musculus musculus]
Goldbeter and Koshland expanded it in a 1983 paper to account for ultrasensitivity brought on by covalent
modification, and the pigment depletion formula is one modification of it. Savageau considered
dimensionally restricted conditions, and a key step in its derivation was due to Briggs and Haldane. An
Eadie-Hofstee diagram uses it, though it is more famously the basis of the double reciprocal Lineweaver-
Burke plot. One of its namesake's eponymous constant used in it can be defined as the substrate
concentration at which the reaction occurs at half of its maximum speed. For 10 points, name this doubly
eponymous equation that describes enzyme kinetics.
ANSWER: Michaelis-Menten equation
Problems that limit the strength of this model include the fact that random collisions and free diffusion
cannot usually occur in environments in which it is applied, as well as the limits of its most important
approximation. The Eadie-Hofstee diagram was one of the plots used before more accurate computational
techniques to determine parameters in this model. The most powerful assumption used in this model is the
quasi-steady state approximation that allows one to determine the relationship between two molecules and
the complex they form in a differential equation. For 10 points, what is this model, also graphically
analyzed via the Lineweaver-Burk plot, that simply describes enzymatic activity?
ANSWER: Michaelis-Menten kinetics
Binnig, Quate, and Gerber invented one type of these devices that measures piezoelectric forces on a
cantilever, called the atomic force one, while a dichroic filter can be used as a beam splitter in the
fluorescence type of them. Ernst Ruska built one type of these instruments that can analyze surface
topology through raster scanning of (*) electrons, and Anton van Leeuwenhoek used the optical variety
of these devices to obtain the first observations of blood cells and bacteria. For ten points, identify these
instruments used to view objects that are too small for the naked eye.
ANSWER: microscopes (accept specific types, like atomic force microscopes)
Nomarski invented a version of this device that uses differential interference contrast, and the
confocal type generates three-dimensional images using fluorescence. The bright-field type can use
either stained or unstained specimens, and particularly high settings may require oil-immersion
lenses. (*) Compound ones have a rotating nose piece with three or four objectives, and specimens are
mounted under a coverslip on a slide. For 10 points, name these instruments used to observe small samples.
ANSWER: microscope
One class of these instruments has transmission and scanning variants. Typically, basic forms of this
instrument will contain components like an objective, stage and an ocular. They are referred to as
compound if they have greater power. Anton von Leeuwenhoek made major early scientific contributions
using this instrument, which today are roughly divided into optical and electron variants. For 10 points,
name these biological instruments used to observe very small objects.
ANSWER: microscopes [prompt on electron microscope before "objective"]
The Hoffman modulation contrast type of these devices enhances phase gradients. A component named
after Nomarski (no-MAR-skee) is used in the differential interference contrast type of these devices. Abbe
(AH-BAY) condensers are attached to these devices. Confocal ones remove light that is out of focues. They
have objective and ocular pieces. The multiplication of the strengths of two of their pieces gives the total
magnification. For 10 points, name these laboratory devices that magnify images of cells and other
structures.
ANSWER: optical microscopes
One type of these devices uses piezoelectric materials to maintain a constant distance between a
cantilevered tip and an object. These devices may use either critical or Kohler illumination. Max
Knoll invented one type of this device that uses (+) electrons in a raster scan pattern to examine
objects. Red blood cells and spermatozoa were discovered when Anton van (*) (LAY-von-hoke)
Leeuwenhoek used this device. Illustrations of what he saw through one of these devices were published by
Robert Hooke. For 10 points, name this device that traditionally uses a series of lenses to magnify a sample.
ANSWER: optical microscope [or scanning electron microscope; or atomic force microscope]
An early example of these instruments was made in 1590 in the Netherlands, for which Leppershey
and Janssen are often given credit. Giovanni Faber coined its modern name, although Galileo Galilei
called his an "ochiolino", or "little eye". One type of these devices examines the surface of an object
by firing (*) electrons which tunnel through it. An "atomic force" one has a resolution of less than one
nanometer, while the most common type has a resolution limit of about 200 nanometers due to diffraction.
Leeuwenhoek [LEE-ven-hook] discovered red blood cells and spermatozoa using one of these. For ten
points, what scientific instrument is used to produce magnified images of small objects?
ANSWER: Microscope [accept optical microscope before "electrons"]
Georges Nomarski developed one of these devices that exaggerate differences in density. One subtype of
these devices are often equipped with Everhart-Thornley detectors. That subtype of these devices is divided
into transmission and scanning varieties. Zacharias Janssen is credited with inventing these devices.
Staining is sometimes performed before using these devices, whose parts include the stage, arm, and fine
adjustment knob. For 10 points, name these laboratory devices with eyepiece and objective lenses that are
used to view small objects.
ANSWER: microscopes [accept more specific answers]
The Hoffman modulation contrast type of these devices enhances phase gradients. A component named
after Nomarski (no-MAR-skee) is used in the differential interference contrast type of these devices. Abbe
(AH-BAY) condensers are attached to these devices. Confocal ones remove light that is out of focues. They
have objective and ocular pieces. The multiplication of the strengths of two of their pieces gives the total
magnification. For 10 points, name these laboratory devices that magnify images of cells and other
structures.
ANSWER: optical microscopes
August Kohler developed an optimal method of illumination for use with the simplest type of this device.
Another type of this device uses a sputter coater to make samples conductive and is the scanning electron
type. A cover slip is placed over a slide to hold a specimen for viewing with the simplest type of this
device. Extensive observations with this device were made by Anton van Leeuwenhoek . For 10 points,
identify these devices used to magnify objects too small for the human eye to see, such as bacteria.
ANSWER: microscope
One especially accurate type of this device has a spin-polarized form that uses a ferromagnet and relies on
quantum tunneling, and another has a "tapping" mode that prevents the device from altering molecular
conformation. The confocal form of this technique allows three-dimensional visualization. The phase-
contrast form of this technique doesn't require staining, allowing for the study of the cell cycle. For 10
points, name this technique with a well-documented form employing beams of electrons, which more
mundanely uses a series of lenses to produce a magnified image of small objects.
ANSWER: microscopy [accept word forms; accept phrases like using a microscope]
Vinblastine and taxol inhibit the assembly of these structures, and their depolymerization can be induced by
colchicine. In Xenopus, the phosphorylation of the XMAP215 protein causes them to increase or decrease
in size haphazardly, also called dynamic instability. They are nucleated at their minus ends at a gamma ring-
complex found in their namesake "organizing centers." Kinesin and dyenin transport organelles and
molecules along them and they are found in a 9+2 arrangement in cilia and flagella. For 10 points, identify
these entities that are made up of tubulin and which serve to drive the cell apart via motor function during
daughter cell formation.
ANSWER: microtubules
These structures have one end in a namesake organizing center, and their lengths can fluctuate
wildly through a phenomenon known as dynamic instability. (*) Kinesins move molecules towards the
plus end of these structures, while dyneins move molecules towards the minus end. Centrioles are formed
from these cytoskeletal structures, as are cilia and flagella, in which these structures are arranged in a "9 +
2" manner. For 10 points, name these parts of the cytoskeleton that are larger than actin filaments or
intermediate filaments and are made from the protein tubulin.
ANSWER: microtubules
These structures can be destabilized using katanin or stathmin, and undergo a phenomenon known as
dynamic instability in which they oscillate between growing and shrinking phases apparently at random.
Each of these structures originates from a namesake "organizing center", and MAP Kinase phosphorylates a
group of proteins responsible for assembling and stabilizing these structures. Both kinesin and dynein
transport molecules along these structures, which appear in a 9+2 arrangement in flagella and cilia. FTP,
identify this smallest part of the cytoskeleton, made up of tubulin.
ANSWER: microtubules
CLASP proteins bind one end of these structures and help inhibit a process called "catastrophe." These
structures can have persistence lengths of 3-4 mm, which is several orders of magnitude higher than the
average cellular diameter. These structures can be severed by katanin. Drugs such as paclitaxel stabilize
these structures and prevent their depolymerization, where colchicine prevents its dimeric subunits from
coming together. Shortening of these structure at the kinetochore ends of the spindle apparatus helps
chromosomes walk towards poles during mitosis and meiosis. For 10 points, identify these structures which
are components of the cytoskeleton and which are made of tubulin proteins.
ANSWER: microtubules
Vinca alkaloids target these structures, whose formation in Xenopus eggs is controlled by XMAP215. A
structure containing six HEAT repeats called the TOG domain is present in proteins that interact with them,
and the tektins also associate with these structures. Their monomers, which are homologous to FtsZ,
.contain an alpha and beta subunit that binds to GTP, and their creation relies on a gamma-ring complex.
Targeted by taxol and colchicine, these structures undergo assembly and disassembly in a process called
dynamic instability. Found in the spindle apparatus, they are in a 9+2 arrangement in flagella. For 10 points,
name these strands of polymerized tubulin, a component of the cytoskeleton.
ANSWER: Microtubules
The phosphorylation of stathmin can cause an increased growth in these structures, and proteins called
CLASPs prevent catastrophe from occurring in these structures. Vinblastine and colchicine can cause
depolymerization of these structures which are severed by katanin. The motor proteins dynein and kinesin
move toward one of these structure's minus end and plus end, respectively. GTP binds to the alpha and
beta forms of a certain protein which composes the dimers which make up these structures. For 10 points,
name these components of the cytoskeleton which are composed of tubulin.
ANSWER: Microtubules
These structures are targeted by Vinca alkaloids. In mammals, the proteins CG-NAP and kendrin
helps anchor a complex that assembles these structures while in yeasts, the proteins Spc97p and
Spc98p are in that assembly complex. (*) GTP binds stably to their alpha subunits, but when GTP
changes to GDP in their beta subunits, it causes rapid disassembly of them. These structures assembled by
Gamma-TuRC can oscillate between "rescue" and "catastrophe" in dynamic instability. The motor protein
kinesin moves to their plus end and dyein to their negative end. They form the 9+2 structure in flagella and
cilia along with the spindle fibers used in mitosis. For 10 points, name these structures that make up the
cytoskeleton along with intermediate filaments and microfilaments, made of tubulin.
ANSWER: microtubules
Proteins can interact with these structures via TOG domains. A drug that prevents their formation
cannot continue to be used in patients with foot drop and is 100% fatal if it gets into the spine; that
drug is vincristine, which like vinblastine is a vinca alkaloid. A compound that prevents the growth of
these structures is commonly used to treat gout, and that compound is also used to synchronize cells
for karyotyping. Gamma ring complexes nucleate their growth, which alternate phases of (*)
assembly and catastrophe in a process called "dynamic instability". Their monomers bind and hydrolyze
GTP. Their growth is inhibited by colchicine and stabilized by taxol, and they form the mitotic spindle by
connecting chromosomes to the centrosome. These structures are made of tubulin. For 10 points, name
these components of the cytoskeleton that are bigger than intermediate filaments.
ANSWER: microtubules
Mutations in the EFHC1 gene were recently found to disrupt their formation, which is inhibited by
nocodazole in flow cytometry. Stathmin and Tektin interact with these structures, and they oscillate between
"catastrophe" and "rescue" in a process called dynamic instability. The Gamma-TuRC complex assists with
their formation. Drugs like Colchicine disrupt the dynamics of these structures. Dyein is a motor protein
which moves toward the minus end of them, while kinesin moves toward the plus end. Nine doublets of
them surround two singlets in flagella and cilia, and they form the spindle fibers that separate chromosomes
during mitosis. For 10 points, name these structures composed of tubulin, which, along with microfilaments
and intermediate filaments, make up the cytoskeleton.
ANSWER: microtubules
Drugs that act on them include nocodazole and colcemid. MAP2 and Tau proteins are responsible for their
organization in axons. Severed by katanin and depolymerized by stathmin-Op18, they are stable when
possessing GTP caps. Taxol blocks their assembly while colchicine promotes their destabilization. Kin N
kinesins move toward their plus ends, while kin C kinesins and dynein move towards their minus ends.
Positioning the Golgi apparatus, they exhibit dynamic instability and function in chromosome capture. FTP
name these components of the cytoskeleton made up of GTP bound alpha and beta tubulin.
ANSWER: microtubules; prompt on tubulin before it is mentioned
These structures can change size as a result of the XMAP215 protein in Xenopus eggs. Vinca alkaloids
inhibit the formation of these structures. In these structures, CLASP inhibits a process called "catastrophe,"
which is followed by "rescue" in a growth process caused by the hydrolysis of GTP called dynamic
instability. The drugs colchicine and taxol stop the polymerization of these structures' alpha and beta
dimers, which bind to GTP. They nucleate with the help of gamma-ring proteins in their namesake
organizing centers. Kinesins moves molecules to their plus ends, and dyneins move molecules to their
negative ends. They come in a 9 plus 2 arrangement in flagella. For 10 points, name these components of
the cytoskeleton made of tubulin.
ANSWER: microtubules [or tubulin till mention]
These structures are maintained by CLIP and CLASP proteins. Depending on the point of attachment,
these structures are divided into astral and polar types. Their formation is inhibited by the anti-cancer drug
paclitaxel. Kinesin (kin-EY-sin) proteins are used for transport along these structures. A protein subunit of
these structures localizes to the centrosome and assists in the formation of the mitotic spindle at "organizing
centers". For 10 points, identify these largest components of the cytoskeleton, usually pictured as long,
hollow rods.
ANSWER: microtubules [prompt on mitotic spindle or equivalents]
The protein FtsZ, which is found only in bacteria, is said to be the progenitor of this structure. One
type of this structure designated g combines with gamma ring proteins to form a ring complex that
nucleates these entities. Their rapid changes between growth and shrinkage due to the hydrolysis of
a GTP cap is known as (*) dynamic instability, while taxol and tau proteins can be used to stabilize these.
Dyneins and kinesins move molecules across these structures, which are associated with MAPs. During
mitosis, their namesake organizing centers are created and these attach to the kinetochore. For 10 points,
name this part of the cytoskeleton, which are found in cilia and flagella and which are made of tubulin.
ANSWER: Microtubules [prompt on "tubulin" before mentioned]
Reid's paradox concerns how rapidly plants experienced this action after the last ice age, and
irregularities in this can result in nomadism. Many pelagic [peh-LAA-jik] organisms experience a
daily vertical form of this action. Gene flow in animal groups usually occurs because of this action
that is longest for the Arctic tern. The rainy season triggers the great one of this for the wildebeest
and zebra on the Serengeti. Monarch butterflies perform a unique two-stage form of this action,
which is guided by smell in anadromous fish such as salmon. Name this action exhibited by birds
flying south for the winter in which populations periodically move from one place to another.
ANSWER: migration [accept word forms]
A long-term form of this process induced by man-made structures is named for Ferdinand de Lesseps. An
Emlen funnel is used to study these events, the "reverse" form of which can affect individuals for whom this
phenomenon is genetic, like passerines. Irregular types of these events are called irruptions. Major types of
this phenomenon include the "chain" form, wherein populations slide north or south, and the "leap-frog"
form, wherein summer and winter latitudes swap outright. For 10 points, name this seasonal journey
endured by species like the Monarch butterfly and Canadian goose.
ANSWER: migrations
The spotted predatory katydid and the sabre-toothed blenny are two organisms that display this. One lesser
known type of this phenomenon includes the Wasmannian variety, though better known types include one in
which both species are equally unpalatable, known as the Mullerian type, which in some cases is
indistinguishable from the Batesian variety. FTP identify this phenomenon in which one species copies
certain traits from another in order to gain evolutionary advantage.
ANSWER: Mimicry
The self type of this technique is used by animals with false eyes, like moths. Mantella frogs use this
advantage by aposematic coloration. Some spiders use this technique by smell, but most animals use it
visually. The Batesian type of this technique applies to equally unpalatable organisms, in contrast with
Mullerian. For 10 points, name this technique to escape predation, exemplified by viceroys resembling
monarch butterflies.
ANSWER: mimicry [or Batesian mimicry before "self type"]
The occurrence of this at the molecular level was discovered when two viral proteins cross reacted with a
human filament protein. The Aristotelian form of it can be observed in some galliform birds, and the
Vavilovian type of it results in artificial selection of weeds, which become secondary crops. A bipolar
version of it occurs in Monarch butterflies which exhibit differential palatability. For 10 points, identify this
process wherein one species imitates a model species, which commonly exists in Batesian and Mullerian
varieties.
ANSWER: mimicry
Octopuses of the genus Thaumoctopus are commonly named after this behavior. One form of this
behavior in plants is known as pseudocopulation. It frequently involves aposematic species, which can be
seen in the Mullerian complex of the viceroy and monarch butterflies. In addition to the Mullerian type, it
also comes in a Batesian variety. For 10 points, name this behavior whereby a species benefits from its
similarity to another species.
ANSWER: mimicry
The Emsleyan form of this phenomenon is present in Coral snakes, and one example of this phenomenon in
plants is pseudocopulation to attract pollinators. Naturalist Henry Walter Bates observed that certain
butterflies exemplified this phenomenon, while the Mullerian type of this phenomenon causes mutualism
between species involved. Examples of this phenomenon include predators choosing not to eat viceroy
butterflies, due to their similarities to the bad-tasting Monarch butterfly. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon characterized by two different species having the same resemblance, which can be used for
protection for some species.
ANSWER: Mimicry
This phenomenon is exhibited by the evolution of wild rye caused by the artificial selection of wheat crops,
first noticed by Nikolai Vavilov. The Mertensian type allows predators to be injured non-fatally by a less
harmful species, allowing them to learn that pattern. One type occurs when two or more harmful species
both share each other's warning signals, while another type occurs when a tasteful species imitates a
distasteful species. Exhibited by snakes and butterflies, for 10 points, name this biological phenomenon,
whose best-known types are Mullerian and Batesian, in which one organism resembles another for
protection against predation.
ANSWER: mimicry
In Papilio dardanus (puh-PILL-ee-oh dar-DAN-us), only females exhibit the polymorphic form of this
trait. The Mertensian (MURR-ten-see-an) hypothesis predicts that this trait stems from an intermediate
model. This process is dynamic if the model is motion. Aposematic (ay-pah-seh-MAH-tick) coloring is an
example of the Mullerian (MEW-lair-ee-an) form of this action, the Batesian (Bait-see-an) form of which
occurs when a harmless species resembles a harmful species. For 10 points, name this process of organisms
resembling each other, such as viceroys and monarch butterflies.
ANSWER: mimicry [accept word forms]
A mutation in this object results in diseases like Kearns-Sayre (curns-say-ur) syndrome. One enzyme in
it contains F0 (EFF-sub-zero) and F1 components. Oxidative phosphorylation (fahs-for-ih-LAY-shun)
occurs in this structure using energy derived from the electron transport chain. Within its matrix, the Krebs
cycle takes place. The inner membrane of this object has highly folded components called cristae
(CHRIS-tay). For 10 points, name this organelle which generates ATP and is known as the "power plant"
of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
In Drosophila, the fuzzy onions gene regulates the fusion of these organelles in sperm, which creates the
nebenkern. One disease that affects these organelles results in a "salt-and-pepper" pigmentation of the
retina. In another disease, these organelles take the appearance of "ragged red fibers" under a Gomori
trichrome stain. In addition to the aforementioned Kearns-Sayre syndrome, the TIM/TOM complex sees the
translocation of proteins into them. Enzymatic abnormalities in these organelles can result in significant
oxidative stress, and cytochrome C is found within these structures. It contains inner compartments called
cristae. For 10 points, name these organelles with namesake matrilineal DNA, known as the "powerhouse"
of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
Enzymes located in this non-organ structure include D-beta-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase and
acetoacetate decarboxylase, which are involved in ketogenesis. A substance located inside this
structure contains a D loop inside its control region. 2,4-dinitrophenol and thermogenin increase the
permeability of this structure's membrane, acting as uncoupling agents. This organelle contains its
own (*) maternally inherited DNA, and its most important function can be described using chemiosmotic
theory, which uses the "proton motive force." The folds in this organelle's inner membrane are called
cristae. For 10 points, name this organelle which uses the electron transport chain to generate ATP for the
cell to use as energy.
ANSWER: mitochondrion [or mitochondria]
The Tim/Tom complex is found in this organelle that contains an enzyme composed of an F0 and F1
complex. This organelle's matrix fills the inside of the series of cristae (KRIH-stay) that make up this
organelle's interior. The presence of DNA in this organelle has led scientists to theorize that like the
chloroplast it was once a separate organism, known as the endosymbiotic (enh-doh-sim-bie-AH-tick)
theory. For 10 points, name this organelle, whose role in ATP production causes it to be known as the
"powerhouse" of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
These organelles contain succinate dehydrogenase complexes and use ubiquinone, or coenzyme q, to
transport electrons between the iron-sulfur proteins in Complexes I and III. These shape-changing
organelles oxidize NADH and pyruvate, and their unique, maternally-inherited DNA suggests that, like
chloroplasts, they were once endosymbionts. The inner of their two membranes have cristae, which are
squiggle-shaped folds where the electron transport chain occurs. For 10 points, name these cellular
organelles in which the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation occur, synthesizing ATP for energy for
the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrions]
Deficiencies in this organelle can cause myopathies like Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Two complexes of
translocases, Tim and Tom, facilitate the movement of proteins through its membranes. Alpha-
proteobacteria are believed to be the precursors to this structure, which is a focus of
(*) endosymbiosis theory along with the chloroplast. Cell death can be triggered by the release of
cytochrome C from cristae in this organelle's inner membrane. Oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA are converted
to citric acid in this organelle's matrix. For 10 points, name this cell organelle which has its own DNA,
inherited through the mother, and is sometimes known as the "powerhouse of the cell."
ANSWER: mitochondria [accept mitochondrion]
The first and last steps of heme biosynthesis occur in this organelle, and proteins are targeted here by
passing through the TOM and TIM complexes. The release of cytochrome c from this organelle is a method
of inducing apoptosis, and this organelle contains a series of four complexes in its cristae that catalyze the
electron transport chain. This organelle has a double membrane and contains its own DNA. For 10 points,
name this organelle, which is the ATP-generating powerhouse of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria
The protein cytochrome c is found in this structure. It's not a chloroplast, but this organelle has a
double membrane, contains extranuclear DNA, and is thought to have originated as a separate
organism according to endosymbiotic theory. One part of this structure has folds called cristae,
which maximize the surface area where the reactions of the electron (*) transport chain can take place.
In eukaryotic (yoo-kah-ree-AH-tick) cells, this is where aerobic cellular respiration takes place. For 10
points, name this organelle, a cellular "powerhouse" that produces ATP.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
In brown adipose tissue the uncoupling protein thermogenin can cause this organelle to release heat. This
organelle's posession of its own DNA is cited as evidence by proponents of endosymbiotic theory. The
inner membrane of this organelle is compartmentalized into folds called cristae. Cellular respiration and
production of ATP primarily occurs in this organelle. For 10 points, name this organelle that serves as the
"power plant" of the cell."
ANSWER: mitochondrion [or mitochondria]
A protein found in this organelle, UCP1, mediates heat generation in brown adipose tissue. Tom40 protein
channels exist on its membrane, and ubiquitin targets paternal genetic material in this organelle. Lynn
Margulis proposed the endosymbiotic theory to explain why this organelle also possesses DNA, which is
passed down maternally. In this organelle, oxalate is produced from pyruvic acid through the function of
coenzyme A in the Krebs cycle. For 10 points, name this organelle, the site of the electron transport chain
and anaerobic respiration, which produces ATP.
ANSWER: mitochondria or mitochondrion
Proteins tagged for transport to this organelle have a signal sequence on their N-terminus that tends to fold
into an amphipathic alpha helix. Protein transport in this organelle is mediated by the TOM, TIM and OXA
complexes. An unusual "double" phospholipid with four fatty acid chains, cardiolipin, is found primarily in
it. Degeneration of retinal ganglion cells is linked to this organelle in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy.
Unusually, instead of being a stop codon, UGA codes for tryptophan in this organelle. Proteins covalently
linked to a heme molecule are found in this organelle and are called cytochromes. The inner membrane of
this organelle is folded into cristae and the presence of a double membrane around it suggests it is the
product of endosymbiosis. For 10 points, name these organelles where cellular respiration and ATP
synthesis occur.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
A disease related to a malfunction in this object dramatically affects eye movement and is called
Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Its inner membrane is composed of large amounts of cardiolipin. According to the
endosymbiotic theory, this organelle originated from proteobacteria. This organelle contains namesake
DNA which are only inherited from the mother. Its internal compartments called cristae are studded with
proteins. For 10 points, name this ATP generating organelle described as the "power plant" of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
Aggregations of a diseased form of this organelle take on a "ragged red fiber" appearance, and mutations in
this organelle lead to Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy. TOM and TIM proteins allow the translocation of
proteins across their membranes, and they release cytochrome c into the cytoplasm during apoptosis. They
are maternally inherited and participate in the citric acid cycle. These organelles' inner membranes are
organized into folds called cristae, on which is located a protein that exploits a proton gradient to make a
high-energy molecule. For 10 points, name these organelles that produce energy for the cell in the form of
ATP.
ANSWER: mitochondria
In this organelle, ubiquinol is made from ubiquinone by the action of Complex I, an iron-sulfur
protein. Coenzyme Q is in this organelle whose namesake (*) "Eve," a theorized ancestor of all humans,
could be found by tracing changes in its maternally-inherited non-nuclear DNA. Cristae are folds in the
internal membrane of this organelle, where the citric acid cycle and electron transport chain occur to
produce ATP. For 10 points, name this organelle which helps generate energy for the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
The activity of hsp70 in these structures is the subject of the "thermal" and "cross bridge" ratchet
models. These structures house another structure whose regions are separated by punctuating tRNA
sequences and which are made up of a "light" and a "heavy" strand. The Oxa protein sits in this
organelle's membranes, and one enzyme in this structure binds ADP and switches between three
conformations due to the movement of the (*) Fo ("F sub O") subunit.. A high concentration of protons is
established in these organelles' intermembrane space during the heterotrophic electron transport chain.
Those protons eventually reenter these organelles' matrix, which allows for the synthesis of ATP. For 10
points, name these organelles which are theorized to have once been free living prokaryotes, which are
often dubbed cells' "powerhouses."
ANSWER: mitochondria
Defects in this organelle cause Pearson Syndrome which evolves into Kearns-Sayre Syndrome. This
organelle releases cytochrome c during apoptosis (ay-pop-TOH-sis). A porin layer surrounds this organelle
that contains a matrix, bounded by the inner membrane, which has folds known as cristae (KRIS-tie). It has
its own DNA, inherited only from the mother. For 10 points, name this organelle that produces ATP and is
the powerhouse of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
Decreased motor skills appear when Leigh's disease mutates this structure and copper accumulates in the
liver when Wilson's disease mutates it. This structure will release cytochrome c during apoptosis, is
inwardly lined with cristae, and is the site of the Krebs cycle. For 10 points, name this organelle found in
the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells and generates the supply of ATP, which explains its nickname, the
powerhouse of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
The first disease to be associated with this organelle was Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy, and the TIM
and TOM complexes are inner and outer transport mechanisms in it. The Eve Theory is about the
matrilineal descent of these organelles that are also affected by Leigh's disease and Kearns-Sayre syndrome.
Cytochrome C is released from this organelle to signal apoptosis, and it is the site of oxidative
phosphorylation. Cristae are the inner foldings of this site of the electron transport chain and Krebs Cycle.
For 10 points, identify this organelle that produces ATP and is sometimes referred to as the "powerhouse of
the cell."
ANSWER: Mitochondria [or Mitochondrion]
Posttranscriptional insertions and deletions of uridine residues occur in these structures in
trypanosomes. These structures are adversely affected in Barth syndrome due to a defect in the
biosynthesis of cardiolipin. Other diseases associated with them include Friedreich's ataxia and
Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Damage to them results in the formation of a permeability transition pore
and can trigger (*) apoptosis through the release of cytochrome c. They may contain thermogenin when
found in brown fat, and they contain the malate shuttle, which regenerates NADH inside them. FTP name
these organelles that contain F0F1 ATP synthase and that are the sites of the citric acid cycle and the
electron transport chain, generating energy for the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria or mitochondrion
The Q cycle involves the reduction of coenzyme Q10 to ubiquinol in these structures. A dysfunction of
these organelles can affect neurons in Leigh's disease. MACs form in these structures during apoptosis,
during which a part of complex III is released. That protein, cytochrome c, is embedded in a structure of
this organelle through which the movement of electrons form a proton gradient, which synthases use to
produce a nucleoside derivative. The internal area within this organelle's double membrane is called the
"matrix," which is folded in this structure to form cristae. For 10 points name this double-membraned
organelle, the main site of ATP production.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
Cardiolipin in the membranes that bind these organelles can cause Barth syndrome, while a protein
that manages a positive feedback loop with IP3, cytochrome c, is located in their inner membranes.
Kearnes-Sayre syndrome arises due to five thousand base pair deletions in their maternally inherited
DNA, the presence of which suggests the endosymbiontic theory. Filled by cristae and the matrix, for 10
points, identify these organelles, home to the electron transport chain.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
HSP90 aids in the delivery of substances to the translocase of outer membrane complex found on these
entities, which are also the site of the combination of protoporphyrin IX with iron to form heme. Kearns-
Sayre syndrome and Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy are examples of diseases associated with the
transfer of their genetic material, a process which in over 99 percent of mammals involves maternal
inheritance as there are roughly 1000 times more of these in oocytes than in sperm. Along with chloroplasts,
these are the subjects of endosymbiotic theory, and the foldings of its inner membrane are known as cristae.
FTP, identify this double-membrane cell organelle that generates the majority of the ATP in a cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy is caused by mutations associated with these organelle. This
organelle is home to an protein with F0 and F1 subunits. Coenzyme Q and cytochrome c are other proteins
important in the function of this organelle. The structure of this organelles include a matrix and cristae,
while another of its important constructs is the electron transport chain. The Krebs cycle occurs in it,
producing much of the cell's ATP. For 10 points, name this power houses of the cell that performs cellular
respiration.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
One neurometabolic disorder resulting from a mutation in these structures is called Leigh's disease,
and a malfunction in them can also result in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy. These structures
contain channel proteins called porins, and they release cytochrome C during apoptosis. They contain
two membranes, with folds in the inner one called cristae. These organelles may have originated as
endosymbiotic prokaryotes, and they possess their own DNA. For 10 points, name these organelles that
produce energy in animal cells.
ANSWER: mitochondria [accept mitochondrion]
Mutations in these entities can result in Leigh Syndrome. These structures carry their own maternally
inherited genomes independent of the nucleus. Lynn Margulis (MAR-goo-LYS) postulated that both
chloroplasts and these entities evolved from symbiotic bacteria within a host cell. Within the matrix of these
organelles, pyruvate (PIE-roo-VATE), NADH, and glucose undergo the Krebs cycle, and they are divided
by cristae (CREES-tay). For 10 points, name this organelle responsible for the synthesis of ATP, which
supplies cellular energy.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
Proteins are brought from the cytoplasm into this organelle by the TIM and TOM translocases. This
organelle has both outer and inner membranes, the latter of which has increased surface area due to folds
called cristae. This organelle possesses its own DNA, which is inherited from the mother, and which leads
biologists to theorize it was originally a bacterium taken into the cell through endosymbiosis. For 10 points,
name this organelle where most of respiration takes place, making it the "powerhouse of the cell."
ANSWER: mitochondrion [or mitochondria]
Leber optic neuropathy was the first disease to be associated with this organelle, while Kearns Sayre
syndrome is caused by defects in these which leads to Ophthalmoparesis and ptosis. The Tom and Tim
proteins are involved with translocation of proteins across their membranes. Cytochrome C is also found
within these structures, and is released into the cell to trigger apoptosis. These organelles have two
membrane systems with the inner one possessing folds called cristae, and they possess their own genome
which is used to analyze matrilineal ancestry. For 10 points, name this organelle, often referred to as the
"power source" of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondrion [or mitochondria]
These organelles communicate with the endoplasmic reticulum through the MAM structure, and Peter
Mitchell explained their main function in his chemiosmotic theory. This organelle releases cytochrome c
into the cytoplasm during apoptosis, and the endosymbiotic theory postulates that these organelles were
once living organisms. The infoldings in their inner membrane are known as cristae, and they possess a
fluid-filled space known as the matrix, which contains DNA. For 10 points, name this organelle that
generates ATP, often called the "powerhouse of the cell."
ANSWER: Mitochondria [accept Mitochondrion]
Reducing equivalents enter these organelles via the malate-aspartate shuttle. Defects in these organelles can
result in Kearns-Sayre syndrome or in Wilson's disease. It is in these organelles that brown fat produces
heat through thermogenin. A heme protein found here is cytochrome c, and these organelles possess an
independent, maternally inherited genome. Within its inner membrane occurs the Krebs cycle. For ten
points, name this organelle where most cellular energy is generated.
ANSWER: mitochondria
Malfunctions of this organelle include Wilson's disease, Kaerns-Sayre syndrome, and Leber's
hereditary optic neuropathy. It can be found in long traveling chains, and the malate-aspartate
shuttle is used between it and the cytosol. Its namesake uncoupling occurs in brown fat, and
apoptosis is induced when cytochrome c is released from it. Its cristae are formed by its inner
membrane, which is evidence of its endosymbiotic origin. For 10 points, name this organelle whose matrix
is the site of the citric acid cycle, the so-called powerhouse of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
The protein mutated in Friedrich's Ataxia, frataxin, localizes to this organelle. This organelle is
stained by a series of rosamine derivatives sold by Invitrogen, named [this organelle]-"tracker".
Antibodies to proteins within it are present in 95% of primary billiary cirrhosis cases. Another dye
that localizes here is nonyl acridine orange, which stains a bicyclic phospholipid called cardiolipin.
The glycerol phosphate and malate-aspartate shuttles move reducing equivalents into it, and with the
aid of the (*) carnitine shuttle it carries out beta-oxidation. MELAS and ragged red fiber disease are
caused by defects in it, as is Leber's Neuropathy. Its contains NADH dehydrogenase, succinate
dehydrogenase, and ubiquinone, all components of the electron transport chain. Also containing ATP
synthase and Krebs cycle enzymes, for 10 points, name this double-membraned organelle with a cristae and
matrix.
ANSWER: Mitochondria
Mutations in the Mfn2 gene result in dysfunction of a protein associated with this organelle, an occurrence
linked to Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome. It can store thermogenin, and the idea that one component is
passed down primarily maternally is called Eve Theory. Coenzyme Q and cytochrome C complexes, which
are implicated in the electron transport chain, stud its cristae, the folds in its inner membrane. For 10 points,
name this organelle which produces ATP via cellular respiration and acts as the powerhouse of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria (or mitochondrion)
Cardiolipin is a so called "double" lipid with four fatty acid tails that is abundant in this organelle.
Thermogenin acts as an uncoupler of one process that occurs in these structures in brown fat cells, which
get their color due to the abundance of these structures. The F1 complex of a protein found in this structure
has been shown to be water soluable, and that protein's F0 complex is a transmembrane domain that
releases its product onto the F1 complex. Cytochrome C is a peripheral protein found in the intermembrane
space of this organelle, and secretion of that enzyme serves as a signal to trigger apoptosis. For 10 points,
name this semi-autonomous organelle, where the bulk of ADP phosphorylation occurs, often called the
"powerhouse of the cell."
ANSWER: mitochondria
MERRF disease causes aberrations in them, while Kearn-Sayre syndrome and Leber's hereditary optical
neuropathy result from defective ones. Its DNA is theorized to come from a single entity called "Eve," a
source which is aptly named as its DNA is only inherited from the mother. Tom and Tim proteins are
needed to transport proteins across its two membranes, which include the protein porin in the outer one and
many cytochrome oxidase complexes in its inner folded one. Chemiosmosis and the citric acid cycle occur
in the cristae and matrix of, FTP, what organelle, the so-called "powerhouse" of the cell?
ANSWER: mitochondria
2,4-DNP is an example of an uncoupler used by this organelle. The color of brown fat is due to the high
concentration of this organelle, which is responsible for generating heat in that tissue. One can trace
matrilineal descent through this organelle's DNA. Like the chloroplast, this double-membraned organelle is
the subject of the endosymbiotic hypothesis. For 10 points, name this site of oxidative phosphorylation, the
energy-producing organelle.
ANSWER: mitochondria
One disease involving this structure is characterized by the appearance of ragged red fibers under a
Gomori stain. The TIM/TOM complex manages translocation of proteins through it. This structure
contains a membrane-embedded enzyme with a rotating stalk that is powered by the passage of
protons through its F0 subunit down an (*) electrochemical gradient. The citric acid cycle occurs in its
matrix. Its possession of its own, matrilineal DNA accords with the endosymbiotic theory of its origin. This
organelle's inner membrane is arranged in folds called cristae. For 10 points, name this organelle, the site of
the vast majority of a cell's ATP production.
ANSWER: mitochondria
This organelle contains the enzymes aconitase and fumarase. The TIM and TOM complexes are found
within this organelle. A complex in this organelle contains iron-sulfur proteins and cytochromes, which
causes a proton gradient that is undone by ATP synthase. Acetyl-coA is brought into this organelle to react
with oxaloacetic acid. This organelle contains a double membrane, and inside its cristae the Krebs cycle
takes place. For 10 points, name this organelle, often called the "powerhouse" of the cell because it is the
site of cellular respiration.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
This organelle releases cytochrome c in apoptosis. Inner folds in this organelle's matrix-enclosing inner
membrane, called cristae, are central to the Krebs cycle's electron transport chain. Like the chloroplast, this
organelle reproduces through binary fission. Name this cell organelle that generates ATP for the cell to use
as energy.
ANSWER: mitochondrion (or mitochondria)
A disease caused by a defect in these is characterized by progressive limitation of eye movement
and is known as Kearns-Sayre syndrome. This organelle contains cytochrome c, and, like the nucleus,
this organelle has a double membrane, with the (*) inner one featuring folds known as cristae. Like the
nucleus and chloroplast, they also contain their own DNA. The site of the Krebs cycle and completion of
the electron transport chain, for 10 points, name this organelle, the cell's power source.
ANSWER: mitochondria [accept mitochondrion]
The TIM/TOM complex moves material in and out of them, and disorders caused by defects in these
include Kearn-Sayle syndrome and Leber's optic neuropathy. Substances found within them include
ubiquinone, or coenzyme Q, and release of cytochrome-c [*] from these organelles helps trigger
apoptosis. Their internal fluid is known as matrix, and the inner folds of their bilayer membrane are called
cristae. Their maternally-inherited DNA is a subject of the endosymbiotic theory. For 10 points, name this
organelle in which electron transport occurs and in which ATP is produced, known as the "powerhouse" of
a cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria
One process that takes place in these structures involves a combination with coenzyme A to create
acetyl CoA. That process takes place in this organelle's matrix. Another process that takes place in this
structure creates a proton gradient. This organelle is the location of the Krebs cycle and the electron
transport chain. This double-membraned structure has an inner membrane that is folded called the cristae.
For 10 points, name this organelle that is responsible for the production of ATP and is often called the
powerhouse of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
The membrane of this structure features a channel composed of Tom40 proteins, and amphipathic N-
terminal signal sequences direct proteins to this structure. A missing protein in this structure is the cause of
Friedreich's ataxia, and altered signaling pathways in this structure are the cause of Leber's hereditary optic
neuropathy. Like the nucleus, it is surrounded by a double membrane, and this organelle has numerous
invaginations called cristae. Home to the citric acid cycle and electron transport chain, this organelle has its
own DNA. FTP name this organelle that produces the energy molecule ATP.
ANSWER: mitochondria [accept mitochondrion]
When diseased, these organelles can appear as ragged red fibers under a Gomori trichromal stain.
The translocation of proteins across this organelle is managed by the TIM/TOM complex. Pyruvate
is converted to acetyl-CoA in this organelle. Deletions in the DNA of this organelle can result in
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, and that DNA is passed down (*) maternally. The inner membrane of this
organelle is made up of folds called cristae. This organelle is the site of electron transport chain and the
Krebs cycle, the latter of which takes place in its matrix. For 10 points, name this powerhouse of the cell,
responsible for the production of ATP.
ANSWER: mitochondria (or mitochondrion)
Kearns-Sayre syndrome is a disease associated with malfunction of this organelle. Nonsyndromic
deafness, ataxia, and neuropathies may result from mutations in this organelle's DNA, which is
inherited entirely from the mother. The inner of this organelle's two membranes has compartments
called (*) cristae and contains the matrix, which contains enzymes that oxidize pyruvate. It produces much
of the cell's supply of ATP through oxidative phosphorylation. For 10 points, name this energy-generating
organelle.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
Damage to one component of this organelle may cause Leigh's disease or Leber optic atrophy, and its
membrane contains a protein whose release triggers caspase nine and thereby induces apoptosis. That
protein, called cytochrome c, is essential to a transport process that ends with ATP synthase. The electron
transport chain, which takes place in this organelle, uses the redox potential of NADH and FADH2 to
generate ATP from fuel. For 10 points, identify these cellular power plants, whose cristae and matrix host
glycolysis and the Krebs cycle.
ANSWER: mitochondria
These entities can be found wrapped around the sperm flagellum or between myofibrils of muscle,
and cytochrome C release from these entities can signal apoptosis. The inner membrane of this entity
contains proteins that perform oxidative phosphorylation and regulate metabolite movement, and is
compartmentalized into (*) cristae. These organelles help detoxify ammonia in the liver, and they have
their own DNA, which is thought to be inherited from the mother. For ten points, name these membrane-
enclosed organelles which produce ATP, the counterparts of chloroplasts that are known as the
"powerhouses" of the cell.
ANSWER: Mitochondria
This entity requires proper functioning of the protein frataxin, which, when mutated, causes
Friedrich's ataxia. Another disease of these bodies limits eye movement and is known as Kearns-Sayre
syndrome. Lynn Margulis popularized the idea that these bodies are proteobacteria that underwent
endosymbiosis. This organelle's inner folds are called cristae, and it contains its own DNA that is
inherited exclusively from an organism's mother. For 10 points, name this powerhouse of eukaryotic
cells.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
Myoclonic epilepsy is a disease that causes these organelles to aggregate into "ragged red fibers". In
most eukaryotes, this organelle contains an enzyme consisting of a rotor, rod, and knob that form its
F1 and F0 subunits. That enzyme is powered by the diffusion of protons into its namesake (*) matrix.
These organelles perform phosphorylation in folds called cristae, which is also the site of a pathway that
uses pyruvate. These organelles are thought to have arisen from endosymbiosis and contain maternally
inherited DNA. The Krebs cycle takes place in them, and results in the production of ATP. For 10 points,
name these organelles, often referred to as the "powerhouse" of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
This body releases cytochrome ("SIGH"-tow-krome) c to trigger apoptosis (AY-pop-TOW-sis). The
DNA found in these organelles (OR-guh-NELLZ) is passed down matrilineally (MAT-ruh-LIN-ee-uh-lee),
and along with its double membrane, may be evidence for its endosymbiotic (EN-"dough"-sim-by-OTT-ick)
origin. Its inner folds are called cristae (KRIS-tay), and its matrix is home to respiration reactions like
glycolysis (GLY-"CALL"-ih-sis). For 10 points, name this organelle, the "powerhouse" of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
This organelle is the site of d-aminolevulinic acid creation during porphyrin synthesis, and twenty
percent of the lipids present here are cardiolipin. This organelle obtains reducing equivalents via the
malate-aspartate shuttle to carry out one of its most important processes, and the TOM and TIM
complexes are found in its inner membrane. Mitchell showed that one important function of this
organelle occurs through a (*) chemiosmotic mechanism. Surrounded by a double membrane, its central
matrix is the site where acetyl-CoA is produced before the other steps of oxidative phosphorylation,
including the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain. For 10 points, name this organelle, the
primary site of ATP production.
ANSWER: mitochondria
Faults found in these structures can cause both Leber's optic neuropathy and Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Peter
Mitchell described the chief function of these structures in his chemiosmotic theory, and features within
these structures include the cytochrome-c oxidase complex. Folds in these organelles are called cristae, and
the electron transport chain is found within these structures, which also contain a fluid-filled space called
the matrix in which the Krebs cycle takes place. For 10 points, name these organelles, whose role in ATP
production and cellular respiration earns them the nickname "powerhouse of the cell."
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
These structures contain inner and outer transport mechanisms called the TIM and TOM
complexes and release cytochrome c during apoptosis. The majority of the post activation steps of
beta oxidation occurs in these membrane bound structures. Like (*) chloroplasts, they have their own
DNA and they contain an inner matrix with folds called cristae. In eukaryotes, the Krebs cycle occurs in
this structure. For 10 points, name this organelle that generates most of the cell's ATP, earning it the
nickname the "powerhouse" of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria or mitochondrion
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy is caused by a problem in this organelle, which has also been
suggested as a possible cause of aging. This organelle transfers substances across its inner membrane
through a TIM/TOM complex, and it is thought to have developed from (*) proteobacteria according
to the endosymbiotic theory. This double-membraned organelle self-replicates during mitosis and meiosis
and contains its own DNA, RNA, and ribosomes. The electron transport chain is embedded in the cristae of
this organelle, and the Krebs cycle occurs in its matrix. This "cellular power-house" is, for 10 points, what
organelle that produces ATP via cellular respiration?
ANSWER: mitochondrion or mitochondria
Ragged Red Fibers are seen in some disorders affecting this structure. Another disorder of this structure is
an optic neuropathy named for Leber. The protein cytochrome c is released from this organelle during
apoptosis. Surrounded by a double membrane, this organelle contains an area known as the matrix, and is
the site of the Krebs cycle. For 10 points, name this organelle that also carries out oxidative
phosphorylation in order to produce ATP.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
Pearson's syndrome, Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy, and Kearns-Sayre syndrome are all caused by
faults in this cellular organelle. The namesake DNA of this organelle is usually inherited from an
organism's mother. Cytochrome C is found here to aid the process of the electron transport chain, and this
organelle's origin is the focus of endosymbiotic theory. The inner membrane contains folds called cristae
form matrices in, for 10 points, which cellular organelle that primarily produces ATP?
ANSWER: mitochondrion or mitochondria
In humans, superoxide dismutase 2 is found in these structures. Uncoupling proteins are localized to these
organelles, particularly in brown adipose fat tissue, where these structures house thermogenin. SMACs and
cytochrome c are released from this organelle during apoptosis. FADH2 is produced in this organelle's
matrix, which is indented with several folds called cristae. In this organelle's membrane, protons move
down their concentration gradient through ATP synthase, resulting in oxidative phosphorylation. For 10
points, name this site of cellular respiration, the "powerhouse" of the cell.
ANSWER: mitochondria [or mitochondrion]
This structure disappears in organisms with mutations in the Twinkle helicase and contains a pair
of hypervariable regions within its D-loop. Diseases linked to this structure are suppressed by
heteroplasmy. Defects in this structure cause cyclic vomiting syndrome and a disease in which ragged
red fibers appear in muscle. In humans, this structure contains a 7S rRNA gene that mice lack. This
structure, mutations in which cause Lieber's (*) Neuropathy and several myopathies, contains several
tRNA genes and genes encoding components of the electron transport chain. Mutations of this structure are
almost exclusively maternally inherited. For 10 points, name this circular structure found inside the matrix
of an organelle that produces ATP.
ANSWER: mtDNA [or mitochondrial genome or mitochondrial DNA; prompt on "mitochondria"]
This process occurs only after MPF activates the G2 checkpoint. Sister chromatids separate and migrate
towards spindle pores as kinetechore microtubles contract in one part of this process. This part of the cell
cycle is preceded by interphase during which the chromosomes in cell nuclei are replicated. Phases in this
process include prophase and anaphase, and this process is generally followed with cytokinesis. For 10
points, name this process which results in two daughter cells with identical nuclei and is often contrasted
with meiosis.
ANSWER: mitosis [accept prophase, anaphase, metaphase, or telophase until "prophase"]
In this process, the breakdown of a structure made of tubulin (TOO-byoo-lin) leads to the creation of
asters. A structure sometimes known as the equatorial plate is formed during the middle part of this process.
In this process, spindle fibers attach to kinetochores (kin-ET-oh-cores) on centromeres (SEN-tro-MEERS)
and then elongate to help separate sister chromatids (KRO-muh-tids). For 10 points, name this process
followed by cytokinesis (site-oh-kin-EE-sis) in which a eukaryotic (YOU-carry-aht-ic) cell divides into two
daughter cells.
ANSWER: mitosis [accept prophase before "plate" is read]
This process is initiated by the activation of MPF at the G sub 2 checkpoint, while a cell with multiple
nuclei is created when it occurs without cytokinesis. During one stage in this process, spindle fibers cause
sister chromatids to line up at a plate, and it results in two cells with the same number of chromosomes as
the parent cell. For 10 points, name this process with five phases including metaphase, the method of cell
division that occurs in non-reproductive cells.
ANSWER: mitosis [accept prophase before "multiple nuclei"]
Colchicine and taxol stop this process by interfering with tubulin polymerization. It is promoted by cyclins,
and SMC proteins play a pivotal role in the first half of this process. The nucleolus disappears during one
step of this process, and spindle fibers attach to kinetochores located on the centromeres during another
step. The G2 phase precedes this process, and cytokinesis follows it. Bacteria perform binary fission instead
of undergoing this process. For 10 points, name this process in the cell cycle during which one cell forms
two daughter cells.
ANSWER: Mitosis
One type of these organisms has genes known as Vol, Tinman, and Eyeless and has 4 chromosomes with an
X-Y sex chromosome system. That one was first used by T.H. Morgan. Another one of these organisms has
exactly 959 somatic cells, each of whose ancestry can be traced to the embryo. The ABC model for flowers
was developed using Arabidopsis, one of these. Another type often has specific genes "knocked out."
Examples of them include C. elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and lab mice. For 10 points, name this
type of organism used in place of humans in genetic experiments.
ANSWER: model organism [accept fruit fly or Drosophila melanogaster before 959]
Helcionelloida is an extinct class in this phylum, one of the first to evolve an efficient excretory system.
Many of its members have radulae, or toothed tongues, and a dorsal concentration of internal organs called
a visceral mass. One member of this phylum features siphuncles in its septa, and is shaped like a logarithmic
spiral. Its members are characterized by the presence of a muscular foot and a mantle, which may secrete
calcium carbonate. Classes in this phylum include cephalopods, bivalves, and gastropods. For 10 points,
name this animal phylum containing squids, snails, and clams.
ANSWER: mollusca or mollusks
Members of this animal phylum produce larvae called veliger. Though not annelids or arthropods, they
have excretory glands called nephridia. They also have a tongue with chitinous teeth used for scraping
called a radula. Their gonads are protected by a mantle, and while they all have a mucus-secreting foot for
movement, not all possess a shell. Members include bivalves, cephalopods, and gastropods. For 10 points,
name this phylum containing clams, octopi, and snails.
ANSWER: mollusca [or mollusks]
Some members of this phylum employ an olfactory organ called an osphradium, and the genus
Architeuthis ("are"-kih-TOO-tiss) in this phylum includes the largest invertebrates in the world. A
tooth-covered radula is incorporated in the digestive system of some members of this phylum such as
solenogasters. The bodies of members of this phylum are covered by a soft mantle, and this phylum
encompasses gastropods and cephalopods. For 10 points, name this phylum of marine creatures including
clams, squids, and octopi.
ANSWER: Mollusca [or mollusks]
Members of this phylum use feather-like ctenidia in respiration. One order in this phylum has millimeter-
wide axons, which Hodgkin and Huxley studied to discover action potentials. Conchiolin and chitin
constitute the shells of these animals, which are derived from the dorsal body wall. The odontophore
underlies a chitinous feeding structure called the radula. The body cavities of animals in this phylum are
enclosed by the mantle. The muscular foot that characterizes members of this phylum gives rise to the
tentacles in cephalopods. For 10 points, name this phylum which includes squid and hard-shelled oysters.
ANSWER: Mollusca [or molluscs; prompt on "Cephalopoda" or "cephalopods"; prompt on "Bivalvia" or "bivalves"; prompt on "squid" or "giant squid" before "squid" is read]
.Members of this phylum are the vectors for the spread of Schistosomiasis. Free-swimming larvae of many
species in this phylum are known as trocophores, which use cilia for propulsion until the development of a
characteristic structure, and Eric Kandel won the Nobel prize for his studies of memory formation in
Aplysia, which belongs to this organism. Members of this phylum possess an anterior buccal cavity
containing an odontophore, which supports the main feeding structure, the radula. A true coelom and
bilateral symmetry are common extant features of this phylum, while hemocyanin acts as an oxygen carrier
in the hydrostatic skeleton. For 10 points, name this phylum with characteristic features like the visceral
mass, head, and foot, encompassing such organisms as gastropods and cephalopods.
ANSWER: Mollusca [accept mollusks]
Schistosomiasis is transmitted to humans by one member of this phylum, and one of their defining
characteristics is composed of perlucin and concholin (KAHN-cho-LIN). A structure in this phylum
containing many chitinous teeth is supported by an odontophore; that structure is the radula, and the mantle
secretes shells for this phylum. For 10 points, identify this phylum including bivalves and cephalopods,
whose most common member is the squid.
ANSWER: mollusca
Classes in this phylum include Polyplacophora, while another organism in this phylum is the geoduck
[GOOEY-duck]. Many classes in it have a broad muscular foot and a scraping tongue called a radula. All
organisms in this phylum exhibit bilateral symmetry and contain a mantle cavity, and it includes the largest
invertebrate, the colossal squid. For 10 points, name this diverse invertebrate phylum that includes clams,
snails, and octopuses.
ANSWER: mollusks [accept mollusca]
This phylum includes the proposed serialia clade [seh-ree-A-lee-uh klade], which in turn includes
monoplacophora, which were once thought to be extinct. Though it does not exist in protobranchia and
heterodonta, most of the animals in this phylum use a radula to take in food. These animals have a mantle
that secretes conchiolin [kon-KIE-uh-lin] and calcium carbonate. Name this phylum that includes
cephalopods [SEH-fuh-loe-pods] such as octopus and squid and also includes bivalves and snails, a phylum
whose animals are often covered by shells.
ANSWER: Mollusca or mollusks
The hyponome helps some members of this phylum swim, the bojanus functions as a kidney in some
members of this phylum, while the osphradium is a smell organ in the genus Conus. Some members of
this phylum fire love darts into their mates as a part of copulation. Members of this phylum, which
include the worm-like Alpacophroans, eight-plated polyplacophores, and nudibranches with acquired
cnidarian nematocysts, may have a tongue-like organ called a radula. Extinct members of this phylum
include ammonites and the nautilus, and extant members include the gastropods and cephalopods. For ten
points, identify this phylum that includes clams, squids, and snails.
ANSWER: Mollusca
One extinct genus of this phylum hailed from the Tommotian epoch, and is known as Latouchella.
Caudofauveta and Solenogastres hail from one of its classes, which contains arogonotic sclerites. In
addition to Aplacophora, another of its classes consists of chiton, and the principal body cavity
possessed by members of this phylum is the hemocoel. A visceral mass houses the organs of its
members, and many species use the radula to feed. Containing classes of cephalopods and bivalves, for
10 points, name this phylum containing squids and snails.
ANSWER: Mollusca [or mollusks]
Ctenidia on members of this phylum are used as gills, while they also have an odontophore, which is a row
of teeth. Two nephridia in them are used in both the excretory and circulatory systems. Their body is
referred to as the visceral mass. All of them have an organ that acts like a tongue called the radula. Many
members retain the mantle, which, among other uses, creates their shells. Cephalopoda and Bivalia are two
classes of, for 10 points, which phylum, that includes squids, clams, and snails?
ANSWER: Mollusca or mollusks
One species in this phylum transmits flukes that cause schistosomiasis. Some members of this phylum
use secretions from the byssal gland to create fibrous threads of protein. Members of one class in this
phylum possess a lid-like structure called an operculum. They use an odontophore to support and
control a (*) toothed structure used to scrape food off surfaces, the radula. Members of this phylum, classes
in which include Gastropoda and Cephalopoda, also possess a muscular foot and a mantle that secretes a
shell. For 10 points, name this phylum including squid and snails.
ANSWER: Mollusca [or mollusks]
One species in this phylum was the model organism Eric Kandel used to study a siphon-gill withdrawal
reflex. That species is the californica species of a genus in this phylum. Though not platyhelminthes,
members of this phylum serve as intermediates in transmitting schistosomiasis from trematodes to humans.
Aplysia is a genus in this phylum, members of which, excluding bivalves, feed using an odontophore along
with a toothed chitin ribbon called a radula. This phylum's most numerous subclass are the cephalopods.
For 10 points, identify this phylum of invertebrate mammals that includes squids and octopuses.
ANSWER: molluscs [or Mollusca]
The first host of an endoparasitic digenea and the intermediate host of species of Schistosoma are members
of this phylum. Mercenaria mercenaria is a member of this phylum that contains a pallial line, a ctenidium
composed of demibranchs, byssal glands, a ventricle wrapped around the rectum, a protuberance known as
the umbo, and a chitinous toothed structure called the radula. Eric Kandel uses the ganglia of one member
of this phylum for neurophysiological studies. In addition to the model organism Aplysia, this phylum
consists of members in classes such as Polyplacophora, Bivalvia, and Cephalopoda. For 10 points, name
this phylum, members of which have a mantle that is responsible for secreting the shell, and include chitons,
clams, oysters, snails, and squids.
ANSWER: mollusca [or molluscs]
The characteristic feature of this phylum of animals is composed of a matrix of conchiolin
(conk-EYE-o-lin) which binds to aragonite. The ctenidia (ten-ID-ee-uh) are a breathing apparatus in this
phylum which includes periwinkles and conniwinks. The chiton (KAI-ton) is an extremely primitive
member of this phylum, whose members possess a scraping feature used for collecting food called the
radula (RAD-yoo-luh). Among the classes found in this phylum are cephalopods, gastropods, and bivalves.
For 10 points, name this class of shelled invertebrates that includes mussels and clams.
ANSWER: mollusca [or mollusks]
This phylum's common ancestor is thought to be a Monoplacophoran. One class in this phylum
contains pairs of gills called ctenidia, and that class also has an adductor muscle. All members of this
phylum have a structure called the mantle. Another common feature in this phylum is a ribbon of
teeth support by an odontophore, called a radula, although bivalves do not have it. This phylum also
contains gastropods and cephalopods. For 10 points, name this phylum that includes snails and squids.
ANSWER: Mollusca [or mollusks]
Hypotheses regarding the phylogeny of this phylum include the Testaria hypothesis and the Aculifera
hypothesis, and the classification of Wiwaxia and Kimberella as part of this phylum is controversial.
One class belonging to this phylum is the extinct Helcionelloida, and extant classes include
Aplacophora and Scaphopoda. Some members of this phylum use (*) love darts during courtship.
Anatomical features unique to this phylum include the mantle and a tongue-like structure known as the
radula. This phylum includes the largest animal without a backbone, the giant squid, as well as other
cephalopods. FTP, name this phylum which also includes bivalves and gastropods.
ANSWER: Mollusca [or molluscs]
Certain flatworms living in the hepatopancreas of Heterobranchian members of this phylum can
cause schistosomiasis. This phylum's family Helicinidae protects itself with an operculum. The
predatory Naticidae attacks other members of this phylum, gaining access using acid and a
characteristic structure that is also used as a poisoned (*) harpoon in the family Conidae. Some
members of this phylum use a byssus to attach themselves to objects. The hyaline shield and odontophore
sandwich the chitinous ribbon used for feeding by this phylum, the radula. Members of this phylum have a
visceral mass covered by a mantle, and include bivalves and gastropods. For 10 points, name this phylum
that includes cephalopods, snails, and clams.
ANSWER: Mollusca (or molluscs)
Some members of this phylum have magnetite-coated teeth and eight overlapping shell plates, while others
are covered in photophores and can turn themselves inside out. Members of this phylum have a sense organ
called the osphradia, and an odontophore supporting a radula. They were the first to develop an efficient
excretory system. Other features of this phylum include muscular feet, which may secrete mucus, and a
mantle, which may secrete a shell. For 10 points, name this phylum containing bivalves, gastropods, and
cephalopods, which includes animals like snails, squids and clams.
ANSWER: mollusks [accept mollusca]
Studying this phylum outside of Paris inspired Jean-Baptiste Lamarck's theory of evolution of
acquired traits. The anatomy of this phylum contains a dorsal body wall that can excrete a calcium
carbonate protective layer. In addition to a "mantle," all organisms in this phylum contain a
structure that facilitates motility, called a (*) "foot." The "bivalve" organisms of this phylum typically
excrete shells. For 10 points, name this largest marine animal phylum that contains classes of gastropods
and cephalopods, and whose members include squids and clams.
ANSWER: mollusca [or molluscs]
The larvae of some organisms of this phylum are called veligers. Organisms in this phylum feed through
ribbons of tiny teeth called radula. Many organisms of this phylum can secrete calcium carbonate through
their mantle to create a dorsal covering. Other members of this phylum can create spiral shells or produce
pearls. Classes in this phylum include Cephalopoda and Gastropoda. For 10 points, name this phylum that
includes organisms like snails, squid, and clams.
ANSWER: Mollusca [or mollusks]
The trochophore is a ciliated larval stage in the life cycle of many marine organisms in this phylum. One
class of this phylum possesses excretory organs known as nephridia, and that same class undergoes a
process known as torsion, during which the internal organs rotate and the anus becomes positioned above
the head. This phylum includes (*) chitons which possess a shell divided into eight dorsal plates. Members
of this phylum have a muscular foot, a visceral mass, and a mantle, and some use a radula to scrape up food.
For 10 points, name this invertebrate phylum which includes snails, clams, and the giant squid.
ANSWER: Mollusca (or molluscs)
Primitive members of this phylum contain pairs of gills called ctenidia, and the organs of smell in
this phylum are known as osphradia. Most members of this phylum contain an odontophore, which
supports a ridged tonguelike structure known as the (*) radula, or the mantle, which is modified into
an organ of propulsion in order Cephalopoda but secretes an external shell in most other orders. For 10
points, name this phylum that contains octopi, clams, and snails.
ANSWER: Mollusca [accept Mollusks]
Like some arthropods, most members of this phylum bind oxygen to copper in a plus two oxidation
state within the metalloprotein hemocyanin, which is suspended in hemolymph. Organisms in this
phylum are characterized by the presence of a tongue-like ribbon with chitinous teeth called a radula.
Some members possess a conchiolin and calcium carbonate shell secreted by a soft mantle covering. For
10 points, name this animal phylum that contains cephalopods, such as cuttlefish, and gastropods, such
as snails.
ANSWER: Mollusca [accept mollusks]
This phylum includes organisms called limpets and nudibranches. In this phylum, organs are located in an
area called the visceral mass. Ammonites are an extinct group of animals belonging to this phylum.
Members of this phylum have a tongue-like appendage made of chitin called the radula. Their bodies are
covered by a mantle, although it is often hidden under a shell. Classes within this phylum include
Cephalopoda and Gastropoda. For 10 points, name this phylum, which includes animals such as squids,
clams, and snails.
ANSWER: Mollusca [accept mollusks]
This phylum includes the rare Monoplacophora, the only trace of which was in fossils until their
rediscovery in 1952. Members of one class in this phylum possess a lid-like structure called an operculum.
Its members contain a non-muscular region known as the visceral mass, which contains all their body
organs, and they use odontophores to support their rows of teeth, known as radulae. Classes in this phylum
include cephalopods and gastropods. For 10 points, name this invertebrate phylum that includes cuttlefish,
squids, clams, and snails.
ANSWER: Mollusca [accept Mollusks]
Organisms in this phylum have chemosensors known as osphradia, and the scaphopods in this
phylum contain light-sensing organs known as aesthetes. This phylum's second-largest class is
sometimes called Pelecypoda because organisms in that class apparently look like hatchets. A unique
class within this phylum has a closed circulatory system and contains the lowest organisms thought to
have a "true" brain. In addition to (*) Bivalvia and Cephalopoda, other classes within this phylum
include Gastropoda, which contains slugs and snails. For 10 points, name this phylum that includes octopi
and clams.
ANSWER: Mollusca [or mollusks]
The biosynthesis of the hormone that triggers this process is controlled by phantom, shade,
disembodied, and shadow, which are members of the Halloween family. The receptor central to
triggering this process is a dimer of the ultraspiracle protein fused to the EchR protein, and that
receptor is also triggered by dibenzoylhydrazine analogs. This process transitions the organism from
one instar to the next, and it is triggered by a steroid hormone called ecdysone. It results in the
creation of exuviae, and begins with a separation of the (*) cuticle from the epidermis. Some species of
spider undergo this process annually, and it ends with the organism crawling out of its old exoskeleton. For
10 points, name this process in which an insect sheds its skin.
ANSWER: molting [accept ecdysis before "ecdysone", prompt after; accept metamorphosis before "spider", prompt after; accept things like skin-shedding or exoskeleton-shedding until "exoskeleton", prompt after]
In insects, this process begins with apolysis, after which a namesake fluid is secreted into the
exuvial space, and insects are known as teneral after undergoing it. It is also called ecdysis in insects.
In birds, this process often begins at the head, and an analogous process in mammals involves the (*)
replacement of fur. This process also occurs when snakes shed their skin. For 10 points, name this process
by which an animal sheds and replaces its outer covering.
ANSWER: molting [or ecdysis before mentioned; prompt on shedding before mentioned]
The French consul Auguste Francois discovered a species of this animal, which is now commonly
named for him. Another species of this animal is found in and named for the Nilgiri Hills. Sri Lanka is the
only home of an animal of this type called the purple-faced langur. Another species of this animal found
only on the island of Borneo is named for its proboscis. These animals include lutungs, which are part of
the Old World group of these animals. For ten points, name these animals that include macaques and other
primates with tails, which differentiates them from apes.
ANSWER: monkeys [prompt on primates]
They do not exhibit secondary growth of their stems, and their vascular tissue is not arranged in concentric
rings but rather in the scattered atactostele formation. Vascular bundles in their stems feature a covering of
parenchyma but no pith, and their pollen contains only one furrow. Roots are adventitious and can develop
from buds other than the apical meristem shoot, while their stomata are arranged parallel to the long axis of
leaves, all of which feature parallel venation. FTP, name the angiosperm class of plants that contains flower
segments arranged in multiples of threes and only one seed leaf.
ANSWER: monocots or monocotyledons
P2 subtype SE plastids is a synapomorphy for this taxon. Many of these organisms have a
characteristic scutellum. The Acorus genus is thought to be the oldest branch within this taxon. They
include the large Poaceae and the Orchidaceae families. (*) In addition to coleoptiles, a protective
shealth with two mid ribs and two vascular bundles in many of them was used in the study of auxins.They
often have adventitious roots, flowers parts in parts of three, and parallel veins. They include the onion,
sugar cane, and the cereal grain family. For 10 points, name this group of plants that have a single cotyledon
or seed leaf that makes up one of the two major groups of angiosperms along with dicots.
ANSWER: monocots [accept monocotyledons]
Animals in this order are the only member of their class to have interclavicles, and the adults do
not have teeth. They do not have genetic imprinting, and the largest family in this order is
Tachyglossidae (TACK-ee-GLOSS-id-ay). One member of this order has ten sex chromosomes and a
sense of (*) electroreception. Long-beaked and short-beaked are the names given to the types of echidna in
this order, which are found exclusively in New Guinea and Australia. For 10 points, name this order of
mammals whose members, including the platypus, lay eggs.
ANSWER: monotremes [or monotremata]
Steropodon galmani belonged to this order. A species in this order secretes a substance which
uniquely contains D-amino acids in a C-type natriuretic peptide. This taxon was named for its
presence of a cloaca, though none of its members have scrota. Males of a species in this order have no
SRY gene but do have five X chromosomes. This order's genera include Ornithorhynchus,
Tachyglossus, and Zaglossus. This order branched off from today's (*) Eutheria and Metatheria around
200 million years ago. One of its species secretes a non-necrotic venom and has rows of electroreceptive
organs on its bill. For 10 points, name this order that includes echidnas and platypuses, which are mammals
that lay eggs.
ANSWER: monotremes [or monotremata]
Members of this taxonomic group lack teeth except as infants and have the ability to sense electric fields
using receptors in their snouts. They lack a corpus callosum but have a cloaca, through which oviparous
birth occurs. Males have horny spurs on their rear ankles that are sometimes venomous. Females have
glands on their abdomens which secrete milk, instead of having nipples. They live only in Australia and
New Guinea, and have bones in their jaws and ears marking them as mammals, despite contention.
Comprising their class along with Metatheria and Eutheria, for 10 points, name this order of egg-laying
mammals which includes platypuses and echidnas.
ANSWER: monotremata [or monotremes]
Although these organisms do not contain the ampullae [AAM-pyoo-lay] of Lorenzini, members of this
order do have electroreceptors in their snout. Members of this order have 10 sex chromosomes,
and they contain spurs on their ankles that can contain venom. Like marsupials, these organisms
lack a corpus callosum [kuh-LOH-sum], and this order gets its name due to the fact that its
members urinate, defecate, and reproduce using one hole, the cloaca. This order consists entirely of
echidnas [uh-KID-nuhz] and a "duck-billed" organism. Name this order of egg-laying mammals that
includes the platypus.
ANSWER: monotremes [or Monotremata]
This order split off before Metatheria and Eutheria according to the theria hypothesis. This order
uses the XY sex-determination system, but has ten sex chromosomes instead of the usual two. The
only extant genuses in this order are Ornithorhynchus, Tachyglossus and Zaglossus, which contain
five species only found in New Guinea and Australia. Instead of having nipples, this order secretes milk
through the skins of its abdomen. The male of one species in this order has venomous spurs on its hind legs.
This order of mammals has a true cloaca. For 10 points, name this order of egg-laying mammals that
includes echidnas and platypuses.
ANSWER: monotremes [or Monotremata; or echidnas or Tachyglossidae before "ten sex chromosomes"]
The "theria" hypothesis concerning this order's evolution was modified in 2005, holding that genetic
drift was responsible for their acquisition of electroreceptive abilities. Fossil evidence indicates that
this order's ancestors maintained tribosphenic molars and cynodonts in their mouths, but no known
discovery explains their ability to maintain constant body temperature in a variety of environments.
This order's most unorthodox aspect is their birthing process. For 10 points, name this order of mammals
that lays eggs, which includes the duck-billed platypus and the echidna.
ANSWER: monotremes (or monotremata; accept word forms)
The two extant subgroups of this classification are Ornithorhynchidae and Tachyglossidae. This group's
name comes from the fact that its members use a single body part for reproduction and excretion. It is not
yet known whether marsupials are more closely related to placental mammals or to these animals, which
are native to Australia. For 10 points, name this taxonomic order that includes the echidna and the
duck-billed platypus, also known as egg-laying mammals.
ANSWER: monotremes [or Monotremata]
This scientist worked with Charles Manning Child to show that a small piece of a planarian [pluh-NAR-eeun] 
could regenerate an entire organism. Following the work of William Bateson, this scientist found that
coupling and repulsion are incomplete, and before the work of Barbara McClintock, he explained Janssens'
discovery of crossover. The unit measuring genetic linkage is named for him, and he demonstrated that a
white eyed mutation is sex-linked. Name this scientist famous for his work on Drosophila [dro-soe-FEE-lah]
melanogaster, or fruit flies.
ANSWER: Thomas Hunt Morgan
Food is transported through these organisms by means of the leptome, which consists of cells surrounded by
water-conducting hydroid cells. The largest organism of this type is the Dawsonia superba which can grow
to 20 inches tall, unusual for these organisms because they only grow when hydrated. They aren't ferns, but
these organisms rely on spores rather than flowers to reproduce. They are classified, along with liverworts
and hornworts, into a division of plants that lack vascular systems. For 10 points, name these small plants
which often grow in clumps on tree bark and rocks and are classified as bryophytes.
ANSWER: mosses
Michael Majerus wrote a recent book on these organisms. J.W. Tutt proposed that changes in these
organisms were due to bird predation. H.B.D. Kettlewell studied these organisms and concluded that their
phenotypical change was due to industrial melanism. For 10 points, identify these oft-cited examples of
evolution whose darker form became prevalent due to soot.
ANSWER: peppered moths [or Biston betularia]
The "Xeno" form of this organism has humanized antibody genes, and common strains of them
include BALB/c. Cre-Lox gene targeting was developed to create knockouts in these organisms,
which have 20 chromosomes. Among the tests they are subjected to include (*) ear-clipping for genetic
samples, and transgenic ones are used to model diseases for first round drug testing. For 10 points, name
these common laboratory animals, whose cognitive ability is tested using mazes.
ANSWER: mouse [or Mus musculus or M. musculus; do NOT accept rat]
Cre-Lox recombination was developed for these organisms. Lathrop and Loeb's classic study on tumors
was conducted in these organisms, which were used to identify the CFTR gene causing cystic fibrosis.
Smithies and Capecchi pioneered an approach in which homologous DNA undergoes recombination in
embryonic stem cells from these animals, producing chimera offspring. These are the animals most
commonly subject to gene transgenesis and gene knockout. This was the first mammal to have its genome
completely sequenced. For 10 points, name these common laboratory animals with name Mus musculus,
which are smaller than rats.
ANSWER: mice [or mouse; or Mus musculus before mention; don't accept "rats"]
Variations of this technique include FLAIR. This technique, which often uses gadolinium-containing
contrast agents, is based on measuring the T1 and T2 relaxation time after an RF pulse. This technique is
dependent upon the presence of water in tissues. It is often used to diagnose muscle injuries and brain
tumors. For 10 points, name this medical imaging technique that uses the same principle as NMR.
ANSWER: MRI [or magnetic resonance imaging; prompt on NMR; prompt on nuclear magnetic resonance]
Brunner's glands secrete this substance in the small intestine. Its main components are large
glycoproteins that are rich in oligosaccharides. H. pylori causes disease by secreting molecules that
break down this substance. Produced by goblet cells, this substance is pushed along by cilia, which
are found on (*) epithelial cells. This substance, which is overproduced in cystic fibrosis, traps pathogens
and can clog the airway during infections. For 10 points, name this thick, yellowish substance expelled
from the body when coughing or blowing your nose.
ANSWER: mucus [prompt on phlegm; prompt on sputum]
Leukotrienes C4 and D4 stimulate the release of this. The proteins associated with this have regions of
tandem repeats of serine and threonine and also have membrane bound family members. It can expand
upon leaving cells by calcium ions masking charges on the molecules in it. This is associated with the
immunoglobulin class IgA. This is created by goblet cells and proteins in it are heavily glycosylated and
have many disulfide bridges allowing a gel to form. The stomach secretes this with bicarbonate as a barrier.
It usually includes lysozme and lactoferrin which impart anti-microbial abilities. Cilia help move this.
Hagfish notably make this to evade predators and cystic fibrosis sufferers have problems stemming from
production of a notably thick form. For 10 points, name this thick liquid excreted by parts of the body for
protective purposes as seen during allergies.
ANSWER: mucus
This scientist is the last namesake of a theory in which two loci mutate in order to cause hybrid
incompatibility; that model is named for him, Bateson, and Dobzhansky. This man discovered the
first balancer, which he called "CIB." Felsenstein showed that a model proposed by Fisher and this
man reproduces the Hill-Robertson effect. This man introduced the term hypomorph, neomorph,
and antimorph to describe particular (*) genetic changes. This man argued that sexual reproduction is
favored due to the accumulation of deleterious mutations by asexual organisms, a mechanism called his
namesake "ratchet." This student of Thomas Hunt Morgan used Drosophila melanogaster to study
mutation. For 10 points, name this geneticist who exposed fruit flies to X-rays.
ANSWER: Herman Joseph Muller
The severity of this disease is measured on the EDSS scale. A classic symptom of this disease is
Lhermitte's (LARE-meet's) sign. Its treatments includes a random polymer of four amino acids called
glatiramir acetate, which shifts the Th1 response to a Th2 response. Oligodendrocytes are lost in this
disease, which can be diagnosed by looking for white matter plaques on MRI. For 10 points, name this
autoimmune disease which destroys the myelin sheaths surrounding neurons.
ANSWER: multiple sclerosis [or MS]
This disease is treated by glatiramir (GLA-tir-aa-mir) acetate and interferon. The symptoms of this
disease are exacerbated by heat in Unthoff's phenomenon. An early symptom of this disease, resulting
from the degradation of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (fass-IK-yoo-lus), is the eyes being unable to
move together. This disease eventually leads to paralysis. For 10 points, name this autoimmune disease, in
which antibodies to the myelin sheath interfere with nerve transmission, known as "MS."
ANSWER: multiple sclerosis [or MS until it is read]
A 0 to 10 scale that measures the severity of this disease considers eight functional systems and is
called the EDSS. Uhthoff's phenomenon is the worsening of this condition's symptoms with increased
body temperature. Drugs like Avonex and Rebif, which are forms of interferon beta-1a, are used to
treat this disease. Symptoms of this disease can include tremors and nystagmus, which are part of a
triad named for the first man to describe this disease, (*) Jean-Martin Charcot. The scars that form in
this disease are partially due to the destruction of oligodendrocytes. For 10 points, identify this autoimmune
condition in which the conduction of signals between neurons is impaired due to the degradation of myelin
sheaths.
ANSWER: multiple sclerosis [prompt on "demyelination" until the giveaway]
Patients with this disease sometimes suffer overheating and fatigue when exposed to hot weather
thanks to Uhthoff's phenomenon, and feel the "barber chair phenomenon" when bending their heads
forward. Jean-Marie Charcot was the first to describe and name this disease, whose name refers to
scars in the brain's (*) white matter produced by the destruction of the myelin sheathes that insulate
neurons. For 10 points, name this neurological disease more common in women than men, which can cause
muscle weakness and paralysis.
ANSWER: MS [or multiple sclerosis]
Different types of these body tissues contain nebulette and nebulin proteins. A small example of these
tissues attached to hair follicles are the arrector pili [PIH-lie], which create goosebumps. Three pairs of
these tissues in the neck are called scalene. These tissues have fibrils that contain myosin and actin, which
work in conjunction to change the lengths of these. These can be classified as cardiac, skeletal, or smooth,
and these can also be classified by whether or not they are striated [STRIE-ay-ted]. Name this tissue often
connected to a bone with a tendon, including the trapezius, deltoid, and biceps.
ANSWER: muscles
The intrafusal type of this tissue is connected to the dorsal root ganglia by 1a afferents. The largest
known protein, titin, is found in this tissue, which contains nicotinic receptors on one end of a junction
traversed by acetylcholine. This tissue is divided into units called sarcomeres, which contain sliding
filaments of actin and myosin, and it comes in cardiac, smooth, and skeletal forms. For 10 points, name this
tissue which contracts when doing work and makes up the biceps.
ANSWER: muscle [or skeletal muscle before "skeletal" is read]
One action within cells of this material is facilitated by folds of the plasma membrane called T
tubules. In this material, the binding of calcium ions causes the rearrangement of proteins called the
troponin complex. The borders of units of this tissue contribute to striations by lining up with fibrils
and are called the Z lines, which are attached to (*) thin and thick filaments. The basic units of this
tissue consist of repeating light and dark bands and are called sarcomeres. For ten points, name this tissue
which experiences a namesake "contraction" due to the sliding of actin and myosin, and which supports
bones.
ANSWER: muscle
One type of this tissue consists of cells joined by intercalated disks. T-tubules are sections of the plasma
membrane, or sarcolemma, that wrap around the functional unit of this tissue, the sarcomere. The
sarcomere contains actin and myosin filaments that slide across each other to perform this tissue's most
important function. For 10 points, name this tissue that comes in smooth, cardiac, and skeletal types, which
produces movement of body parts such as the biceps.
ANSWER: muscle
This tissue's basic functional unit is activated by calcium binding to troponin-C (truh-POH-nin-"C") and is
bounded by the Z-line. That unit is called the sarcomere (SAR-co-meer). A disease that affects this tissue is
named for Duchenne and is called its "dystrophy." This tissue, which can be smooth, cardiac, or skeletal,
forms structures such as the gluteus maximus and the deltoid. For 10 points, name this tissue, which
attaches to bone and contracts in order to permit motion.
ANSWER: muscle
Cells in one type of this tissue are bundled together by perimysium. That type has indentations in
their plasma membranes known as T-tubules. Those cells also use the protein titin to connect the Z
and M lines. Another type of this tissue has cells separated by (*) intercalated disks that allow them to
act in synchrony, and is protected from tetanus by a long refractory period. Troponin and sarcomeres are
not present in one form of this tissue, which is responsible for peristalsis in the digestive tract and known as
the smooth type. Actin and myosin form the striations in the other two types of, for 10 points, what
contracting tissue that makes up the heart, tongue, and biceps?
ANSWER: muscle tissue [accept skeletal muscle tissue before "intercalated" andstriated muscle tissue before "not present"]
One type of this tissue can be identified by the presence of intercalated discs. Troponin is found in
two types of this tissue. Acetylcholine (uh-SEE-tuhl-CO-lean) binds to this tissue's nicotinic receptors
after it receives action potentials that cause the release of (*) calcium ions. Cells in this tissue are
organized into sarcomeres, and are divided into smooth, cardiac, and skeletal types. For 10 points, name
this tissue whose contraction is the source of movement for the body.
ANSWER: muscle tissue
This tissue can be described by the Hill model. This tissue is comprised of cells with multiple nuclei, and
contain T tubules in which calcium flows after being released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Cells in this
tissue primarily contain structures arranged by desmin at the Z line; those structures are sarcomeres. Fibers
of this tissue are classified as oxidative or glycolytic. This tissue can be divided into striated, smooth, and
cardiac types. For 10 points, name this tissue that is responsible for generating force and makes up the
diaphragm and biceps.
ANSWER: muscle
The malfunctioning lysosomes [LY-soh-sohmz] of Pompe [PAHM-puh] disease primarily affect this
tissue, which stores creatine [KREE-uh-tin] phosphate as an easily accessible source of energy. The
units of this tissue are the subject of the sliding filament model, and troponin is found in it. One
type of this tissue contains intercalated discs, and this tissue is made up of multinucleated cells. This
tissue contains a calcium storing organelle called the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and its basic units are
made of actin and myosin. This tissue, which is composed of sarcomeres, comes in skeletal, smooth,
and cardiac varieties. Name this tissue that contracts, allowing the body to move.
ANSWER: muscle tissue or muscles or muscular tissue [accept answers that also contain "skeletal", "smooth", "cardiac", or "striated"]
Archibald Hill's empirical equation modelling this process gives an inverse relationship
between force and velocity. Activation of dihydropyridine receptors in L-type calcium channels
signals for this process to occur. According to the most common model of this process, ATP
binding causes S1 to "cock", but then ATP hydrolysis causes it to lengthen as part of the power
stroke. Huxley and Niedergerke proposed the sliding filament model of this process, in which
cross-bridges force the Z bands closer to each other. Acetylcholine is required for activation of
this process, during which the myosin head slides along actin. In tetanus, this process is never
turned off. For 10 points, name this process in which sarcomeres are voluntarily stretched or
compressed, such as when you stretch a biceps.
ANSWER: muscle contraction [or muscle tension; or concentric contraction; or obvious equivalents; prompt on muscle movement]
One type of this illness characterized by arrhythmias and brachycardia is named for Emery and
Dreifuss. The presence of Gowers' sign and elevated creatine kinase are used to diagnose various
types of this disease, which has X-linked varieties named for Becker and Duchenne. Fibrosis and
excess adipose tissue gradually replace normal (*) myofibers in this degenerative disease. Progressive
scoliosis is a common sign of this disease, which leads to deformation of the legs and pelvis, loss of the
ability to balance, and eventual respiratory distress and death. For 10 points, name this disease characterize
by wasting of the skeletal muscle.
ANSWER: muscular dystrophy
Sufferers of this disease classically use the Gowers maneuver. It is caused by a mutation in a
protein that colocalizes with syncolin and synemin in the DGC complex. Patients with this disease
have over ten times the normal amount of CPK. The protein mutated in this disease contains 79
exons and is responsible for coupling the basal lamina to the cytoskeleton, and traverses the (*)
sarcolemma. Patients with this disease develop cardiomyopathy around age 20 and wheelchair- and
ventilator-dependence by age 13. This disease, which is a more severe form of a disease named for Becker,
is caused by very large deletions of a protein encoded by the X chromosome. For 10 points, name this
genetic disease which causes progressive muscle weakness.
ANSWER: Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy [or Duchenne MD]
One sign of this disease is patients' use of the Gowers maneuver. A recent therapy for this disease
involves oligonucleotide-mediated exon-skipping. A similar condition caused by a less-damaging mutation
in the same gene as this disease is named for Becker. Blood levels of creatine kinase are very high in this
disease, which also causes dilated cardiomyopathy without heart failure. The gene mutated in this disease
has 79 exons, and patients exhibit pseudohypertrophy and eventual respiratory failure. The gene central to
this disease, dystrophin, is located on the X-chromosome, and its mutation leads to wasting and loss of the
ability to walk. For 10 points, name this X-linked genetic disorder which causes muscle wasting.
ANSWER: Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy or DMD
An adult-onset form of this condition is induced by CTG or CCTG repeats, the myotonic form. A milder
form of this condition is named for Becker, which, like its best-known form, is X-linked recessive. Its best-
known form exhibits Gower's sign, while one aforementioned form results in drooping eyes and difficulty
swallowing, and another can require a pacemaker because of its effects on cardiac tissue. For 10 points,
name this group of genetic disorders, with one type named for Duchenne, in which sufferers have weakened
skeletal muscle.
ANSWER: muscular dystrophy
One severe type of this disease results in a mutation at Xp21, and onset usually occurs before age 5.
Gower's sign is used to diagnose that type of this disease, in which excess calcium enters and
degrades the sarcolemma. Drooping of the eyelids is a sign of the (*) myotonic form of this illness.
Along with the Duchenne (doo-SHEN) type of this disease, a less severe type named for Becker delays
complete wasting of the legs and pelvis as late as age 30. For 10 points, name this disease in which skeletal
muscle atrophies.
ANSWER: muscular dystrophy
Peter Medawar proposed that aging occurs due to the accumulation of these over time. According to
one paper by King and Jukes and another paper by Kimura, neutral examples of them become the
most widespread among a population. This process was found to occur in E. coli regardless of
whether or not they were exposed to the T1 phage in the fluctuation test performed by (*) Luria and
Delbruck. They can be classified as nonsense if they generate a premature stop codon, and they are divided
into point or frameshift types. Favorable ones lead to increased survival via natural selection. For 10 points,
name these random events in which the genetic code of an organism undergoes a spontaneous change.
ANSWER: mutations
An experiment that exposed E. coli to the T1 bacteriophage proved that selection did not give rise to these
entities; that experiment was named for Luria and Delbruck. Salmonella typhimurium is exposed to
histidine-free environments to measure a substance's ability to cause these in the Ames test. Wobble base
pairing can prevent some of these from resulting in changes in amino acid sequences. Insertion or deletion
of nucleotides may cause the "frameshift" type, while sickle-cell anemia results from the "point" type.
Carcinogens are particularly potent at causing these. For 10 points, name these changes that occur in the
nucleotide sequence of a genome.
ANSWER: mutations [accept word forms; accept "mutants" before "changes"]
These can be identified using a technique known as TILLING. Harris Bernstein discovered the "amber"
type of them, which is contrasted with the "ochre" and "opal" types. One example of the "point" variety of
these causes sickle-cell anemia, and it is also an example of the "missense" variety, since it results in valine
being encoded instead of glutamic acid. They can also be classified as "nonsense" or "frameshift." For 10
points, name these changes in DNA sequences, which may be caused by radiation.
ANSWER: mutations
The rate at which these events occur can be determined by dividing Watterson's estimator by four times
the effective population size. E. coli strains in which glycosylases are damaged are named for their high
occurence of these. Replica plated bacteria that were then subjected to a phage were used to show how
these occurrences behave randomly in the Luria-Delbruck experiment. The ability of bacteria to live on
media lacking histidine is the basis of the Ames method for testing a substance's ability to cause these.
Repair enzymes can stop these from propagating to the next generation. These events provide the variation
on which evolution acts by creating new alleles. For 10 points, name these events in which DNA changes
because of errors in replications, noxious chemicals, or radiation.
ANSWER: mutations [or mutational events]
Herman J. Muller received the 1946 Nobel Prize for inducing this phenomenon in fruit flies, and
Pearson syndrome is a pancreas disease resulting from this process in the mitochondria. The CCR5
delta-32 type of it gives humans resistance to HIV, while the pyrimidine dimer form linked to
melanoma is caused by UV rays. Proofreading by polymerase does not always prevent the severe
frameshift type of it, and point examples include silent, missense, and nonsense. These events provide
the genetic variety needed for evolution but are also responsible for diseases like cystic fibrosis and
hemophilia. Name this change to a DNA sequence that can affect the phenotype of an organism.
ANSWER: mutation [accept word forms]
Transversions are types of this change, as is the creation of a stop codon too early in the "nonsense"
examples. Sickle-cell anemia results from the point type of this phenomenon. These events may be (*)
beneficial or deleterious, and if a number of nucleotides not divisible by 3 is inserted or deleted, that is the
"frameshift" type of this event. Radiation is a common cause of this event that may lead to cancer. For 10
points, name these events that damage DNA.
ANSWER: mutation (accept point mutations)
The impact of this relationship on population density can be represented by adding positive terms to both
parts of the Lotka-Volterra equations. Exemplified by Mullerian but not Batesian mimicry, it can also be
observed when ants live inside a bull-horn acacia. This is also found in the Paris and Arum types of
arbuscular mycorrhizal [MY-kor-HEE-zul] fungi, which increases both nutrient uptake and hexose
digestion. Another example is rumen bacteria in the intestinal tracts of cows which aid in digestion and
intake some digestive products. Name this type of symbiosis in which two species both benefit.
ANSWER: mutualism [accept word forms; prompt on symbiosis or word forms thereof]
This substance can be stained using luxol fast blue. This substance is damaged as a result of defects in
the PMP22 gene, which causes type 1A Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. This substance and the
structure it typically binds to are eaten by macrophages after transection in Wallerian degeneration.
A ceramide bonded to a phosphocholine gives a type of molecule referred to as "sphingo-this." This
substance induces saltatory conduction between (*) nodes of Ranvier, and it gives white matter its white
color. Its degradation is the cause of multiple sclerosis. For 10 points, name this substance created by
oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells, whose function is to insulate the axon of a neuron.
ANSWER: myelin sheath
In mice, this substance is lost after infection with Theiler's virus, and a protein found in this
substance is not produced in Shiverer mice. Luxol fast blue is used to stain this substance, and
the primary lipid component of this substance is galactocerebroside. Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease results in this loss of this substance, and an autoimmune disease that results in the loss of
this substance is caused by autoreactive T-cells crossing the blood-brain barrier. Spaces between
complexes of this substance are called Nodes of Ranvier, and this substance serves to increase
the capacitance of the cells it surrounds. For 10 points, name this substance synthesized by
oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells, which wraps around axons.
ANSWER: myelin
Its structure was the first deduced by x-ray diffraction by Kendrew. Its Richardson ribbon
representation shows a single polypeptide of 8 alpha helix segments joined by beta turns, 153 residues
in all. Found in muscles of diving mammals, it has a hyperbolic binding curve. Consisting of a histidine
bound to 1 of the 6 coordination sites of iron II at the center of a protoporphyrin ring, For ten points, name
this protein whose heme group binds to oxygen, similar to the beta chain of hemoglobin.
ANSWER: myoglobin
The fastest-known processive motion is the seven-micrometer-per-second travel, via 35 nanometer
steps, of the type XI of these proteins in plants. Rho kinase inactivates a phosphatase affecting these
proteins, and also directly phosphorylates part of them. Most of these proteins consist of a neck next
to a long coiled-coiled tail domain. Phosphorylation of the regulatory light chain of one of these
proteins is important in the formation of a cleavage furrow during cytokinesis. In the absence of
ATP,
one of them fails to (*) unattach from its substrate, causing rigor mortis. The hydrolysis of ATP causes the
head of one of these proteins, which spans the "A" band of a sarcomere, to straighten. For 10 points name
this
class of proteins that make up thick filaments, and are involved in muscle contraction alongside actin.
ANSWER: myosin
A nuclear isoform of this protein's Class I co-localizes with RNA polymerase II and is required for
transcription initiation. This protein's Class VI is absent in the Snell's waltzer mutant; that class, class VII,
and class XV are missing or malformed in a variety of nonsyndromic hearing impairments including
Usher's syndrome. Class II of this protein contains two regulatory light chains, two essential light chains,
and two heavy chains. That class is found in the A band of a sarcomere, is connected to titin at the M line,
and makes up most of the "thick filaments." For 10 points, name this protein slides along actin to produce
muscle contraction.
ANSWER: myosin
This protein consists of two identical heavy chains, two regulatory light chains, and two essential light
chains. Each heavy chain contains an alpha helix in the neck region, which associates with the light
chains, as well as a tail domain and a globular head domain. This molecule forms the A band of the
sarcomere. When ATP is hydrolyzed, this protein's head changes shape and dissociates from an actin
filament. For 10 points, name this protein that, along with actin, is responsible for the sliding-filament
model of muscle contraction.
ANSWER: myosin
Class III of this protein appears to aid in photo-adaptation in Drosophila, and class VI is found in the
periticular necklace of sensory hair cells and is also the only of the 24 known classes directed towards the
minus end of its support. Class V is involved in vesicle transport and has a longer neck region than class II,
which has alpha-helical coiled coils in its dimerized tails, as well as essential and regulatory light chains.
Binding and hydrolysis of ATP causes conformational changes to enact their main function. For 10 points,
name these proteins that comprise the thick filaments of sarcomeres and provide the driving force for
muscle contraction.
ANSWER: myosins
Along with Hemin, this compound is needed to grow hemophilius influenzae in culture. It commonly serves
as a donor for ADP-ribosyltransferase enzymes. This compound has a single absorption peak at 259 nm and
gains a peak at 340 meters upon being converted to a related molecule. The ratio between it and that related
molecule is around 700, and one class of molecules activated by it are histone deacetylases important in
calorie restriction known as sirtuins. Its levels control the rate of glycolytic enzymes and the Krebs cycle as
a general indicator of redox states in the cell. Its reduced form is good for ten electrons in the electron
transport chain. For 10 points, name this oxidized electron carrier which is similar to NADP.
ANSWER: NAD [or Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide; accept NADH]
Binding to the P-loop of a Rossmann fold, its triple-phosphate analog is reduced in noncyclic, but not
in cyclic, photophosphorylation. Niacin is needed for its synthesis, and its oxidation by oxygen gas
provides 50 kcal of energy. Six of them are reduced for every glucose molecule passed into the Krebs
Cycle while only two are provided by glycolysis. Made of an adenine bounded to two phosphate groups,
two riboses, and nicotinamide, For ten points, name this energy-carrying molecule that acts as fuel for
oxidative phosphorylation.
ANSWER: nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (or) NADH
This molecules' namesake oxidase is mutated in most version of Chronic Granulomatous Disease and
is responsible for the phagocytic respiratory burst. This compound is required in each cycle of fatty
acid synthesis to transform the carbon-3 ketone to a hydroxyl group. This compound is generated
alongside 6-phosphoglucono-delta-lactone and ribulose-5-phosphate in the pentose (*) phosphate
pathway, which is the primary source for this compound in humans. This substance is consumed by
glutathione reductase, and in plants this compound is produced alongside ATP in the light-dependent
reactions. For 10 points, name this phosphate-containing reduced dinucleotide, an energy carrier which is
the end product of the photosynthetic electron transport chains.
ANSWER: NADPH [do NOT accept NAD or NADH]
Two molecules of this compound are a required cofactor in the rate-limiting step of cholesterol
biosynthesis, a reaction catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase. This compound reduces glutathione to
minimize damage from reactive oxygen species, and neutrophils use its namesake oxidase during
phagocytosis. In animals, this compound is made by the oxidative reactions of the pentose phosphate
cycle. This compound and ATP convert 3PG to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. It has a 2 prime (*)
phosphate group on its ribose sugar. This compound forms during non-cyclic, but not during cyclic,
electron flow. Electrons liberated from photosystem I reduce this compound, a required coenzyme for the
Calvin Cycle. For 10 points, name this dinucleotide used in photosynthesis, unlike NADH.
ANSWER: NADPH [or nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; or NADP+; do not accept or prompt on "NAD+" or "NADH"]
Aristotle argues against Empedocles's claim about heat and cold using a precursor of this theory. Howard
Odum adapted this theory to thermodynamics in the maximum power principle, and this mechanism helps
prevent the production of sterile hybrids in the Wallace effect. Trofim Lysenko argued against this theory
because it disagreed with Lamarckism, and, according to its formulator, this theory states that "favorable
variations would tend to be preserved" in the struggle for existence. For 10 points, name this mechanism
underlying The Origin of Species, espoused by Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: natural selection [prompt on "evolution"]
In a controversial interview with Der Spiegel, geneticist George Church claimed that he could
produce a clone of this creature. Numerous fossils of these animals are found in the Levant, including
nine found by Ralph Solecki near some pollen in the Shanidar Cave of the Zagros Mountain,
suggesting that they may have conducted (*) "flower burials." Svante Paabo led the Max Planck
Institute's sequencing of the genome of this Mousterian tool-using species, which confirmed that it
possessed the same variant of FOXP2 as humans, but the jury's still out on whether or not they interbred
with them. For 10 points, name this brow-ridged Pleistocene hominid species named for a German valley
and wrongly maligned for being unintelligent.
ANSWER: Neanderthals [or Homo neanderthalensis; prompt on hominids or primates or other less specific answers]
The fingers of this species exhibited large apical tufts. They used Mousterian tools, had an average cranial
capacity of 1200 to 1800 cubic centimeters, and evolved from Homo ergaster. They lived from 130,000 to
28,000 years ago, coexisting with Homo sapiens, and the back of their skulls contained a protruding
occipital bun. For 10 points, name this species of early humans whose skulls featured heavy brow ridges
and low, sloping foreheads, named for their discovery in a German valley.
ANSWER: Neanderthals [or Homo neanderthalensis]
This species used Mousterian tools made of flint and may have held burial ceremonies. This species
was shorter than Cro-Magnons, with whom they co-existed, but they probably did not interbreed.
This species became extinct, possibly due to climate change, roughly 30,000 years ago. (*) Heavy
brows and sloping foreheads were features of, for 10 points, what species closely related to modern humans
that was named for a valley in Germany?
ANSWER: Neanderthals or Neandertals (accept Homo Neanderthalensis; accept Homo Sapiens Neanderthalensis)
One of the more easterly discoveries of this group was at the Kebara Cave on Mount Carmel in
Israel. This group used the Levallois technique to produce Mousterian tools and was named for the
German valley where their fossils were first discovered in 1856. A common descendant of (*) homo
heidelbergensis along with modern humans, they may have interbred or fought with homo sapiens near
the end of the Ice Age. For 10 points, name this pre-modern hominid which possessed a large browridge
and inhabited Europe until about thirty thousand years ago.
ANSWER: Neanderthals
Relics found near Gibraltar provide evidence to this species' Mousterian culture. Recent evidence
suggests this species may have cross-bred with homo sapiens. The first evidence of this species was
discovered in 1829 at Engis, and this species is named for a German valley where several early specimens
were discovered. This species had enlarged craniums and pronounced eyebrow ridges. For 10 points, name
this close relation of modern humankind that disappeared 25,000 years ago.
ANSWER: Neanderthals
Genera in this phylum include Globodera, which features the potato cyst type, and Aphelenchoides,
which are the foliar type that live inside of leaves. Ascariasis is a common disease caused by a
namesake member of this phylum, which are the most prevalent examples of pseudo-coelomates.
They have no circulatory system but do have a complete digestive system, and one member often used
in labs was the first multi-cellular organism to have its entire genome mapped. For 10 points, name this
phylum including C. elegans, consisting of often-parasitic roundworms.
ANSWER: nematoda [or nematodes; prompt on roundworms before read]
$500 million per year in agricultural damage is done by a member of this phylum that causes cysts
in soybean plants. Members of this phylum reproduce using chitinous spicules, and the amoeba-like
sperm cells of this phylum are the only eukaryotic cells that lack G-actin. One member of this phylum
was the first animal to have its full genome sequenced. This phylum of Pseudocoelomates includes the
common model organism (*) C. Elegans, and members of this phylum that infect humans include the
hookworm. For 10 points, name this phylum that includes all roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematoda [or nematodes; prompt on "roundworms" until mentioned]
One species belonging to this phylum which is used in pest control is H. indica; that organism, along
with C. briggsae, belongs to this phylum's order of rhabditida. Members of this phylum possess a
pseudocoelem body cavity but lack a circulatory system. Mello and Fire studied one organism in this
phylum amidst their studies of RNA interference; that model organism, which was studied by Sydney
Brenner, was the first multicellular organism to have its entire genome mapped. This phylum includes the
trichinella worm and C. elegans. For 10 points, identify this phylum composed of frequently parasitic
roundworms.
ANSWER: nematoda [or nematodes; prompt on roundworms before mentioned]
Many members of this phylum have renette glands in their excretory system. Though not
priapulida (pree-ah-PUH-lih-dah), this phylum of worms is part of the group ecdysozoa
(eck-dih-SOH-zoh-ah), which are protostomes. One member of this phylum has had the
developmental of its 1,031 cells mapped. Secernentea (seh-cer-NEN-tee-ah), which is a class in this
phylum, includes the organism C. (*) elegans. The worm that causes trichinosis is a member of this
phylum. The doubly opened tube of their digestive tract separates them from flatworms. For 10 points,
name this phylum of roundworms.
ANSWER: nematoda [or nematode; prompt on "roundworms" before mentioned]
There is debate that this phylum should be split up because it is arguably polyphyletic. This phylum, along
with arthropods, and other smaller phyla, makes up a larger group called Ecdysozoa. These
pseudocoelomates possess only longitudinal muscle cells, which they contract in order to move. Sydney
Brenner did extensive work with one member of this phylum, and members of this phylum have four
peripheral nerves that run along the length of its body; those nerves create a dense ring near the pharynx and
serve as the brain. Name this phylum of roundworms which includes such organisms as C. elegans and
hookworms.
ANSWER: nematoda
Some members of this phylum go through the alternative dauer stage during development. Along with
rotifers, these organisms are capable of temporarily suspending life processes in a process known as
cryptobiosis. They are included with arthropods in a group of animals which shed their cuticles, Ecdysozoa.
One member of this phylum comes in a "wild type" N2 strain, was introduced by Sydney Brenner as a
model organism, and was the first multicellular organism to have its genome sequenced. Including C.
Elegans, For 10 points, name this phylum of roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematoda [accept Nematodes]
The drug mebendazole is used to treat diseases caused by members of this phylum, such as
trichuriasis and ascariasis. These organisms use chitinous spicules during reproduction and are
sheathed in a hard protein cuticle. These organisms possess a pseudocoelom and are one of the
simplest animals that have a two-way digestive system. Sydney Brenner extensively used one member
of this phylum, (*) C. elegans, as a model organism. Many members of this phylum are parasitic helminths,
such as hookworms and pinworms. For ten points, name this phylum of nonsegmented roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematoda (or nematodes; accept roundworms until mentioned)
The 90,000 species in this clade are traditionally divided into the paraphyletic class Adenophorea and the
more natural class Secernentea. Free-living members can be found in moist soil and in decomposing organic
matter on lake and ocean bottoms, where they play an important role in decomposition and nutrient cycling.
This clade also includes parasitic members such as Ascaris lumbricoides, which infect over 1.5 billion
people, and Trichinella spiralis, the causative agent of trichinosis. For 10 points, identify this
pseudocoelomate worm phylum whose most famous member is, the hermaphroditic model organism with
exactly 959 somatic cells, Caenorhabditis elegans.
ANSWER: Nematoda
Parasitic members of this phylum cause river blindness and elephantiasis. This phylum exhibits a
radially symmetric head but a bilaterally symmetric body. Trichinosis [trih-kih-NOH-siss] is caused
by a member of this phylum whose members are not (*) segmented and have a two-ended digestive
system without a stomach. This pseudocoelomate ["pseudo"-SEE-lum-ayt] phylum includes a model
organism studied by Sydney Brenner, called C. elegans. For 10 points, name this phylum that includes
roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematoda (accept nematodes; accept roundworms before mention; prompt on worms)
An organism from this phylum has been studied for the impact that EGL-1 has on the CED-3 protease, a
"killer" protein. In a process first observed in this phylum, Argonaute protein forms part of the RISC
complex after Dicer cleaves double-stranded RNAs. There are 959 somatic cells in a model organism from
this phylum, the organism in which Andrew Fire and Craig Mello first discovered RNA interference, and
also the organism in which Sydney Brenner studied apoptosis. Members of this phylum have a pseudocoel
serving as a hydrostatic skeleton. For 10 points, name this phylum whose members include C. elegans, a
phylum of roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematoda [or nematodes; or nemata; prompt on "roundworms" until mentioned"]
Mebendazole can be used to treat Ascariasis, a disease caused by members of this phylum. The sperm
cells of these organisms do not possess G-actin and are the only eukaryotes with that characteristic.
They are similar to rotifers in that they lack a (*) vascular blood system and possess a pseudocoelomate
body cavity. One organism from this phylum was the first to have its genome fully sequenced and has over
950 somatic cells; that organism is C Elegans. For 10 points, identify this phylum whose members consist of
Gastrotrich and other roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematodes [or Nematoda; prompt on roundworms until mentioned]
Sperm of organisms in this phylum may be the only eukaryotic cells that do not possess Gactin.
Members of this phylum, which includes genera like Heterodera and Aphelenchoides,
have a ventral nerve cord and hydrostatic skeletal system, and males reproduce using chitinized
spicules. Organisms in this phylum have a pseudocoelom body cavity and longitudinal, rather
than circular, muscles. This phylum includes the first multicellular organism to have its genome
sequenced, C. elegans. For 10 points, name this phylum of pinworms and roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematoda [or nematodes]
The genus Baylisascarius (BAY-liss-ass-CARE-ee-us) contains a parasitic member of this phylum.
Another member of this phylum was studied as a model organism by Sydney Brenner. Members of
this phylum possess sensory structures called phasmids and, like rotifers, have internal body cavities
called pseudocoels. One member of this phylum was the first organism to have its (*) genetic code
completely sequenced, and another member is named due to where it resides in its host animals, notably
dogs. For 10 points, name this phylum which includes C. elegans, pinworms, heartworms and other
roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematoda [or nematodes; prompt on roundworms before mentioned]
Strongyloidiasis is caused by a member of this phylum, three different members of which are the
causative agents of lymphatic filariasis. This phylum is divided into the classes Adenophorea and
Secernentea. Members of this phylum reproduce by using spicules to transfer amoeba-like gamete cells that
crawl into the genital pore of the female. One organism in this phylum was used by Fire and Mello to
characterize RNAi; that species' hermaphrodite contains exactly 959 somatic cells, all of which have been
fate-mapped. That organism, which was first studied by Sydney Brenner, is C. Elegans. For 10 points,
name this phylum which contains the roundworms.
ANSWER: Nematoda [or Nematodes]
Males in this phylum have special spikes made of chitin, which are inserted into the female, into whom the
amoeba-like sperm cells of this phylum literally crawl. I just described the mating habits of this
pseudocelomate phylum of worms, which includes the parasitic hookworm and biology superstar C.
Elegans.
ANSWER: nematodes (or nematoda; prompt on roundworms)
These organisms' ameboid sperm is the only eukaryotic cell known to lack G-actin. They have no circular
muscle layer and secrete a collagenous cuticle, which they molt during growth. Species in this phylum
exhibit a pseudo-coelem body cavity. Parasitic ones include hookworms and the trichinella worm, and
another species in this phylum has 959 somatic cells, C. elegans. Distantly related to platyhelminthes and
annelids, for 10 points, name this phylum consisting of roundworms.
ANSWER: nematoda or nematodes [prompt on roundworms]
One genus of this phylum, Toxocara, commonly infects cats and dogs and can cause visceral larva migrans
in humans. One species in this phylum infects the muscles of humans after ingestion of undercooked pork;
that parasite causes the disease trichinosis. RNA interference and apoptosis have been extensively studied in
a model organism from this phylum. Many members of this phylum are parasitic, such as the pinworm and
hookworm. A well-studied model organism belonging to this phylum is C. elegans. For 10 points, name this
phylum, which includes roundworms.
ANSWER: nematoda [or nematodes; accept roundworms until the end of the question]
Because these organisms have low UDP-glucuronyl transferase, chloramphenicol can cause a syndrome
in which they appear "gray." The skin of these organisms is covered by a layer known as the vernix
caseosa, and some are further covered by a layer of lanugo. They exhibit the Moro reflex and excrete a
sticky greenish material known as meconium. These creatures must breathe through their nose because, like
apes, they have a larynx located high in the throat. The health of these organisms is measured on a scale
from zero to two in each of five categories, including skin color and muscle tone; that scale is the Apgar
scale. These organisms typically feed on a steady diet of breast milk. For 10 points, name these human
beings that have just been born.
ANSWER: neonates [or newborns; or babies; or infants; or fetus; prompt on humans before mentioned]
This structure contains JG cells, which release an enzyme that leads to angiotensin (AN-geo-TEN-sin)
production and are located on the efferent arteriole (ar-TEER-ee-ole). The vasa recta wraps around a part of
this structure that is situated between the proximal and distal tubules. Molecules leave this structure
through the collecting duct. Bowman's capsule encloses the glomerulus (gluh-MER-uh-LUSS) in this
structure, which also contains the loop of Henle (HEN-lee). For 10 points, name this unit of a kidney.
ANSWER: nephron
Mesengial cells in this structure couple it to the surrounding blood vessels. One section of this structure is
the macula densa, which secretes prostaglandins that trigger hormone release from JG cells. One section of
it is surrounded by the vasa recta, and another section of it upregulates aquaporin-2 in response to
vasopressin. The vascular pole is the site where the glomerulus enters Bowman's capsule in this structure.
Consisting of both proximal and distal convoluted tubules, the Loop of Henle, and the collecting duct, for
10 points, name this functional unit of the kidney.
ANSWER: nephron [prompt on kidney before "macula densa", do not accept afterwards]
The macula densa, composed mostly of these structures, controls the GFR. These structures, which come in
juxtamedullary and cortical forms, contain a long narrow region which is permeable to sodium ions but not
water, called the ascending limb. The renin-angiotensin system is regulated by these structures, which are
affected by antidiuretic hormone. Bowman's capsule in these structures surrounds the glomerulus, and they
have a countercurrent exchange mechanism to osmoregulate through the Loop of Henle. They are vital for
blood filtration. For 10 points, name these functional units of the human kidney.
ANSWER: nephrons [prompt on "kidneys"]
Channels in this structure are affected in Liddle's syndrome, and homozygotes for mutants for a protein
found in these structures may develop diabetes insipidus. The squamous cells of one location in these
structures are contrasted with the cuboidal epithelial cells of the proximal and distal convoluted tubules, and
a capillary network in these structures is surrounded by Bowan's capsules. Vassopresin triggers the
insertion of aquaporin 2 proteins membranes of cells in these structures. Cells in the ascending limb, which
is found after the Loop of Henle in these structures have an abundance of sodium potassium pumps but are
not permeable to water. For 10 points, name these functional units of kidneys.
ANSWER: nephrons [Prompt on kidneys before mentioned]
In this tissue, the proteoglycan phosphacan inhibits cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix protein
Ng-CAM. Different cell classes of this tissue can be distinguished by staining for class four
intermediate filaments. The cross-linking protein MAP2 localizes to this tissue, which is homogenized
then repeatedly cooled and heated to purify tubulin. LFB (*) stains detect damage to lipid-rich cells of
this tissue, which can be visualized with cresyl violet because it contains aggregates of ER called Nissl
bodies. Beta-interferons are often prescribed for a disease that causes scarring in this tissue and has a
relapsing-remitting form. That disease is multiple sclerosis. This tissue is divided into white and grey matter
and contains neurons and glia. For 10 points, name this tissue that makes up the spinal cord and brain.
ANSWER: nervous tissue (accept word forms; anti-prompt on "brain" or "spinal cord tissue")
These entities can be classified as having fast, tonic, or regular spiking, and can be found in every
member of the group Eumetazoa. These entities contain tight junctions called hillocks, and nodes of
Ranvier can be found on them. Glia cells such as Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes form a
characteristic (*) sheath around parts of these entities, the deterioration of which can cause multiple
sclerosis, and the body of these cells is called the soma. Synapses are the spaces between, for ten points,
what type of myelin-sheathed cell that has both dendrites and axons?
ANSWER: Neuron (accept axon before "cells")
These cells come in pyramidal and multipolar varieties. Protein synthesis in them takes place in Nissl
(NISS-uhl) bodies. One component of them is protected by a myelin (MY-uh-lin) sheath, which may be
formed of Schwann (SHVAHN) cells. They come in afferent and efferent types, which are also known as
sensory and motor, respectively. They consist of a soma, dendrites, and an axon, and transmit impulses
across synapses. For 10 points, name these cells of the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons [accept nerve cells before "nervous"]
One type of these cells interacts with the pontine nuclei using mossy fibers. Those cells, created in the
subgranular zone, interact with a type of these cells which exhibit complex spikes or simple spikes, named
for Purkinje. They are often found near oligodendrocytes or Schwann cells, examples of glial cells. These
cells are often classified by the excitatory or inhibitory chemicals they release, including GABA and
serotonin. They typically contain a soma, a myelin sheath which covers the axon, and multiple dendrites,
which receive chemical and electrical signals through synapses. For 10 points, name these cells of the
nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons [or nerve cells before "nervous system"]
Signaling in these cells typically obeys Dale's principle. Sakmann and Neher developed a technique
commonly used to monitor these cells; that technique uses a pipet with a gigaohm seal and is called patch
clamping. The Nissl substance is the rough ER of these cells, which can also be visualized using the Golgi
stain. The hillock is the site of summation in these cells. One part of these cells ends in a bouton, which
contains vesicles filled with neurotransmitters. For 10 points, name these cells that contain long projections
called axons and that are responsible for conducting impulses in the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons [prompt on "brain cells"]
BDNF and NGF are examples of growth factors specific to these cells which can bind to Trk receptors.
During development, one part of them possesses a "growth cone" and lends its name to a "hillock"
where these cells begin to narrow. A solution of silver dichromate was used to dye these cells black by
Golgi, and nodes of Ranvier can be found on the long arms of these cells which are covered by a myelin
sheath. For 10 points, identify these cells which are used to send messages by the nervous system.
ANSWER: neuron
These entities are immersed in potassium dichromate and silver nitrate and turn black in Golgi staining.
Functioning due to changes in action potential, parts of these bodies are surrounded by Schwann cells or
glial cells and include the nodes of Ranvier, gaps in their surrounding myelin sheaths. Synaptic gaps border
these objects' axons. For 10 points, name these cells, containing many dendrites, which carry
electrochemical messages through the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons [accept axons before mention]
Examples of these cells include Purkinje cells, and certain parts of these cells are often surrounded by
Schwann cells, which are types of glial cells. The myelin sheath coats long arms of these cells and serves to
increase the speed of impulses, and the space between two of these cells is called the synapse. The soma
and dendrites are parts of these cells, and electrical impulses are conducted out of these cells by their single
long projections called axons. For 10 points, name these cells abundant in the brain that are also called
nerve cells.
ANSWER: neurons [accept nerve cells before mentioned]
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is caused by clumping of mitochondria in these structures, which synthesize
catecholamines from phenylalanine and use g-proteins to induce metabotropic effects. One disease
involving them is caused by damage to the substantia nigra, and another is caused by the formation of
plaques around them. Schwann cells and nodes of Ranvier are parts of their soma, and glial cells make up
the myelin sheath. These cells function by action potentials and employ neurotransmitters. Synapses are the
gaps between, For 10 points, what cells that possess dendrites and axons and are an integral part of the
nervous system?
ANSWER: Neurons
Early development of some of these cells are guided by netrin (NET-rin) and semaphorin
(SEM-uh-FOR-in) proteins. Historically, reticular (RET-ick-YU-lar) theory contrasted with these cells'
namesake doctrine. Examples of these cells include pyramidal cells and Purkinje (pur-KIN-jee) cells. The
cell body of one of these cells is known as the soma, and a "hillock" in these cells generates an action
potential, which is propagated down the axon. For 10 points, name these cells of the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons
Early development of some of these cells are guided by netrin (NET-rin) and semaphorin
(SEM-uh-FOR-in) proteins. Historically, reticular (RET-ick-YU-lar) theory contrasted with these cells'
namesake doctrine. Examples of these cells include pyramidal cells and Purkinje (pur-KIN-jee) cells. The
cell body of one of these cells is known as the soma, and a "hillock" in these cells generates an action
potential, which is propagated down the axon. For 10 points, name these cells of the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons
Santiago Ramon y Cajal stated that these entities communicate by contact, as opposed to continuity,
which opposed the reticular theory of Camillo Golgi. Projections from these entities begin at a location
known as a hillock, and they are supported by neighboring glial cells. The aforementioned projections from
these entities which come in contact with the synapse are known as axons, and other projections from these
entities are known as dendrites. For 10 points, identify these basic cells of the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons [accept nerve cells]
Granular bodies in these structures are named for a German whose stain revealed them, Franz Nissl. They
contain a tight junction called a hillock. Saltatory conduction is used to transport action potentials across
myelinated sheaths called Nodes of Ranvier in these structures. They receive metabolic and structural
support from neighboring glial cells. The body of these cells is called the soma, and they possess dendrites
and axons. For 10 points, name these specialized cells that connect to each other to form networks in the
body's central and peripheral nervous systems.
ANSWER: neurons [or nerve cells; or neurones; prompt on soma before read; prompt on axon before "soma"; prompt on dendrite until "hillock"]
An enolase specific to these cells is a tumor marker for small cell lung cancer, and the function of these
cells is subject to Dale's principle. Specific types of them include Betz cells and Renshaw cells. The
Fitzhugh-Nagumo model modifies an earlier mathematical model of their operation, and these cells contain
a large quantity of ribosome-rich Nissl substance. The first model of their operation was derived by
Hodgkin and Huxley using patch-clamp experiments. These cells, which are often adjacent to
oligodendrocytes or Schwann cells, have a hillock between their bodies and a long process that contains
nodes of Ranvier known as the axon. For 10 points, name these cells which communicate using action
potentials and synapses, the primary cell type of the nervous system.
ANSWER: neuron
These cells are dyed black using Golgi's method, which allowed Santiago Cajal to study the Purkinje
variety of these cells. One part of these cells has a namesake "growth cone" and "hillock" from which
it extends; the Nodes of Ranvier also form on that part of these cells. Oligodendrocytes and
astrocytes are two types of glial cells that support these cells, and the [*] sodium-potassium pump
allows them to build up electric potential. These cells are composed of a soma and dendrites, and Schwann
cells make up their myelin sheaths in the peripheral nervous system. Connecting at synapses, for 10 points,
name these basic functional cells of the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons
The TrkA (track a) receptor binds a growth factor for this type of cell. One model for the operation of
these cells is the FitzHugh-Nagumo model, which was created in response to the Hodgkin-Huxley model.
They are stained by Golgi's method. They can be afferent, efferent, or inter. Regions include the hillock and
soma. Voltage gated channels in them allow for the propagation of action potentials. They contain dendrites
and axons. For 10 points, name these cells of the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons
The function of these units was hypothesized by Ramon Cajal (cah-HALL), whose rival Golgi divided
them into two types based on length. The analog of the tight junction in these units is the hillock, which
becomes depolarized to initiate a positive feedback loop. Astrocytes can transform from glial cells to this
type of cell, which undergo saltation when action potentials propagate across successive Nodes of Ranvier.
The soma is the cell body of this type of cells, which contain the short dendrites and gaps known as
synapses. Occuring in a motor variety, for 10 points, name this basic unit of the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons [prompt on "nerve cells"]
During embryonic development, these cells undergo axophilic migration. Camillo Golgi created a
method for staining these cells. Saltatory conduction occurs between these cells. These cells undergo a
depolarization, repolarization, and hyperpolarization of their membrane potential during an action potential.
Glia support these cells, which come in "sensory" and "motor" types. For 10 points, name these cells that
have axons and dendrites and make up the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons [or motor neurons; or sensory neurons; or interneurons]
The activity of these cells can be regulated by the catabolic activity of monoamine (MAH-noh-ah-meen)
oxidase (ACKS-sih-days). Purkinje (purr-KIN-jay) cells are very large examples of these cells that respond
to GABA. These cells are activated when their hillock reaches a threshold potential of around minus 55
millivolts, generating an action potential. The terminal ends of these cells are separated from the dendrites
of their neighbors by synapses. For 10 points, name these cells that transmit signals through the nervous
system.
ANSWER: neurons
When immersed in potassium dichromate and silver nitrate, these cells turn black in Golgi staining. The
synthesis of proteins in these cells takes place in Nissl (NISS-uhl) bodies. Coming in two varieties, these
cells can come in pyramidal and multipolar varieties. Parts of these entities include the Nodes of Ranvier,
the soma, and these also possess dendrites and axons. For ten points, name these specialized cells that
connect to each other to form networks in the body's central and peripheral nervous systems.
ANSWER: Neurons [prompt on "nerve cells"]
Types of these cells include pyramid and basket cells. Myelin sheaths and nodes of Ranvier can be found on
one part of these cells. A sodium-potassium pump sets up a chemical gradient important to the function of
these cells. Glial cells support this type of cell by providing protection. These cells can transfer information
to each other by sending molecules across a synapse to a dendrite of another cell. Electrical impulses along
the axon of this type of cell are known as action potentials. For 10 points, name this type of cell, which are
found in the nervous system.
ANSWER: neurons
In adults, these cells are created in the subventricular zone, which is bounded by the ependyma. When
Substance P is released by these cells in response to nociceptive stimuli, inflammation occurs. Schwann
cells coat parts of these cells in an insulating sheath, the loss of which can lead to multiple sclerosis. They
form a primitive "net" in cnidarians, but form a more complex system that includes somatic and autonomic
branches in chordates. Astrocytes, a type of glial cell, help regulate the plasticity of the synapses between
these cells. For 10 points, name these cells whose dendrites receive signals from axons.
ANSWER: neurons [or nerve cells]
Mesotetradextrine and mesoendodextrine are two components which assist them, and the vomiting
center of the body contains high amounts of one of them. In addition to Substance P, another of these
is produced by the substantia nigra, whose degeneration can lead to Parkinson's disease. Major
inhibitory ones include glycine and GABA, while excitatory ones include serotonin and acetylcholine.
For 10 points, name these chemicals used to signal between neurons in the synapse.
ANSWER: neurotransmitters
One example of these chemicals activates receptors which can also be activated by nicotine or
muscarine. SSRIs inhibit the reuptake of one of these chemicals. They can be classified as excitatory or
inhibitory, and one example of the former type is glutamate. Parkinson's disease involves a decreased
production of one of these, dopamine. For 10 points, name these chemicals which transmit signals across
synapses, which include GABA and acetylcholine (uh-SEE-till-CO-lean).
ANSWER: neurotransmitters
This organization consists of 27 ICs, such as the NLM, which operates the NCBI. It is located in
Bethesda, Maryland. With the DOE, it was the major funder of the Human Genome Project. Its public
access policy requires researchers to provide access to papers through PubMed Central. What organization
funds medical research as part of the Department of Health and Human Services?
ANSWER: National Institutes of Health [or NIH]
DAF-2 diacetate can be used to visualize this molecule, whose synthesis is inhibited by NPA. The
enzyme that synthesizes this molecule contains both a heme and a tetrahydrobiopterin cofactor, and
its two domains are brought together in a calmodulin-dependent manner. That enzyme comes in an
inducible form, a neuronal form with an extra PDZ domain that anchors to dystrophin, and an
endothelial isoform. This molecule's release is triggered by shear stress upon endothelial cells and is
synthesized from L-arginine. This molecule activates the soluble isoform of guanylyl cyclase, leading to
increased cyclic GMP the relaxation of smooth muscle cells. Viagra increases the levels of this molecule,
which is one of the few gaseous, small signaling molecules. For 10 points, name this signaling molecule
responsible for vasodilation, which is paramagnetic and diatomic with formula NO.
ANSWER: Nitric Oxide or NO
In the substantia nigra, it leads to phosphorylation of the phosphatase 1 inhibitor DARPP-32.
Mimicked by SNP and S-nitrosothiol, it is induced by calmodulin, which becomes active when Nmethyl-d-aspartate receptor opens to let in calcium. Bound by hemoglobin, it activates guanylyl cyclase
to make cyclic GMP, similar in effect to carbon monoxide in relaxing smooth muscle. Formed via a
cysteine-nitroglycerin reaction, For ten points, name this gas and second messenger linked to Viagra, not to
confused with a similar anaesthetic gas.
ANSWER: nitric oxide (do not accept "nitrous oxide")
In bacteria, nif genes code for a process that involves both this element and an enzyme with an
iron-molybdenum complex. The rhizobia (rie-ZOE-bee-uh) in the root nodules of plants convert this
element to a certain compound. This element provides base-like characteristics to pyrimidine
(pih-RIH-mih-deen) and purine (PURE-een) and is bonded to carbon in a peptide bond. This element,
which is found in amines, is converted to ammonia via its namesake fixation. For 10 points, name this gas
that makes up eighty percent of Earth's atmosphere, with symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen [accept N before mentioned]
Oxides of this element are used to widen blood vessels. Diazotrophs like rhizobia are organisms that
"fix" this element, and are found in the roots of legumes. It is not hydrogen, but the positive end of an
amino acid has a group-the (*) amine group-containing this element. This element is excreted from the
body in urea. Ammonia consists of hydrogen and, for 10 points, what element with atomic number 7 and
symbol N?
ANSWER: nitrogen (prompt on N)
This element is incorporated into glutamine ("GLUE"-tuh-"mean") and glutamite ("GLUE"-tuh-"might")
in a process known as assimilation of this element. The presence of this element in fertilizer causes "dead
zones" in polluted water. Legumes ("LAY"-gyumez) convert this element into more biologically usable
form in a process known as this element's "fixation." For 10 points, name this element whose diatomic
("DIE"-uh-tom-ick) form is an inert gas that makes up about seventy-eight percent of the atmosphere.
ANSWER: nitrogen [or N]
One important metabolic pathway named for a compound containing this element generates ornithine
and its namesake substance, urea. Pyrimidine and purine bases, such as adenine and thymine, are often
given a name that reflects their containing this element. Bacteria fix this element by forming ammonia. For
10 points, name this element found in the amino group of amino acids, whose diatomic form is an inert gas.
ANSWER: nitrogen [or N]
The incorporation of a heavy version of this element was used to show that DNA replication is
semi-conservative in the Meselson-Stahl experiment. This element is bound to oxygen in a powerful
gaseous blood vessel dilator. The diatomic form of this element has a very strong (*) triple bond,
which is why legumes contain Rhizobia (rie-ZOH-bee-ah) in their roots to transform it into ammonia. That
process is known as this element's "fixation". For 10 points, name this element, with atomic number 7 and
symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen
The imidazole ring of histidine contains two atoms of this element, two isotopes of which were used in the
Meselson-Stahl experiment. Pseudomonas and Paracoccus species can convert compounds containing this
element to its elemental gaseous form. Purines contain five atoms of this element, which mammals excrete
in the compound urea. The symbiosis of Rhizobium and legume roots fixes this element in its namesake
cycle. For 10 points, name this element found in namesake nucleic acid bases and bound to three hydrogen
atoms in ammonia.
ANSWER: nitrogen [or N]
One important metabolic pathway named for a compound containing this element generates ornithine and
its namesake substance, urea. Pyrimidine and purine bases, such as adenine and thymine, are often given a
name that reflects their containing this element. Bacteria fix this element by forming ammonia. For 10
points, name this element found in the amino group of amino acids, whose diatomic form is an inert gas.
ANSWER: nitrogen [or N]
Functional groups featuring this element are found on either side of the carbonyl group in urea molecules,
and plants are * unable to use this element unless it has been acted upon by lightning or mycchorhizae
[mycor-izzay]. This element's namesake cycle includes its fixation by bacteria living in plant roots, and
ammonia is made up of atoms of hydrogen and this element. This element is often found along with
phosphorus and potassium in fertilizers. For 10 points, name this most abundant element in the atmosphere,
with chemical symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen [accept N before mentioned; accept hydrogen until *]
One key step in this process can occur via lightning breaking up the namesake substance or bacteria
converting it into an anion. Regardless of the method of that step occurring, that step in this process is
called fixation. This process is complete when waste is converted to the product of the Haber process via
ammonification. Name this process that circulates and reuses the most abundant element in earth's
atmosphere.
ANSWER: nitrogen cycle
The DraG and DraT ribosyltransferases control the central enzyme of this process in R Rubrum. 6cyanopurine can differentially stain bacteria that have mutations in genes controlling this process.
One organism that carries out this process operates via either the sanctions hypothesis or the
partner-choice hypothesis. Klebsilla pneumoniae is used as a model for this process. The operons that
control this process, which are partly regulated by the GlnR locus' transcription of NtrC and NtrB,
encodes a series of 20 genes and are known as the Nif operons. The presence of leghemoglobin in
structures that perform this process is necessary to remove oxygen, since that poisons the molybdenumcontaining complex central to it. Carried out by rhizobia in root nodules and involving the cleavage of a
strong triple bond, for 10 points, name this process that cleaves diatomic nitrogen into ammonia.
ANSWER: Nitrogen Fixation
Organisms in which this process occurs tend to have elevated levels of ascorbate peroxidase. Members of
genus Frankia perform this process, and it is characterized by the occurrence of a pinkish color in
leghemoglobin. It occurs in specialized cells called heterocysts in cyanobacteria, and the protein central to
this process is inactivated by oxygen, contains an iron-molybdenum complex, and is coded for by the nif
gene. The microorganisms most commonly associated with it form root nodules and are called rhizobia. For
10 points, identify this process which results in ammonification of the most common atmospheric gas.
ANSWER: nitrogen fixation
The enzyme that catalyzes this process consists of an iron component and a molybdenum-iron component
around an iron-sulfur center. It often takes place in leghemoglobin-containing root nodules, and for every
two output molecules, this process consumes sixteen ATPs. In addition to taking place in certain organisms,
this reaction can be catalyzed by lightning. It is only able to be conducted by some prokaryotes, such as
bacteria in the genus rhizobium. Name this reaction that adds hydrogen to produce ammonia from its
namesake diatomic gas.
ANSWER: nitrogen fixation
The Azolla ferns form symbiotic relationships with Anabaena cyanobacteria to help the ferns in this
process, and some cyanobacteria used specialized structures called heterocysts to perform it. Nif genes code
for the enzymes which accomplish this process in bacteria, and those complexes have an iron-molybdenum
enzyme which transfers 6 electrons by consuming 12 ATP. It is most commonly performed by plants which
have bacteria called Rhizobia in their root nodules. On the industrial scale, this is accomplished with the
help of an iron catalyst and is co-named for Carl Bosch. For 10 points, identify this process which sees the
reduction of a certain element from its oxidized form into ammonia.
ANSWER: nitrogen fixation [prompt on nitrogen reduction or equivalents]
Organisms that both perform this process and respire aerobically make use of leghemoglobin. This
process is performed by the filamentous actinomycetes, which are symbiotic with mountain lilacs,
and by (*) Rhizobium, which infect legumes to form root nodules. In this process, three successive pairs of
hydrogen atoms are added to the namesake gas to form two molecules of ammonia. For 10 points, name this
process by which a common, inert gas is converted into a biologically useful form.
ANSWER: nitrogen fixation
A. vinelandii is a model system to study this process. Homocitrate coordinates a metal ion in the
active site of an enzyme that catalyzes this process; that enzyme contains M-clusters and P-clusters.
Trichodesmium can do this process during the day, even though it is normally inhibited by oxygen.
Diimines and hydrazine are intermediates of this process. It requires 12 ATP and a net addition of
six (*) electrons. Molybdenum is a cofactor for this process. Inside legume root nodules, Rhizobia, a
diazotroph, carries out this process. It is the biological equivalent of the Haber-Bosch process. For 10
points, name this process in which ammonia is formed from a diatomic gas.
ANSWER: nitrogen fixation [prompt on partial answer]
W897X mutation in the SCN9A sodium channel causes an inability to experience this phenomenon,
which is carried by the tract of Lissauer. An initial form of this phenomenon is caused by activation of
A-delta fibers. It's not themoreception, but information about this phenomenon is carried via the
spinothalamic and trigeminal pathways, and it is depleted via selective prolonged activation of TRPV1
binding via capsaicin. This sensation is carried by small, unmyelinated C- fibers. A "referred" form of this
phenomenon occurs after insufficient oygen reception at the heart, in the form of angina. For 10 points,
identify this somatic sensation which is suppressed by endogenous opiates which produce strong analgesia.
ANSWER: nociception [accept pain or experiencing pain]
Prosimian primates that express this behavior have two K layers, whereas the only higher primates
to display this behavior are part of genus Aotus, so-named because their ears are very hard to see.
Mayfly drift is most common when they exhibit this behavior. Gordon Walls came up with a
namesake "bottleneck hypothesis" to explain how placental mammals evolved this behavior in the
Mesozoic era. Several species falsely thought to display this behavior are instead (*) crepuscular. In
animals that display this behavior, rhodopsin synthesis far outpaces its breakdown, and there are more rods
than cones. For 10 points, name this behavior, not exhibited by diurnal animals, but instead by bats, owls,
and other things that hunt at night.
ANSWER: nocturnality [or word forms; or obvious equivalents until "at night" is read]
In some cases, this process is presaged by increased recombination in the pericentromeric region of
diagrams that show this process, which lends credence to the idea that the two stages during which this can
occur are "entangled"; those two stages uniquely see this occur equally frequently in Patau syndrome. This
process can occur during meiosis I or II, depending on whether a tetrad or sister chromatids fail to unbind.
For 10 points, name this failure of genes to separate properly, which leads to monosomy or trisomy, like in
Down syndrome.
ANSWER: nondisjunction
On this continent, the excavation of a gravesite led to the discovery of a man buried with 20,000 shell
beads arranged in the shape of a falcon. The game of Chunkey was played on this continent by a
civilization that inhabited the site now known as the Monks Mound. This continent was the site of a
competition between Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Charles Marsh called the Bone Wars. This
continent, which contains a fossil-rich area called the La (*) Brea Tar Pits, also contains one of the
largest deposits of soft-tissue fossils, the Burgess Shale. This home of the Cahokia Mounds contains a giant
strike-slip fault at the Pacific Plate and the world's deepest canyon. For 10 points, name this continent,
which was the home to the Anasazi and contains the Canadian Rockies and the San Andreas Fault.
ANSWER: North America [do not accept or prompt on "America"]
Axel and Buck won a Nobel for discovering that this organ's function is performed by thousands of
G-protein coupled receptors, which send signals to cranial nerve one. When Little's Area in this organ is
exposed to dry air, a hemorrhaging known as epistaxis may result. This largely cartilaginous organ is used
for olfaction. For 10 points, name this organ with two nostrils and aroma-detection ability.
ANSWER: nose
These are a major warning sign and symptom of Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome, also known as HHT. Most
cases of them are of the anterior variety, which originate from Kiesselbach's plexus. The other type,
posterior, is more common in adults with hypertension, and they are far more serious due to more volume
and duration. Some other causes of it are von Willebrand disease, vitamin deficiencies, pressure differences
in the affected region, vasodilation, insufflated drugs, and foreign objects in the area in which they occur.
For 10 points, what is this medical condition, also known as epistaxis, that results from a rupture in the
sphenopalatine artery?
ANSWER: nosebleed [accept epistaxis before mentioned; also accept reasonable equivalents at any time]
Among the first animals to possess this structure were the fish Haikouicthys. Consisting of a core
of glycoproteins enveloped by two helices of collagen fibers, it secretes the protein sonic hedgehog
homolog, which is important in the development of neurons. It forms during (*) gastrulation by the
epiblasts that comprise the floor of the amnion cavity, and it leads to the formation of the neural plate.
Extending to the sphenoid bone, for 10 points, name this structure found in the embryos of all chordates, the
precursor of the vertebral column.
ANSWER: notochord
When cells of this structure do not fully develop, lesions called Tornwaldt's cysts can form. During
embryonic development, this structure produces a morphogen important in organ differentiation named after
Sonic the Hedgehog. It is composed of a glycoprotein core surrounded by two collagen helices, and it
served as a backbone in Haikouichthys. Though it is a defining feature of the phylum Chordata, most
chordates do not retain this structure into adulthood, though tunicates and lancelets notably do. Identify this
structure that is the precursor to the intevertebral disk, a structure found in the embryos of all chordates.
ANSWER: notochord [do not accept or prompt on "dorsal nerve chord"]
Floating head mutants in zebrafish lack this structure. It can be easily studied in ascidians
because it only consists of 40 cells. A protein secreted by this structure induces a concentration
gradient of the same protein in the floor plate. Its namesake process is formed by cells from the
primitive knot migrating away from the primitive groove. This structure develops into the nucleus
pulposus. This structure secretes (*) Sonic hedgehog homolog to establish the dorsal-ventral axis. It
induces the ectoderm to form the neural plate. This structure derived from the mesoderm is made of a
cartilage-like material. For 10 points, name this structure which is present in all vertebrate embryos, and is
the namesake of the phylum containing vertebrates.
ANSWER: notochord
The two halves of this structure are bridged and partly held together by the dimerization of
SUN and KASH domains. Proteins that support the inner surface of this structure are mutated in
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. Proteins traversing this structure do so via the Ran-GTP cycle. This
structure is traversed by a series of complexes containing proteins with phenylalanine-glycine
repeats, known as its namesake pore complexes. The space between the two halves of this
structure is contiguous with the endoplasmic reticulum, and this structure is disassembled during
prophase and reassembled in telophase. For 10 points, name this structure that consists of two
lipid bilayers, which surrounds an organelle that contains chromatin and DNA.
ANSWER: nuclear membrane [or nuclear envelope; prompt on nucleus]
KASH and SUN domains bridge this structure. Lamin proteins, which organize this structure's
breakdown during mitosis, form the "lamina" just inside this structure. This structure breaks down in
prophase, when chromatin begins to condense into chromosomes. For 10 points, name this membrane,
often called an "envelope," that encompasses an organelle that is the "control center of the cell."
ANSWER: the nuclear membrane [or or nucleus membrane; or nuclear envelope; or NE; or nucleolemma; or karyotheca; or nucleus before lamin]
Nesprin 2 Giant helps to organize and maintain this structure. The LEM domain is associated with
proteins in this location. Other important proteins here include emerin and MAN1 which are found in its
inner region. It is bridged by Nup210 and movement through that bridging substructure is controlled by
proteins like RAN and importin. One disease caused alterations to this structure is progeria which results
from mutations in its intermediate filaments called lamins. This structure contains pores and is contiguous
with the ER. It is disassembled near the end of prophase. For 10 points, name this double lipid bilayer that
surrounds the nucleus.
ANSWER: nuclear envelope [or nuclear membrane; accept nuclear lamina before Nup210 and prompt afterwards; prompt on nucleus]
The "reduction of dimensionality" model attempts to explain the selectivity of these structures. The
assembly of these structures was first studied with the use of the chelator BAPTA and lectin WGA,
and one model for their function involves the binding of the successive FG residues that line these
complexes. These structures contain a molecule called the "center plug" and one end of these
structures have a basket like shape. Hydrolysis of Ran-GTP to Ran-GDP and dissociation of Ran-GDP
with the help of Ran-GEF helps these structures perform their characteristic activity; that activity is
performed with the aid of karyopherins called importins and exportins. For 10 points, identify these
structures which are embedded in the envelope of a namesake organelle and which facilitate the transport of
molecules between that DNA containing organelle and the cytosol.
ANSWER: nuclear pores [or nuclear pore complexes; prompt on Nups or nucleoporins]
Because they bind to ERCs, their asymmetric segregation during yeast budding permits resetting of age in
the daughter cell. The spaghetti oil model posits cycles of transient binding and releasing of receptor
proteins, explaining their selectivity. The selective phase model is supported by high concentrations of
hydrogel-forming FG repeats that locally dissolve when bound to carrier molecules. Entropic bristles
formed by peripheral nups could restrict access on the cytoplasmic side. Their structure is eight-fold
symmetric and contains a basket that projects into the lumen. The RanGTP cycle regulates transport through
them via importins and exportins that bind to sequences rich in basic residues. FTP, name this structure of
the nuclear envelope through which mRNA is exported.
ANSWER: nuclear pore complex or NPC
This organelle is the localization site of the protein Treacle, whose mutation causes Treacher-Collins
syndrome. Silver staining of tumor cells reveals this organelle's namesake organizing regions, which
serve as a marker of malignancy. This structure is organized by genes on chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21,
and 22. A group of molecules that segregate to this organelle come in C/D box and H/ACA box
varieties, which are responsible for guiding methylation and (*) pseudo-uridinylation. This organelle
can be stained for using the PAF49 antibody, and this organelle is divided into the fibrillar center, the dense
fibrillary component, and the granular component. This organelle is the site of ribosome production. For 10
points, identify this small darkly staining structure found within the nucleus.
ANSWER: nucleolus [prompt on "nucleus" until mention]
Defects in this structure's proteins can cause Treacher-Collins Syndrome and spinocerebellar ataxia. The
components that make up paraspeckles form a region in this, the PNC, and in addition to its primary
function, it can store proteins and a protein associated with it, ARF, can indirectly regulate the cell cycle.
This disappears during mitosis, and reforms at sites called NORs. This structure has a fibrillar component,
which is composed of proteins and rRNA, and a granular component made up of incomplete products
waiting for export to the cytoplasm. For 10 points, name this unbound region where ribosomal subunits are
created.
ANSWER: nucleolus [accept nucleole]
This organelle is the site of p53 localization due to proteasome inhibition. Spliceosomal RNA is
regulated by the small RNA found here. During mitosis, the components of this structure are
synthesized from chromosomal organizer regions, and this structure coalesces from ten smaller
structures after cell division. It contains (*) fibrillar centers and the protein fibrillarin, which is involved
in ribosomal RNA processing. For 10 points, name this organelle in which components of ribosomes are
assembled, found within the nucleus.
ANSWER: nucleolus
The RAN cycle is involved in transport into this organelle, and proteins in this organelle's membrane
include FG porins (PORE-ins), and this organelle is suppoprted from the inside by a mesh made of lamin
(LAM-min) proteins. Erythrocytes (uh-RITH-ro-"sites") lack this organelle, and one structure inside this
organelle contains fibrillar (FIH-brill-ar) centers and synthesizes ribosomes. For 10 points, name this
organelle, which contains the majority of a cell's genetic material and thereby acts as its control center.
ANSWER: nucleus
Cajal (kuh-HALL) bodies in this structure contain scaRNAs, which direct post-transcriptional
modifications of another type of RNA unique to this structure. Transport into and out of this organelle is
dependent on a GTPase called Ran. Importins and exportins move proteins across this organelle's
membrane. A smaller organelle within this one is the site of ribosome (RYE-bo-some) production. This
organelle is surrounded by a membrane known as its "envelope," which breaks down and disintegrates
during prophase. For 10 points, name this organelle that contains much of a cell's genetic material.
ANSWER: cell nucleus
This organelle is isolated using NP-40 detergent, crushed, then imaged via autoradiography in its
namesake run-on assay. Mutations in proteins found in this organelle are responsible for
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. The Ran GTPase is used for
transport into and out of this organelle, which occurs through pore complexes. This organelle
contains both (*) speckles and coiled bodies. This structure uses intermediate filaments called lamins to
support the inner surface of its double membrane. This organelle also contains a structure responsible for
ribosome production, and is darkly staining because it contains chromatin. For 10 points, name this
organelle only present in eukaryotic cells, which contains the cell's DNA.
ANSWER: nucleus
This structure contains PML bodies and paraspeckles. The influenza virus can only replicate while
within this structure. This organelle's structure is supported by its lamina. Transcription occurs in
this organelle, which has a subunit that is the site of ribosome synthesis. This organelle has a double
membrane lined with (*) pores, the outer one of which is continuous with the rough endoplasmic
reticulum. Within it is all of the cell's genetic material, arranged into filaments called chromatin. For 10
points, name this organelle, which is often called the control center of the cell.
ANSWER: nucleus
This organelle can contain small structures made from p80/coilin called Cajal bodies. Passage of
molecules through its membrane is controlled by a pore complex. This organelle's membrane is continuous
with the endoplasmic reticulum. The most prominent structure found in this organelle assembles ribosomes.
This organelle is surrounded by a double membrane, called an envelope. For 10 points, name this control
center of the cell which contains most of a cell's genetic material.
ANSWER: nucleus
This structure was transplanted by Robert Briggs and Thomas King into a frog cell. The dye DAPI is used
to stain this structure, which contains Cajal [kah-HAHL] bodies. Importins and exportins move molecules
into and out of this structure, respectively. Intermediate filaments known as lamins line the inner surface of
this structure, which is surrounded by a double membrane. One of its substructures includes a granular
component and is a site of ribosome production. For 10 points, name this structure that contains DNA
organized into chromosomes.
ANSWER: nucleus
Irregularly shaped compartments of this organelle which change in response to cellular metabolic
activity are called paraspeckles, and promyelocytic leukemia bodies are often found in this organelle.
The biogenesis of snRNPs ["snurps"] is thought to be regulated by this organelle's (*) Cajal bodies,
and it can be visualized through Hoechst and DAPI staining. Movement in and out of these organelles is
regulated by RAN proteins at its namesake pores, and this organelle is not found in erythrocytes. This
organelle is surrounded by a namesake "envelope" which is continuous with rough ER, and it is the site of
transcription. For ten points, name this organelle only found in eukaryotes which contains the nucleolus as
well as the genetic material of the cell.
ANSWER: nucleus
One function of this organelle is the processing of ribosomal RNA and the creation of preribosomal
particles. Granules and fibrils in this organelle help transport mRNA through pores in its namesake
envelope. Introns are removed during the processing of the mRNA that results from transcription in this
organelle. For 10 points, name this membrane bound organelle that houses most of the cell's DNA.
ANSWER: nucleus [or nucleolus before granules]
Unspliced mRNA are permitted to leave this structure by the HIV-encoded protein Rev. In embryonic and
tumor cells, this structure and a smaller subpart may contain coiled accessory bodies named for Cajal. Its
surface contains pores into which larger molecules can enter or exit with the help of the transport factors
importin and exportin. This organelle is surrounded by an envelope that is in contact with the rough
endoplasmic reticulum. For 10 points, name this organelle that is only found in eukaryotes, the so-called
"control center" of the cell.
ANSWER: cell nucleus [accept nuclear membrane/envelope before "organelle"; do not accept "nucleolus"]
These structures are targeted by the DAPI stain and some proteins associated with them contain alphasolenoid and beta-propeller folds, known as its namesake pores. Syncytia contain many of these structures.
The membrane of this structure is continuous with the rough ER, and this structure contains histone proteins
strung together in chromatin. For 10 points, name this cell structure present in eukaryotes in which
transcription and DNA synthesis take place.
ANSWER: nucleus
The site of coil-shaped Cajal bodies, some of these contain about ten to thirty PML bodies. snRNP proteins
are found richly in their splicing speckles, and they can be made visible by DAPI staining. Like
mitochondria, these structures are contained in a double membrane, of which the outer one is continuous
with the rough endoplasmic reticulum, and they communicate with the cytoplasm through their namesake
pores. Parts of them produce ribosomes, and they contain histones and chromatids. For 10 points, name this
organelle whose presence distinguishes eukaryotes from prokaryotes, where a cell's DNA is stored.
ANSWER: nucleus
Transport to and from this structure is facilitated by RanGTP, which binds to importins, causing the
importins to release their cargo. 3-prime polyadenylation occurs in this organelle, which contains snRNPs
("snurps"). Lamins provide internal structure to this organelle, and are localized to the same place as NPCs.
Those NPCs contain porins, which allow passage through its membrane. Red blood cells lack this organelle,
which contains a darker region that synthesizes ribosomal RNA. Eukaryotic organisms are defined by the
presence of this organelle. For 10 points, name this organelle which contains DNA and controls the cell.
ANSWER: cellular nucleus
A defect in part of this organelle can result in the disease progeria, in which people to seem to age
prematurely. They contain irregularly shaped structures called paraspeckles and sub-organelles
called "Cajal bodies." It was the first organelle to be discovered and was once known as the
"cytoblast." These organelles consist of (*) chromatin and contain a sub-structure which helps to make
ribosomes. It is not found in prokaryotic cells and is surrounded by a membrane. For 10 points, name this
organelle which contains the cell's genetic material and is the control center.
ANSWER: nucleus [accept cytoblast until mentioned]
Karyopherins are required for the transportation of macromolecules in and out of this organelle, and Cajal
bodies for RNA processing are found in this organelle. Lamina and pores are found on the envelope of this
organelle, which is connected to the rough endoplasmic reticulum through its double membrane. Not found
in red blood cells, for 10 points, identify this organelle, where DNA transcription takes place and chromatin
is found.
ANSWER: nucleus
One structure within this organelle produces another organelle that later attaches to a structure connected to
this organelle's double membrane. Other products of this organelle exit through pores in the surrounding
envelope. During mitosis, one substance in this organelle takes shape while on structure disappears. That
structure within this organelle constructs ribosomes, which move to the adjacent endoplasmic reticulum.
FTP, name this chromatin-containing home to the nucleolus, the central "brain" organelle.
ANSWER: Nucleus [Accept nucleolus until "membrane"]
The surface of this organelle contains the CRM1 protein, which mediates leucine rich export signals and
mediates transport of the U class of certain molecules, and those molecules are modified by this organelle's
GEMS and Cajal (ca-hal) bodies. snoRNAs function in one process in this organelle, and snRNPs (snurps)
aid in the post-transcriptional modification of mRNA in this organelle. The membrane surrounding this
organelle dissolves during prophase. Ribosome synthesis occurs in a particularly dense and unbounded
region of this organelle, whose lipid bilayer has many of its namesake pores. For 10 points, name this
organelle which stores chromosomes.
ANSWER: nucleus
Antibodies to this organelle are tested for by using immunofluorescence against permeabilized HEp-2
cells. The Chelsky sequence is believed to direct proteins towards this organelle, and that sequence
was first discovered in the SV40 Large T antigen. This organelle can be extracted by using NP40
detergent. One protein complex found in this organelle contains several disordered proteins with
phenylalanine-glycine repeats. The DAPI stain is used to stain this organelle, which uses the (*) RanGTP cycle to import proteins through pore complexes. This organelle, which contains gems and Cajal
bodies, is surrounded by a double membrane called its namesake envelope, and a small darkly-staining
structure within this organelle is the site of ribosome production. For 10 points, name this organelle
exclusive to eukaryotic cells that contains DNA.
ANSWER: nucleus
Speckles in this structure contain high amounts of snRNP ("snurp") proteins. The GTPase Ran and
karyopherins help regulate transport into and out of this structure, in which Cajal bodies are found. Alphasolenoid and beta-propeller folds are found in pores on this structure's namesake double membrane, which
is continuous with the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Mature red blood cells lack this structure, which
contains a smaller organelle that is the site of ribosome synthesis. For 10 points, name this structure that
houses the cell's DNA.
ANSWER: cell nucleus [prompt on nucleolus if the buzz is on "Cajal bodies"]
One type of bodies found in these were identified by the fusion of RAR alpha with PML proteins in
promyelocytic leukemia patients. Pores in its membrane are made of proteins rich in phenylalanine and
glycine residues, and import into and export out of this structure requires karyopherins, and is regulated by
Ran proteins. Cajal bodies are also found in this organelle, which can be visualized by Hoechst or DAPI
staining. The rough endoplasmic reticulum is continuous with its double membrane, and it is the location of
mRNA splicing as well as DNA transcription. For 10 points, name this organelle which contains chromatin
that is only found in eukaryotes.
ANSWER: nucleus
This organelle is extracted intact using the NP-40 detergent. This organelle can be observed using
Hoechst staining, which helps visualize its Cajal (kuh-HAL) bodies. It has namesake "pores" that have
alpha-solenoid and beta-propeller folds. Red blood cells lack this organelle, which has one subdivision that
is the site of ribosome synthesis. It is surrounded by a namesake "envelope" and contains chromosomes.
For 10 points, name this organelle that holds much of the cell's genetic material.
ANSWER: cell nucleus
The "halo" type of these structures have radii larger than predicted by a liquid drop model. Transport of this
organelle is depicted by the RAN cycle. snRNPs [SNURPS] are found within this structure, as are bodies
named for Cajal. This organelle has a double membrane, which is lined by many pores. A subpart of this
organelle carries out ribosome synthesis. Histone proteins and chromatin are found within this, and a
namesake "envelope" surrounds this structure. This organelle is known as the "control center" of the cell.
For 10 points, name this organelle, which holds a cell's genetic information.
ANSWER: Nucleus [do not accept "nucleolus"]
This organelle's lamina helps support its shape. Some protists have both a macro and micro version of this
organelle. One part of this organelle is the location of ribosome synthesis, while importins and exportins
assist in transport in and out of this organelle. This organelle, whose envelope is continuous with the rough
endoplasmic reticulum, has pores in its double membrane. Transcription occurs within this organelle, which
disappears during mitosis as its chromatin assemble into chromosomes. For 10 points, name the control
center of the cell.
ANSWER: nucleus
Structures found within it include ones discovered by Cajal, which are thought to be involved in the
modification of snRNPs. Alpha-solenoid and beta-propeller folds can be found in the pores located on the
double membrane envelope of this structure, which is continuous with the rough endoplasmic reticulum.
Red blood cells lack this structure, which contains protein-DNA complexes called euchromatin and
heterochromatin. For 10 points, identify this organelle, which houses the cell's genetic information.
ANSWER: nucleus
This organelle shrinks during pyknosis, and their periphery can contain proteins called gems
near coiled bodies. U1 and U6 are snRNPs ("snurps") that operate within this organelle, whose
membrane maintains shape using intermediate filaments called lamins. Proteins are moved here
through (*) pores in its double membrane. A sub-organelle within it synthesizes ribosomes, and their
presence defines eukaryotic cells. For 10 points, name this organelle which stores DNA in the cell.
ANSWER: cellular nucleus [or nuclei]
This organelle contains Xrn1p in P bodies, and clusters of p80 in Cajal (cah-HAL) bodies. It also
contains small structures called speckles, which are used for splicing. This organelle is surrounded by
a lamina-supported double membrane that is continuous with the endoplasmic
(en-doh-PLAH-smick) reticulum (ree-TICK-yoo-lum). This organelle also contains a small
dark-staining body responsible for (*) ribosome production. For 10 points, name this organelle found in
eukaryotes (yoo-KAH-ree-yotes) that contains the nucleolus (new-klee-OH-luss) and stores a cell's genetic
material.
ANSWER: nucleus
The RAN protein is used for the transport of materials in and out of the pores of this organelle. Observed
with Hoechst and DAPI staining, this organelle, when found in tumors, contains Cajal bodies. Continuous
with the rough endoplasmic reticulum, this organelle is the site of histone proteins, as well as the
production of ribosomes and transcription of DNA. Not found in prokaryotes, for 10 points, name this
"control center" of the cell.
ANSWER: nucleus [or nuclei]
The genes encoding two proteins found in this organelle are mutated in Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy. A proline-tyrosine pairing is found in a non-classical signal for localization into this organelle,
which like its classical counterparts is recognized by importin A. This organelle contains "gems" that are
strongly co-localized with the coilin-containing Cajal bodies. In this organelle, apoptosis cleaves the lamin
proteins that, with intermediate filaments, form its cytoskeleton. U1 through U6 are small RNA fragments
found in this organelle which form its spliceosome. Skeletal muscle cells have more than one of this
organelle, whose outer membrane contains pores. Hetero- and eu-chromatin are found in, for 10 points,
what organelle whose histones package and order DNA?
ANSWER: nucleus
One protein found in this organelle is mutated in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria, and spaces in this
organelle can be occupied by paraspeckles. Transport into and out of this structure requires the
activation of Ran-GTP, and occurs through pore complexes. This organelle contains a small, (*)
dark-staining body that is the site of ribosome production, and most space in it is taken up by chromatin.
For 10 points, name this organelle that contains a cell's DNA.
ANSWER: nucleus
Some individuals who suffer from this condition have a higher than normal count of antibodies to AD-36
adenovirus in their bloodstream. A side effect of many amphetamines has resulted in the repurposing of
those drugs to combat this condition. Suffers from this condition are often resistant to leptin. Increased risk
of sleep apnea is one effect of this condition, which is also strongly linked with type 2 diabetes. A BMI
higher than 35 results in the "morbid" form of this condition, often caused by a sedentary lifestyle. For 10
points, name this condition, the accumulation of excess body fat.
ANSWER: obesity
This condition can be divided into "android" and "gynoid" types. It can be induced by a mutation in the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-2 or the melanocortin-4 receptor, or by a lesion in the
ventromedial hypothalamus. This condition can be diagnosed with an abnormally high value on the Siri or
Brozek indices, which correlate well with Quetelet's Index. This condition was observed in mice deficient in
leptin, though treatment with leptin was not found to reverse the severity of this condition, which is also
commonly observed in sufferers of Cushing's Syndrome. This condition leads to increased risk for Type II
diabetes and cardiovascular disease. For 10 points, name this condition in which a person is massively
overweight.
ANSWER: obesity [accept word forms; prompt on overweight; prompt on anything implying being heavier or fatter than one should be]
A region of it located near the calcarine sulcus is remarkable for a wide stripe of myelin running through it
that was once named for Felix Vicq-d'Azyr, although that line is now usually known by the name the Italian
anatomist who studied it more extensively. Because of this Stria of Gennari, this region is sometimes known
as "striated". It sits directly on top of a strip of dura mater separating it from the cerebellum known as the
tentorium, and within it are the so-called areas 17, 18, and 19 identified by Korbinian Brodmann as
responsible for visual processing. For 10 points name this lobe of the brain, a part of the cerebrum named
for the bone directly on top of it and like it named for the Latin for "to the rear of the head".
ANSWER: occipital lobe (prompt on "cerebrum" before that word is read; prompt on "stria of Gennari" before that is read)
During DNA replication in eukaryotes, flap endonucleases remove RNA nucleotides extended by DNA
polymerase III. In eukaryotes they are generally between 100 to 200 nucleotides long, while they are
between 1,000 to 2,000 nucleotides long in E. coli. Due to the antiparallel nature of DNA strands, only one
continuous strand of DNA can be synthesised at the 3' end of the leading strand. In order to compensate,
these sequences of nucleotides appear in the lagging strand of DNA. FTP, name these fragments of DNA
joined together by ligase first discovered by two namesake Japanese biologists.
ANSWER: Okazaki fragments
Recent research has shown that Pif1 directs the movement of these objects, and the cancer drug Cytarabine
causes destabilization of them. Enzymes which act on them are governed by RPA, and these objects were
first confirmed using a pulse-chase experiment with tritium-marked substrates. Enzymes like RNAse H and
FEN1 remove the RNA primers which begin these objects, and phosphodiester bonds are then formed as
they are linked together by ligase. Occurring because DNA polymerase only works in the 5-prime to 3prime direction, FTP, name these pieces of DNA formed on the lagging strand during replication, named for
a Japanese husband-and-wife team.
ANSWER: Okazaki fragments
In eukaryotes, these biological molecules are created by DNA polymerase delta. It was originally
discovered while studying E.Coli by using a pulse chase type experiment. Their formation is initiated
by RNA primers created by primase, which is later removed by endonucleolytic enzymes. DNA ligase
(*) links these molecules together using phosphodiester bonds to create a larger molecule essential to life. It
forms along the antiparallel lagging strand during the replication of that molecule. For ten points, name
these fragments of DNA that are formed discontinuously from the helicase.
ANSWER: Okazaki Fragments
These entities were proven to exist in their namesake's "pulse chase" experiment. Their creation
depends on specialized flap endonucleases and RNAse H (R-N-aze H), which remove a primer and pave
the way for DNA polymerase omega. These occur in the five-prime to three-prime direction on the
lagging strand, and are linked by DNA ligase. For 10 points, name these short segments of DNA created
during DNA replication, named for a Japanese scientist.
ANSWER: Okazaki fragments [prompt on partial answer]
Potential examples of this entity include SIS, which leads to the formation of platelet-derived growth factor,
and ERBB2, which eventually produces epidermal growth factor. One affliction is linked to one of these
known as c-L-myc, and 20% of all sufferers of afflictions due to these contain one of them from the ras
family. Its occurrence is dominant, requiring only one allele to be mutated while the other can remain in a
proto form of this genetic entity, which differs from genes like p53. For 10 points, name this antagonist to
tumor suppressor genes, a type of gene whose overexpression can lead to cancer.
ANSWER: oncogenes
J. Michael Bishop and Harold Varmus first identified these genes in chicken retroviruses; the first to be
isolated is called src ("S R C"). "Anti-" examples of these include BRCA1 and p53, while normal forms of
them often code for kinase enzymes involved in the signal transduction pathways of the cell cycle. They are
grouped in families like myc (MIHK), mas ("mass"), and ras (RAAS), the latter being active in twenty-five
percent of human carcinomas. Arising from amplification or mutations in their proto- forms, identify these
genes that transform normal cells into tumor cells.
ANSWER: oncogenes [prompt on cancer gene; do not accept "proto-oncogene"]
One condition is caused when c-myc, [see-mick] an example of these, is translocated close to the enhancer
for antibody heavy chains. The first known one was the src gene discovered in RSV. ABT737 targets one of
these named bcl2 which inhibits the formation of certain pores during apoptosis. They can be categorized
into broad classes such as growth factors, receptor tyrosine kinases, and other signaling GTPases. The two
hit-loss of function makes tumor suppressor genes potent, and has the same effect as a gain of function
mutation in one of these genes. For 10 points, name these genes that cause cancer.
ANSWER: oncogenes
In Bacillus subtilis, the attenuation of these objects is prevented by the stabilization of alternate
secondary RNA structures by proteins such as LicT, SacY, and SacT. CAP binds upstream of one of
these objects in the presence of cAMP in order to recruit RNA polymerase. That notable (*) example
of these is regulated by IPTG, which inhibits a certain repressor in order to upregulate beta-galactosidase
synthesis. First discovered in E. coli, these objects include multiple genes, a promoter, and a nearby DNA
sequence that binds repressors or activators. For 10 points, name these units that regulate gene expression,
whose most famous example is the "lac" one.
ANSWER: operon
They typically produce a single polycistronic mRNA, and one of these sequences known as araBAD
controls arabinose metabolism. The Z, Y, and A genes in one of these sequences code for permease,
transacetylase, and beta-galactosidease. Tetrameric protein repressors can prevent RNA polymerase
from binding to these (*) gene sequences, and they can produce enzymes that synthesize tryptophan
and metabolize lactose. For 10 points, name these regulatory systems in bacteria and viruses, series of
structural genes that are controlled by a promoter, like the lac one.
ANSWER: operon
Some examples of these structures has a 4 domain leader sequence whose looping changes with the
concentration of the namesake compound; those loops can be called to repress these constructs via
attenuation. The catabolite activator protein binds to other examples of these structures. A common
example of these directs the synthesis of a protein that is detected by a colorimetric hydrolysis of X-Gal.
The former is the trp [turp] one involved in tryptophan biosynthesis, while the latter codes for a permease
and a transacetylase, and is only transcribed if glucose is absent. For 10 points, name these genetic
structures that regulate gene expression in prokaryotes, whose lac type is involved in lactose metabolism.
ANSWER: operons
A famous example of these objects, studied by Ellis Englesberg, uses a protein called C to bind to two sites
at once, blocking access to the PBAP site. Like bacteriophages, they may use anti-termination. CAP bound
to cAMP can activate another more famous example of them in the presence of inducers like IPTG or
allolactose. These objects include both promoter sites and namesake stretches of DNA that bind repressors
and activators. For 10 points, name these systems of gene regulation investigated by Francois Jacob and
Jacques Monod, famous examples of which include ara, gal, trp, and lac.
ANSWER: operons
The formation of hairpin-like structures can repress these objects in a process called attenuation.
When bound to cAMP, the catabolite activator protein binds upstream of one of these objects to
recruit RNA polymerase. Their activity is regulated by IPTG and can be monitored by the
breakdown of X-gal. One of these objects produces permease, transacetylase, and (*) betagalactosidase enzymes. First discovered in E. coli, these objects include a promoter site and regions of
DNA that bind repressors or activators. For 10 points, identify these objects that regulate gene expression,
famous examples of which include the "trp" and "lac" ones.
ANSWER: Operons
One version of this type of system is activated when catabolite activator protein and cAMP
[cee-eh-em-pee] form a complex and then bind to a promoter. One of these systems is induced by
allolactose, while another is turned off in the presence of high levels of tryptophan through attenuation.
Francois Jacob and Jacques Monod developed the theory of these systems in E. coli. For 10 points, name
these inducible or repressible groups of genes that are regulated and expressed together like lac and trp
[trip].
ANSWER: operons
The first complete map of one of these structures was published in 2009 for Listeria, while the activity of
another can be detected by a blue color in the presence of X-gal. The discovery of these structures in C.
elegans ended the longstanding belief that they were confined to prokaryotes, and the work of Jacob and
Monod found that their function depends on an upstream regulatory gene. The sugar arabinose (uh-RAABih-nohs) acts as an inducer for one of these genetic structures, while tryptophan serves as a corepressor for
another, preventing the attachment of RNA polymerase (pah-LIH-mur-"ace"). Consisting of structural
genes, a promoter, and an operator, name these transcriptional units of the bacterial genome such as E.coli's
trp and lac ones.
ANSWER: operon [do not prompt on "gene"; do not accept more specific answers]
A build-up of a certain substance within a cell causes a protein named CRP to remove itself from one
of these structures. The binding of the cyclic AMP molecule to an allosteric site causes the synthesis
of one substance in these structures. One inducer associated with these structures is the isomer (*)
allolactose. These structures are blocked off from RNA polymerase by a repressor. An experiment with
E.coli revealed that these structures' functions are stopped by the buildup of glucose. For ten points, name
these sequences of DNA found in prokaryotes that have promoter sites and regulate gene expression with
types like trp and lac.
ANSWER: operons (accept lac operons)
One of these entities associated with tryptophan synthesis is altered in the presence of allolactose, and
attenuator sequences can slow down RNA polymerase as secondary feedback. A more common example is
involved in beta-galactosidase and permease production. The absence of cyclic AMP decreases expression
of that example's genes, as does the presence of glucose because the enzyme products end up producing
glucose anyway. For 10 points, identify this part of the genome regulating transcription of a gene, which
contains a promoter region, the most common example of which regulates the metabolism of lactose, the lac
one.
ANSWER: operon
Proteins involved in their regulation may include CIRCE and CAP, which binds to cAMP under conditions
of low glucose. One of these is involved in the regulation of the porin OmpG, while IS1 and IS5 are
insertion elements which cause activation of another of them. The most widely accepted model of their
function, developed after studying one coding for beta-galactoside, is named after Jacob and Monod. For
10 points, name this group of related genes, including an operator and promoter, which is transcribed
together in prokaryotes, the most famous of which is the lac one.
ANSWER: operon
If an alternate loop structure is present, these entities can terminate early in a process known as
attenuation. The mechanism of their function was discovered by Jacob and Monod. Translational repressors
of these entities contrast with their transcriptional repressors, which bind to the operator site. They also
have promoter sites, where RNA polymerase binds. In E. coli, one of them facilitates the transport and
production of lactose. For 10 points, name these sequences of prokaryotic DNA that regulate expression of
related genes, including the trp (trip) and lac types.
ANSWER: operons
One of these structures synthesizes its namesake molecule from indole-glycerol phosphate and serine, and
the fourth domain of that structure is commonly referred to as its "attenuator." The inducer IPTG is often
used in laboratories in conjunction with X-gal to detect if one of these structures is functional. These
structures are transcribed as a unit into polycistronic mRNA. One of these structures codes for a permease
enzyme and an enzyme that hydrolyzes its namesake polysaccharide, named beta-galactosidase. For 10
points, name these structures which code for several proteins that work in coordination, exemplified by the
trp ("trip") and lac ones.
ANSWER: operons [accept trp operon before "IPTG"]
One class of these substances are all derivatives of thebaine, and Salvinorin works as an
antagonist to one of these substances' receptors. The substantia gelatinosa contains several receptors
for these substances, which are released from the periaqueductal gray in the midbrain. These
substances bind to namesake delta, kappa, and mu receptors. Naloxone and naltrexone can reverse
the effects of overdose of these substances, which is fatal via respiratory (*) depression. Endogenous
peptides that mimic these substances include dynorphins, enkephalins, and endorphins. This class of
substances takes its name from alkaloid products of the poppy. For 10 points, name these substances which
include heroin and morphine, which are often used as painkillers.
ANSWER: opioids [or opiates; accept endorphins, dynorphins, or enkephalins before mention; prompt on "analgesics" or "painkillers"]
The axons of this nerve terminate in the layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus, and inflammation of this
nerve can be diagnosed by fundoscopic exam. This nerve is the site of damage in a mitochondrial disorder
named for Leber. Large tumors of the pituitary impinge on this nerve's chiasm, which causes bitemporal
hemianopia. This nerve is formed from the axons of the ganglion cells of the retina. For 10 points, name
this cranial nerve that carries signals from the eye.
ANSWER: optic nerve [or cranial nerve II or two]
This period's major index fossil is the trilobite Bathyurus extans, though trilobites declined in
importance in the late stages. The Taconic orogeny continued the mountain-building begun during
the previous period, and the Rheic Ocean formed along with the supercontinent (*) Gondwana. The
Himantian stages of this period saw mass extinctions affecting trilobites, echinoderms, and conodonts,
probably resulting from an ice age and drop in sea levels. Graptolites and clams first appeared during this
time, though most importantly, plants and animals first began to move onto land. For 10 points, identify this
geologic period between the Cambrian and Silurian periods.
ANSWER: Ordovician period
Gunter Wachtershauser proposed that this process occurred via catalyzation by iron. One step of this
process probably occurred during the Eoarchean Era and may have been the development of protobionts,
and self-replicating, catalytic ribozymes may have started this process. Alexander Oparin and J.B.S.
Haldane theorized that this process occurred after ultraviolet radiation and lightning reduced simple
molecules into organic compounds. That hypothesis of this process was demonstrated in the abiotic
synthesis of amino acids shown by Stanley Miller and Harold Urey. For 10 points, name this process that
may have occurred in the "primordial soup" of early Earth.
ANSWER: abiogenesis [or origin of life on Earth; accept obvious equivalents like the "appearance of first living cells"; prompt on "life" or equivalents]
One theory of this process proposes that the water gas shift reaction with pyrite catalysis near hydrothermal
vents was primarily responsible for it. Any theory of this process must explain the homochirality of amino
acids and the origin of compartmentalization. It may have occurred via panspermia or via the spontaneous
formation of liposome-enclosed protobionts. One experiment which simulated this process electrified a
mixture of primordial gases to yield biological macromolecules, and was conducted by Urey and Miller. For
10 points, name this process which preceded evolution, the appearance of beings capable of metabolism and
replication.
ANSWER: the origin of life on Earth [or obvious equivalents such as the beginning of life; or abiogenesis; or biopoiesis]
The author of this work spent eight years becoming an expert on barnacle anatomy and catalogued various
homologies between specimens. This work was heavily influenced by John Gould's observations of
mockingbirds, and later thinkers replaced its major concept with one of "punctuated equilibrium." This
work contains data on rheas, finches, and tortoises that the author had found on the Galapagos Islands. FTP,
identify this work inspired by voyages on the HMS Beagle, which detailed the theory of evolution by
natural selection, written by Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured
Races in the Struggle for Life
This book ends with a description of a crowded bank filled with plants and various animals; however,
this tract notably avoids mention of humans. This work uses homologous structures, biogeography, and
transitional fossils to support its major claim. It was written after the author returned from his trip to the
Galapagos on board the Beagle. For ten points, name this book proposing evolution by natural selection
written by Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured
Races in the Struggle for Life
One order of this taxonomic class of animals is known as Polypteriformes and can only be found in Africa.
That order is found in the subclass Sarcopterygii, and an infraclass of this group is known as Teleostei and
has the most members. Primitive members have ganoid scales, while more modern ones can exhibit cycloid
scales that have annuli which can be used to predict age. An operculum covering the gills is present in all
these organisms as well as a swim bladder. For 10 points, identify this class of vertebrates separated into
'fleshy-finned' and 'ray-finned,' and whose main difference with Chondrichthyes is their bony skeleton.
ANSWER: Osteichthyes [or osseous fish; or bony/boned fish until "bony"]
These multinucleated cells occupy a shallow cavity known as Howship's lacuna. They are directly
regulated by (*) calcitonin, and estrogen deficiency results in an increase in the production of interleukin 6
by these cells which can result in osetoporosis. For 10 points, name these cells derived from the monocyte
progenitor cell lineage in the bone marrow that attach to bone matrix and produce an acidic environment,
triggering bone resorption.
ANSWER: osteoclasts [do not accept osteoblasts]
One class of drugs that treats this disease has the unusual side effect of causing necrosis of the jaw; those
drugs are bisphosphonates. Like trauma, this condition can cause dowager's hump. A DEXA scan with
T-score below negative 2.5 is indicative of this disease, which becomes common after menopause and is
staved off by calcium supplements. For 10 points, name this condition in which bones become brittle and
easily broken, which usually affects older women.
ANSWER: osteoperosis
These cells contain the ZP3 glycoprotein in an extra membrane, the zona pellucida (peh-LOO-sid-uh),
which surrounds them. Fimbriae interact with these cells, which contain a germinal vesicle and form in a
process which also creates three smaller polar bodies. These haploid cells are released by the follicle, after
which they travel through the fallopian tubes. For 10 points, name these cells which develop into a zygote
and then an embryo after fertilization.
ANSWER: ova [or ovum; or egg cells]
The hilum of this organ is delineated from the insertion of the fold of the broad ligament from which
this organ is suspended by the Farre line. Condensed stromal tissue forms a layer of connective tissue
interspersed with fusiform cells that covers this organ; that layer is called the tunica albuginea.
Other specialized tissues in this organ include granulosa cells, which eventually become (*) luteal cells
thanks to the effects of FSH. A spike in LH leads a follicle in this organ to rupture, allowing a mature egg to
exit this organ and enter the fallopian tube. For 10 points, name these paired organs of the female
reproductive system that produce ova.
ANSWER: ovaries
In some organisms, a long stalk known as the funiculus anchors small particles to the wall of this
organ, which is divided into structures called locules. IP, or intraperitoneal, chemotherapy is used to
specifically treat the cancer of this organ. The infundibulum receives "primary" cells that are
arrested at prophase I after having been released from this organ. A substructure within this organ is
nourished by the hormone hCG -- that substructure is the (*) corpus luteum. This structure is the major
site of secretion for a hormone named for its involvement in gestation. The fruits of plants are actually, for
10 points, what organs that secrete progesterone, are connected by Fallopian tubes to the uterus, and are the
site of egg cell formation in women?
ANSWER: ovary [or word forms; prompt on "fruit" until mentioned]
A geological event named after this molecule was preceded by the creation of many banded iron
formations. That event led to the Huronian glaciation, when this molecule's predominance led to a
reduction of the greenhouse gas methane, leading to an ice age. This compound's abundance has been
postulated to explain the size of insects during the Carboniferous. 2.3 billion years ago, a "Great Event,"
in which this compound's levels rose dramatically, wiped out all the obligate anaerobes on Earth; that
event was caused by production of this molecule by photosynthetic cyanobacteria. For 10 points,
identify this diatomic gas, the second-most abundant in our atmosphere, which you need for respiration.
ANSWER: dioxygen [or O2]
The Kok cycle uses intermediate S states to explain the period-four damped oscillation in this reaction.
The color change of DCIP, from blue to colorless, is commonly used to demonstrate this reaction. The
protein complex in which this reaction occurs has four manganese atoms and a calcium ion. It is driven by
the extremely strong oxidizing ability of P680+. This reaction, sometimes named for Robert Hill, occurs in
the absence of carbon dioxide. It results in the production of four electrons used to replace those lost by
photosystem II chlorophyll molecules. For 10 points, name this reaction which occurs in the
light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis in which water is split to produce a diatomic gas.
ANSWER: oxygen evolution [or photolysis of water; or oxidation of water; or light-catalyzed hydrolysis ; or equivalents mentioning water being broken down to form oxygen; prompt on "light-dependent reactions" or "LDR"; prompt on "photosynthesis"]
The PsbP protein and PsbQ protein are required for this process. This reaction turns the dye DCIP
colorless. The mechanism of this process was elucidated using periodic discharges of a Joliot
electrode by Bessel Kok, who proposed that the complex responsible for catalyzing it oscillated
between five different S-states. Sometimes named for Robert Hill, this reaction is catalyzed by a
complex that contains a single calcium and four manganese atoms in a (*) cluster. Four products of this
process are later used to reduce two molecules of plastoquinone. The complex responsible for this reaction
lies on the lumen side of the thylakoid membrane, and it's driven by the oxidizing power of P680 For 10
points, name this reaction which immediately precedes the entry of electrons into photosystem II, in which
water is oxidized.
ANSWER: oxygen evolution [or water oxidation until "water" is read; or Hill reaction until "Robert Hill" is read; prompt on "photosynthesis" or "electron transport"]
Its binding sites include the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and the lateral septum. Secreted along
with neurophysin-carrier proteins, it was the first polypeptide hormone to be synthesized. It differs
from anti-diuretic hormone in two of its nine amino acids, and both it and vasopressin can be
inhibited with (*) Atosiban. This hormone stimulates contraction of alveolar myoepithelial cells and causes
the ejection of fluid into associated ducts and cisterns. Myometrial receptors for this hormone appear late in
gestation. For 10 points, what is this pituitary hormone that stimulates cervix dilation during birth and the
ejection of milk for breastfeeding.
ANSWER: oxytocin
One non-peptide agonist of this hormone is Wyeth's WAY 267,464. This hormone belongs to a class that
has a disulfide bridge between cysteine residues 1 and 6. This hormone stimulates the release of PGF2
alpha. It is found with the carrier protein neurophysin I in Herring bodies. This hormone is released in the
Ferguson reflex. It differs from a structurally similar one in having isoleucine at its third position. This was
the first peptide hormone to have it structure elucidated and synthesized. It is released from the posterior
pituitary, as is that aforementioned similar one, vasopressin. For 10 points, name this nonapeptide hormone
responsible for uterine contractions and lactation that is nicknamed the "love hormone."
ANSWER: oxytocin
The drug PRIMA-1 binds to mutant forms of this protein, and ATM kinase phosphorylates this
protein. This protein's N-terminus is intrinsically disordered and contains TAD1 and TAD2
subdomains; that N-terminus is a transactivator that binds to CBP. This protein upregulates the
expression of PUMA and it is ubiquitinated by Mdm2. This protein tetramerizes and binds to (*)
DNA in order to trigger p21 expression, which inhibits the G1 to S transition. This protein is up-regulated
in response to UV light and free-radical damage, which allows it to arrest the cell cycle or trigger apoptosis.
For 10 points, name this tumor suppressor called the "guardian angel" of the genome, named for its weight.
ANSWER: p53
This protein is ubiquitinated by Mdm2, and ubiquitin can be cleaved from it by USP7. This protein
forms a complex with Bcl-xL that is disrupted by a protein called PUMA. HPV infection leads to the
production of an inactivator of this protein called E6. This protein tetramerizes via its C-terminal
domain, allowing it to bind DNA. Mutations in this protein can lead to Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and it
activates the transcription of the WAF1 gene, which binds to CDK2. This protein can trigger DNA repair in
case of damage and can halt the cell cycle at the G1/S checkpoint. For 10 points, name this protein which
initiates apoptosis and protects against cancerous growth in the body.
ANSWER: tumor protein p53
This protein's proteasomal degradation is inhibited by ATM-dependent phosphorylation of COP1 and other
E3 ubiquitin ligases, while PPM1D can reverse its effect by inactivating Chk1 and other kinases or by
directly dephosphorylating this protein. Mutations in the gene encoding this protein are associated with a
syndrome that is diagnosed using the Chompret criteria. That condition, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, is
sometimes implicated in patients whose disease does not originate from BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Sirt1
can deacetylate this protein, leading to an inhibition of apoptosis, and more than 50% of human tumors
contain a mutation or deletion of the gene that encodes, for 10 points, what protein involved in the
regulation of the cell cycle and tumor suppression?
ANSWER: tumor protein 53 [accept p53]
In 2007, Fisher et al discovered that when stimulated by sunlight, the gene that codes for this
molecule begins the process by which skin tans. HPV produces a protein known as E6 which inhibits
the production of this molecule, while people who only possess one function gene for coding this
protein are diagnosed with Li-Fraumeri syndrome. This protein's structure consists on an N-terminal
TAD known as (*) activation domain 1 and a region rich in purine residues which is important in
regulating apoptosis. This protein is usually found inactive and bound to the protein Mdm2 but can be
activated by damage to DNA or the expression of oncogenes. Named for its apparent weight in kilodaltons,
FTP, identify this tumor-suppressing protein that regulates the cell cycle, often heralded as the 'guardian
angel of the cell.'
ANSWER: tumor protein 53
This protein cooperates with the MEG3 non-coding RNA to activated GDF15, and this protein induces
a lincRNA that binds to hnRNP-K and mediates downstream transcriptional repression. The drug RITA
up-regulates the activity of this protein. LMO3 binds to this protein through its DNA binding domain, and
this protein also contains a C-terminal tetramerization domain and a proline-rich domain. The HPV E6
protein targets this protein for degradation, as does the ubiquitin ligase mdm2. It is activated downstream of
double-stranded breaks induced by UV damage. This protein triggers the transcription of p21, which arrests
the cell at the G1/S checkpoint. For 10 points, name this innocuously named tumor suppressor, known as
the "guardian angel" of the genome.
ANSWER: tp53
Herzog et al. showed that this protein is activated by ATM kinase, and a different study showed it also
activated by ATR kinase. Along with its regulator, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, this protein is controlled by the
Wip1 gatekeeper. When the pathway named for this protein is damaged, the retinoblastoma pathway is
often damaged as well. Inheritance problems in this gene, along with CHEK2, can lead to Li-Fraumeni
Syndrome. When it binds with DNA, it generates a similarly named entity that inhibits cdk2. In humans, it
is suppressed by HDM2, a homolog of mdm2. Its production can be stimulated by bombarding DNA with
gamma or x-rays, requiring repair, and as a last resort, it induces apoptosis. For 10 points, name this tumor
suppressing protein often mutated in cancer sufferers, "the guardian of the genome.
ANSWER: p53 [or Protein 53 or Tumor Protein 53]
Co-activators of this protein include BRCA1. Discovered in 1979 by Crawford et al, mutations in
this protein often lead to a high susceptibility of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome. After getting a ubiquitin
attached to it, this protein is degraded unless USP7 interacts with it; that ubiquitin is placed on it by
MDM2, which regulates this protein. This protein can be inactivated by E6, a mechanism that HPV
uses. It is activated in response to stresses such as (*) UV rays, osmotic shock and deregulated oncogene
expression. It stimulates another protein that binds to CDK2. Its functions include activating DNA repair
proteins when DNA becomes damaged and initiating apoptosis of cells with damaged DNA. For 10 points,
name this protein whose role as a cancer inhibitor leads it to be called the "guardian angel" of the cell and
which is named for its molecular weight in kilodaltons.
ANSWER: p53 [or Tumor Protein 53]
A gating theory of this was given by Melzack and Wall, who implicate the dorsolateral tract of Lissauer
between spinal segments of Rexed lamina V. It is lost in Brown-Sequard syndrome, and potentiated by the
action of bradykinin on TRP channels. The perception of it is inhibited by the action of periaqueductal
gray, and a study by Liem et. al. claims that redheads are more susceptible to the thermal type. The fast
acute type travels via A-delta fibers toward the dorsal horn, while the dull slow type travels via C fibers.
Divided into cutaneous, visceral, somatic, or neuropathic forms, it results from stimulation of nociceptors.
This is, FTP what sensation defined as an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with
tissue damage or injury?
ANSWER: pain
The free nerve endings of nocireceptors (NOY-suh-ree-sep-torz) are responsible for producing this
feeling, which is controlled by the dorsal column and medial lemniscus (lem-NIHS-cuss). Substance P is an
inhibitory neurotransmitter on the pathway transmitting this feeling. Release of substance P is blocked by
endorphins to reduce this. It can also be reduced by opiates, such as morphine, or by analgesics. For 10
points, identify this unpleasant feeling that often results from getting hurt.
ANSWER: pain
A theory that attempts to explain this phenomenon argues the substantial gelatinosa in the dorsal
horn of the spinal cord contains a "gate" that controls it. Although it is not fever, drugs that suppress
this phenomenon include ketobemidone (KEY-toh-bem-EH-doan) and paracetamol
(PAIR-uh-CEET-uh-mall). It is caused by contact between the medial (*) epicondyle
(EH-puh-CON-dial) of the humerus and the ulnar nerve. This sense is removed by the chemicals lidocaine
and novocaine, which are both anesthetics. For 10 points, identify this feeling which may accompany burns
or broken bones.
ANSWER: pain [or nociception; prompt on touch; prompt on suffering]
In some individuals, the duct of Santorini connects this organ to the duodenum, as does this organ's main
duct, which is alternatively named for Wirsung. This organ's delta and epsilon cells produce somatostatin
and ghrelin, respectively. Glucagon is produced by this organ's alpha cells, which are found within the islets
of Langerhans. Malfunction of this organ's beta cells can cause diabetes mellitus. For 10 points, name this
organ that secretes insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
The canal of Wirsung is a channel passing through this organ, and this organ's blood supply comes in
part from branches of the splenic artery. Its tail runs along the lienorenal ligament, while its head lies
in the curve of the duodenum. The release of secretions from the gallbladder and this organ is
controlled by the sphincter of (*) Oddi. This organ secretes substances produced in its acini, like
trypsinogen, and bicarbonate into the small intenstine. This organ secretes a hormone that is stored in the
liver, breaks down glycogen, and counters another hormone that this organ produces in the beta cells of its
islets of Langerhans. For 10 points, name this organ in which glucagon and insulin are produced.
ANSWER: pancreas
This organ secretes somatostatin from its delta cells. Some people have an extra part of this organ called
the duct of Santorini. Most of this organ's enzymes exit through the duct of Wirsung, after which they enter
the common bile duct and into the duodenum. It also secretes glucagon, which opposes the effects of
another hormone it produces. This organ contains the Islets of Langerhans, and its main function is
disabled during diabetes. For 10 points, name this organ, which is situated below the stomach and secretes
insulin.
ANSWER: Pancreas
This organ's head is removed in Whipple's operation. Some people have a second duct in this organ, the
duct of Santorini. The acinar cells of this organ are stimulated by cholecystokinin (co-luh-sis-toe-KIN-in).
This organ is connected to the bile duct by the duct of Wirsung (VEER-sung). The delta cells of this organ
produce somatostatin (so-mat-oh-STAT-in), and it also produces glucagon. For 10 points, name this organ
which contains the islets of Langerhans, whose beta cells produce insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
Enzymes from this organ are released via cholecystokinin. The hormone ghrelin is produced in this
organ via the epsilon cells, while the delta cells of it produce the regulator somatostatin. Johann
Wirsung is the namesake of this organ's duct that links it to the one of the common bile. It is also home to
the islets of Langerhans. For ten points, name this organ that produces amylin along with insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
Verner-Morrison syndrome is caused by a VIP-secreting tumor in this organ, while in Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome it acquires gastrin-secreting tumors. This organ's acini secrete bicarbonate to neutralize chyme.
Like the hypothalamus, this organ secretes somatostatin through its delta cells. The alpha cells of the Islet
of Langerhans in this organ secrete glucagon, which counters another hormone produced by this organ. For
10 points, name this abdominal organ which secretes insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
This organ fails to fuse in its namesake "divisum." Zollinger-Ellison syndrome results from tumors in
its gastrin-producing areas. The duct of Santorini connects it to the duodenum in some humans, hough the
duct of Wirsung is the usual connection. Ghrelin, which stimulates hunger, is produced in its epsilon cells,
and glucagon is produced from its alpha cells. Groups of cells in this organ compose the islets of
Langerhans. For 10 points, name this endocrine organ that secretes insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
Substances in this organ express the MAF gene due to the existence of the Pdx1 transcription factor.
This organ contains a precursor to the enzyme trypsin. The delta cells of this organ produce a
substance that moderates interaction between adjacent cells and is called somatostatin. Tissue of this
organ creates C cells and is responsible for the release of (*) alpha and beta cells from the Islets of
Langerhans. One part of this organ is responsible for secreting glucagon, which helps to increase the
amount of glucose in the bloodstream. For ten points, name this organ of the endocrine system which
produces insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
If the dorsal and ventral parts of this organ fail to fuse, it is called "divisum". This organ produces
somatostatin (so-MAT-oh-STAT-in) from its delta cells. Other cells in this organ's islets of Langerhans
(LAHN-ger-HAHNS) are the alpha and beta cells, which secrete hormones that, respectively, increase and
decrease the blood sugar concentration. For 10 points, name this organ that is part of both the digestive and
endocrine (EN-doe-krinn) systems and produces glucagon and insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
A bulge on the anterior surface of this organ is called the tuber omentale. A duct leading out of this
organ attaches to the common bile duct, joining this organ to the gallbladder. One hormone secreted
by this organ inhibits the release of growth hormone, that hormone is known as somatostatin. Amylin
is produced in this organ's beta cells, found in region called the Islets of Langerhans. This organ
produces the glucagon hormone along with its opposing hormone that lowers blood glucose levels, a
substance deficient in patients with diabetes. For 10 points, name this organ that produces insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
This body is largely redundant as approximately one tenth of its volume can adequately serve its function, a
fact exploited by Whipple's operation. Abnormal stomach parietal cell activity may be symptomatic of
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, a disfunction of cells in this organ. Cholecystokinin is actually a form of its
namesake hormone. The grape-like clustering of its secretory cells leads to their being called acinar cells. It
empties via the ducts of Santorini of Wirsung into the duodenum. FTP, name this endocrine organ perhaps
best known as the sites of the islets of Langerhans, which produce glucagon and insulin.
ANSWER: the pancreas
Important transcription factors in this organ's development include neurogenin 3 and Pdx-1.
Tumors in this organ can cause Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Fluids from this organ empty into the
Duct of Wirsung. Hormomes produced here include ghrelin, and its delta cells secrete somatostatin.
(*) Alpha cells in its Islets of Langerhans produce glucagon, but it is better known for a product produced in
its beta cells. For 10 points, name this organ that secretes insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
95% of the cells in this structure occur in "grape-like" bundles around a central ductal lumen, and are
shaped like truncated pyramids. The duct of Santorini in this organ is only present in some individuals. The
duct of Wirsung leads to the ampulla of Vater, where it joins the common bile duct and collects the
secretions of the acinar cells. It also has four other types of cells, including gamma and alpha cells, which
secrete somatostatin and glucagon. Joined to the duodenum, it contains beta cells in the Islets of
Langerhans. For 10 points, name this endocrine organ which secretes digestive enzymes and insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas (prompt on "acinar cells" before "organ" is read)
The lesser end of this organ extends towards the spleen and is placed over the left kidney. The ascending
portion of the transverse meso-colon covers the convex front part of the body of this organ. The splenic
artery and vein can be found in the thick upper border of this organ, through which the Canal of Wirsung
extends from the left to right of the substance of this organ. Its secretions include chymotrypsin and trypsin,
which help break down proteins, and the sphincter of Oddi controls the release of liquids through the
Ampulla of Vater, which contains secretions from the gallbladder and this organ. The alpha cells of regions
of this organ secrete glucagon, while the beta cells secrete insulin. For 10 points, name this organ, home to
the islets of Langerhans.
ANSWER: pancreas
Glutamate decarboxylase antibodies are found in many patients with one disease of this organ. It secretes a
namesake polypeptide and produces C-peptide. Like the hypothalamus, its delta cells secrete somatostatin.
This organ's exocrine glands secrete digestive enzymes, but it also has endocrine functions performed by
the alpha and beta cells. Those cells in this organ, lying in clusters called the islet of Langerhans, secrete
glucagon and insulin. For 10 points, name this organ that regulates blood sugar and whose attack by the
immune system leads to type 1 diabetes.
ANSWER: pancreas
Cells which will eventually compose the uncinate head of this organ arise from fibroblast growth
factors. One of this organ's exocrine functions involves transferring digestive enzymes to the small
intestines, and this organ's alpha cells increase the blood-sugar level by secreting glucagon. Its
endocrine production usually occurs in the islets of Langerhans, and this organ's beta cells are important
in the study of human disease, specifically one where insulin cannot be synthesized. For 10 points, name
this organ inhibited by diabetes mellitus.
ANSWER: pancreas [accept Islets of Langerhans before it is read]
2-Monoacylglycerols (mono-a-sel-gly-cerols) are one of the products of the reaction catalyzed by
this organ's namesake lipase. Important cells here include centroacinar cells and acinar cells. The
duct of Wirsung is found in this organ and empties into the (*) duodenum. One hormone produced in
this organ is secreted by delta cells and is called somatostatin, while alpha cells in this organ are
responsible for releasing glucagon, which acts to balance another hormone found in this organ. Home to the
Islets of Langerhans, for 10 points name this organ that secretes insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
In a fetus, ghrelin is produced more in this organ than in the stomach, which is reversed in full-grown
organisms. One bulge on this organ's surface is called the omental tuber, while some people have a second
duct in this organ, known as the duct of Santorini. A lack of this organ's namesake polypeptide is linked to
obesity in rats. This organ produces trypsinogen, the zymogen form of trypsin. One type of cell in this organ
is stimulated by cholecystokinin and secretin. This organ's duct of Wirsung meets the bile duct at the
ampulla of Vater, and transports enzymes produced by its acinar cells to the duodenum. For 10 points, name
this organ whose islets of Langerhans secrete glucagon and insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
Elevated levels of a peptide produced in this organ that relaxes the smooth muscles in the GI tract can
cause WDHA syndrome. That peptide is VIP. Epsilon cells in one structure found in this organ produce
ghrelin. Another 28 amino acid long hormone produced by this organ inhibits growth hormone. This
organ's delta cells produce somatostatin. Cell clusters of alpha and beta cells in this organ are known as
Islets of Langerhans and produce glucagon. For 10 points, name this organ that produces insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
The lower and left lateral portions of this organ form the uncinate process, and many of its products
empty through the duct of Wirsung. It is primarily composed of acinar cells, while other portions of
it have recently been discovered to produce ghrelin in epsilon cells, along with somatostatin in delta
cells. Its exocrine portions produce enterokinase, its namesake lipase, and trypsin, which are secreted into
the duodenum. For 10 points, name this organ whose alpha and beta cells of the islets of Langerhans
produce glucagon and insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
In teleost fish and lagomorphs, this organ is not distinct but instead has its tissue spread about the
mesentary and sometimes incorporated into the spleen or liver. A disease that produces tumors in
this organ can result in a dangerously high production of HCl in the stomach and is known as
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. The omental tuber joins the main body of this organ to its "neck" which
is in turn separated from its (*) "uncinate process" by a namesake notch. This organ is connected to the
bile duct via the Duct of Wirsung and this organ's namesake polypeptide hormone is inhibited by another of
this organ's hormones. That hormone acts against the effects of HGH, gastrin and secretin, is produced by
this organ's delta cells and is called somatostatin. Emptying into the duodenum, for 10 points, name this
organ that produces chemicals like glucagon from its beta and alpha cells of the Islets of Langerhans, also
the site of insulin production.
ANSWER: Pancreas
This body's exocrine component, arranged in its namesake acini, is composed of centroacinar and
basophilic cells, which secrete bicarbonate and other enzymes. Its endocrine component is composed of
four kinds of cells, named after Greek letters. A common autoimmune disease disrupts function in this
organ, often manifesting as ketoacidosis. Cancer in this organ may be treated by the Whipple procedure,
which allows blood to pass to the duodenum despite removing the head of this organ. Name this digestive
and endocrine organ which produces glucagon and insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
Cysts form on this organ in cystic fibrosis patients. This organ's duct of Wirsung connects it to the common
bile duct at the ampulla of Vater, and gallstones in those areas can cause this to enlarge. This organ is
difficult to operate on, which is a major reason that its cancers have a high mortality rate. It contains alpha,
beta, delta, and epsilon cells in its Islets of Langerhans. Name this organ that produces glucagon and the
hormone which opposes glucagon in controlling blood-sugar levels, insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
Frey's procedure is used to treat inflammation of this organ, and the Whipple Procedure involves the
removal of its head. Endoscopic ultrasonography is often used to detect the tumors on this organ that are
caused by Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. The head of this yellowish organ contains the duct of Wirsung,
which is connected to the duodenum, and its tail stretches behind the stomach. For 10 points, name this
organ that is home to the islets of Langerhans and produces a namesake juice.
ANSWER: pancreas
This organ's namesake "tail" produces its namesake polypeptide in PP cells, and the hormone CCK
stimulates its acinar cells. A secondary duct here is called the duct of Santorini, and this organ
secretes chemicals into the duct of Wirsung, which joins the common bile duct at the ampulla of
Vater. Ghrelin is produced in the [*] epsilon cells here, and this organ also produces amylin and
somatostatin. This organ has both endocrine and exocrine functions, and alpha and beta cells in the Islets of
Langerhans in it produce hormones regulating blood glucose levels. For 10 points, identify this organ that
produces glucagon and insulin.
ANSWER: pancreas
The fashion designer Ruth Harkness brought back the first live one of these animals to the
United States. The only two of these animals found in the Southern Hemisphere are at the
Adelaide Zoo, with the female being named Funi. The World Wildlife Fund helped set up the
Wolong National Nature Reserve to protect these endangered animals. A pair of musk oxen was
sent to another country by the American President after the U.S. received two of these animals in
1972. Its "thumb" was the subject of an essay collection by Stephen Jay Gould. This animal,
which mostly lives in mountain ranges in the Sichuan province, has a diet that is over ninety-nine
percent bamboo. For 10 points, name this bear native to China, which has black patches around
its eyes.
ANSWER: giant panda [do not accept "red panda"]
Holospora obtusa can have a symbiotic relationship with the caudatum variety of this organism,
while bursaria can host photosynthetic endosymbionts. Didinium almost exclusively consumes this
organism, whose (*) macronucleus can contain eight hundred copies of a chromosome. Like similar
organisms, this organism ingests via a cytostome and uses contractile vacuoles. For ten points, name this
freshwater ciliate which moves about thanks to the cilia covering its body.
ANSWER: paramecium
Like fungi or lichens, one species of these organisms, bursaria, forms an endosymbiotic relationship with
photosynthetic algae. They are preyed upon by Didinium, and may eject trichocysts if disturbed. They can
reproduce both sexually and asexually. Like other ciliates, they have a highly polyploid macronucleus, and a
diploid micronucleus, which is exchanged during conjugation. Their distinctive appearance is characterized
by a prominent oral groove, cilia, and their oblong, slipper-like shape. For 10 points, name this genus of
protozoans, a model organism in biology.
ANSWER: Paramecium or paramecia [prompt on ciliates until mentioned]
In the presence of these organisms, humans and other mammals produce large amounts of
Immunoglobulin E. They are grouped on scales such as infrapopulations, metacommunities, and
infracommunities, and cuckoos are the "brood" kind of these organisms since they rely on other
birds to care for their young. Some members of the (*) "endo" type of these organisms can be targeted
by anthelmintic medication. Diseases caused by these kinds of organisms include elephantiasis, Lyme
disease, and bubonic plague. For ten points, name these organisms which benefit to the detriment of a host
organism, examples of which include tapeworms and fleas.
ANSWER: parasites (accept parasitism or word forms; prompt on "worms" or "helminths" until "brood" is mentioned)
The "animalcules" observed on fleas by Leeuwenhoek (LAY-ven-"hook") are an example of the "epi"
form of these organisms. The "corpse flower" Rafflesia is one of these, as is Trypanosoma brucei
(trip-ANN-oh-soh-mah BROO-see), the cause of sleeping sickness. Including such pathogens as
Plasmodium and tapeworms, for 10 points, identify this type of organism which, as part of a namesake
relationship, benefits at the cost of its host.
ANSWER: parasite [or word forms; prompt on symbiont or word forms]
The Red Queen's Hypothesis describes how this phenomenon results in counter-adaptation, leading to a
biological "arms race." The European Cuckoo engages in the brood type of this interaction by laying an egg
in the nest of another species. Myco-heterotrophy is a form of this interaction in which a plant unable to
undergo photosynthesis establishes this relationship with a fungus. Common examples of this relationship
occur between fleas and dogs and between tapeworms and humans. For 10 points, name this relationship
between organisms in which one side benefits while causing harm to its host.
ANSWER: Parasitism [accept word forms]
Jansen's chondrodysplasia results when the receptor for this compound is hyperactivated. The gland that
secretes this substance contains large, pale oxyphil cells, but this compound is secreted from its chief cells.
It stimulates increased production of the Vitamin D and absorption of phosphate by the kidney. Its most
important function is opposed by calcitonin and involves upregulation of osteoclasts. For 10 points, name
this hormone that breaks down bone and increases blood calcium levels, which is secreted from a similarly
named cluster of glands in the neck.
ANSWER: parathyroid hormone [do not accept or prompt on "thyroid"]
This term, contrasted with the stroma, can refer to functional parts of an organ in the body such as the
alveoli in the lungs. In its common use, it is a type of cell that serves a secretory function inside resin ducts
and typically has only one cell wall for regeneration. These cells are also responsible for both storage and
photosynthesis, and they make up the pith in the stems of vascular plants. For 10 points, identify these plant
cells making up most common ground tissue and forming the spongy mesophyll layer in leaves.
ANSWER: parenchymal cells
The development of this disease has been linked to the consumption of MPTP by heroin addicts, and a point
mutation on the LRRK2 gene is another risk indicator. The development of this disease is also identified by
the presence of Lewy bodies, which contain large quantities of ubiquitin, and by the disappearance of the
substantia nigra portion of the basal ganglia. Injections of GNDF can slow neuron loss associated with this
disease. Treated by levodopa, the most common symptoms of this disease are triggered by a roughly 80%
decrease in the production of dopamine. For 10 points, identify this disease, named for the author of an
1817 Essay on the Shaking Palsy.
ANSWER: Parkinson's Disease
In 2009, it was found that sufferers of Gaucher's disease had a higher risk for this disease because of
mutations in GBA. Selegiline is one drug used to treat this disease, and it functions as an MAO-B inhibitor.
In this disease, ubiquitin forms complexes with alpha-synuclein, leading to Lewy body formation in the
substantia nigra. William Knowles and Arvid Carlsson both won Nobel Prizes for their work on a treatment
for this disease that can cross the blood-brain barrier, called L-DOPA. Name this disease, with symptoms
such as shaking, rigidity, and slowness of movement, which is caused by a lack of dopamine in the brain.
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease [or PD]
This disease can be acquired through the introduction of the MPTP toxin and observable signs of it include
alpha-synuclein aggregates and Lewy bodies. This disease was renamed by Jean-Martin Charcot in honor of
the physician who first described it. Mainly treated with levodopa, damage in the substantia nigra causes the
death of dopamine-producing neurons in this disease, which is also known as "the shaking palsy." For ten
points, name this neurodegenerative disease characterized by a tremors and difficulties in muscle
movement.
ANSWER: Parkinson's Disease
The progression of this disease's symptoms is traced by the Hoehn and Yahr scale. People suffering
from it develop abnormal proteins called Lewy bodies. This disease affects the basal ganglia
(GANG-lee-uh) and can result in bradykinesia (bray-dee-kie-NEE-see-uh). It is treated with L-DOPA
because its effects are caused by the death of dopamine-secreting cells. This disease was named for an
English doctor who wrote An Essay on the Shaking Palsy. For 10 points, name this degenerative disorder
which is noted for causing movement-related symptoms, such as uncontrollable shaking.
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease [or paralysis agitans; or parkinsonism]
The most common protein mutated in this disease is dardarin, and it must be carefully distinguished from
conditions such as progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration. Its pathology is
characterized by alpha-synuclein accumulating into Lewy bodies. Its chief feature is described as "pillrolling," because it is not an action tremor. For ten points, name this neurodegenerative condition caused by
the death of the substantia nigra's dopaminergic neurons and characterized by rigidity and shaking,
prominently endured by Michael J. Fox.
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease
Mutations in the LRRK2 gene, which codes for dardarin, have been shown to increase the risk of
Crohn's disease and this disease. Blocking the A2A receptor is being looked into as a potential
palliative treatment for this disease, and MAO-B inhibitors are in current usage. It's not
Alzheimer's, but Braak staging and the Hoehn and Yahr scale are used to measure the progression of
this disease. This disease causes the accumulation of alpha-synuclein in (*) Lewy bodies, and it results
from the death of certain cells in the substantia nigra, although what causes the cells to die is idiopathic.
Smokers are at a lower risk for this disease, and levodopa is another common palliative treatment. For 10
points, what is this disease that is being researched by the Michael J. Fox foundation, which results from
dopamine deficiency and has as symptoms rigidity and shaking?
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease [accept Crohn's disease before mentioned]
One class of treatments for this disease consists of ethers and tertiary amines [TER-shee-air-ee uh-MEENS],
which are known as anticholinergic [an-tee-koe-luh-NER-jik] agents and block acetylcholine [ah-SEET-ulkoe-leen]. In people with this disease, protein aggregates called Lewy bodies are found inside neurons,
which stop working inside the substantia nigra [sub-STANCH-ya NEE-grah]. People with it have trouble
making facial expressions and have a variety of movement problems. Some treatments include levodopa
[lev-uh-DOPE-uh], which increases dopamine [DOPE-uh-meen] levels. Name this disease that mainly
affects older people and is characterized by tremors.
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease (accept variations such as parkinsonism)
Mutations in dardarin have been linked to some hereditary cases of this disease. One drug used to
treat this disease is administered with a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor in order to increase its
half-life. One new treatment for this disease is deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus and
globus pallidus interna. MPTP was linked to several instances of this disease in opiate addicts, and
this disease is caused by a buildup of ubiquitin and alpha-synuclein-containing Lewy Bodies, which
destroy the substantia nigra. Important symptoms of this disease include micrographia, cogwheel rigidity,
and a mask-like facial expression. Commonly treated by L-Dopa, for 10 points, name this neurological
disorder which causes impaired motor skills and eventually dementia, named for a British scientist.
ANSWER: Parkinson's Disease
Some treatments of this disease use drugs that inhibit monoamine oxidase-B. This condition is partly
caused by the destruction of the substantia nigra due to the buildup of Lewy Bodies. Symptoms of this
condition include dementia and a still facial expression. This disease is treated by L-Dopa because it often
features a decrease in dopamine pathway action. For 10 points, name this neurological disease, sometimes
called "shaking palsy," associated with the inhibition of motor skills.
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease
The progression of this disease is measured by the Hoehn and Yahr scale. High-frequency stimulation of the
globus pallidus has been used in the treatment of this disease, whose features can be induced by the
synthetic narcotic MPTP. Along with restless legs syndrome, this disease can be treated with the drugs
pramipexole and ropinirole. Deposits of the protein alpha-synuclein are contained in Lewy bodies, which
are linked to this disease. This disease is caused by the deterioration of brain cells in the substantia nigra
that produce dopamine, and is characterized by bradykinesia and muscle tremors. FTP name this neurologic
disease suffered by Michael J. Fox.
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease
Abnormal alpha-synuclein proteins known as Lewy bodies were first discovered in patients suffering from
this disease. The severity of this disease is measured from one to five on the Hoehn and Yahr Scale. This
disease is caused by damage to the pars compacta of the substantia nigra, which is part of the basal ganglia.
This disease results in less active dopamine pathways in the brain, which is why it is sometimes treated with
L-dopa. For 10 points, name this neural disease that results in a loss of motor skill, often causing tremor and
rigidity in muscles.
ANSWER: Parkinson's Disease
This disease has been linked to systematic defects in complex I of the mitochondrial inner membrane.
Physiological signs of this disease include the accumulation of the protein alpha synuclein in deposits
called Lewy bodies within the substantia nigra. It is characterized by the presence of bradykinesia.
Treatment for this disease includes a combination of carbidopa and L-dopa, which address decreases in
the neurotransmitter dopamine. For 10 points, name this disease that results from neural degeneration
in regions of the brain that control movement.
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease [or primary parkinsonism; or paralysis agitans]
Genetic forms of this disease are caused by mutations in PINK1 or dardarin. A pathological
hallmark of this disease is alpha-synuclein-containing Lewy bodies. This disease is caused by the
degeneration of the substantia nigra, and its symptoms include lead-pipe rigidity, cogwheel rigidity,
and (*) shuffling gait. It is treated by L-DOPA, which replaces lost dopamine. For 10 points, name this
neurological disease that causes rigidity, slowness, and jerky movements, named for an English physician.
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease
Earlier surgical treatments for this conditions involved pallidotomy and thalamotomy, while newer
treatments for it can be supplemented by drugs which inhibit monoamine oxidase-B. It is caused by the
degeneration of the neurons of the substantia nigra, which decreases the production of dopamine, and Ldopa is most commonly used to treat its symptoms. First described by its namesake British scientist in 1817,
for 10 points, identify this disease characterized by tremors and slowness of movement, also called the
"shaking palsy."
ANSWER: Parkinson's disease
Salamanders of the genus Ambystoma use a related process that rarely allows for mutations to be inherited.
Kaguya was recently created by it, though Gregory Pincus holds the distinction of producing the effect first
in mammals when he did so in 1937 with rabbits. It was first discovered by Charles Bonnet in aphids,
though it took more than 150 years before it was artificially induced, an achievement which belongs to
Jacques Loeb. FTP, name this sperm-less process by which an unfertilized egg develops into an organism, a
form of asexual reproduction.
ANSWER: parthenogenesis
Subtypes of this process include arrhenotoky and the much more common thelytoky, and an
analogous process in plants is known as apomixis. First studied in sea urchins by Jacques Loeb, the
largest land animals to undergo it are Komodo dragons, while in [*] bees, it produces drones. It was
used in a Tokyo lab to create the mouse Kaguya, and was artificially induced by Gregory Pincus in female
rabbits of mothering age. For 10 points, name this form of asexual reproduction by which egg cells develop
into newborns without male fertilization, from the Greek for 'virgin birth'.
ANSWER: parthenogenesis
Apomixis (EY-poh-MIKE-sis), also known as a clonal version of this process, can occur in species
that utilize the ZW sex-determination system. Automixis (AWE-toh-MIKE-sis) occurs when the eggs
in this process do undergo meiosis. This process occurs naturally in invertebrates such as (*) aphids,
rotifers and nematodes (NEE-muh-tohdz). This form of reproduction has been observed in vertebrate
species such as hammerhead sharks and Komodo dragons. For 10 points, identify this form of asexual
reproduction, named from the Greek for "virgin birth," in which an unfertilized egg becomes a new
organism.
ANSWER: parthenogenesis [prompt on asexual reproduction]
Although this process does not occur naturally in mammals, Gregory Pincus artificially induced this in a
rabbit. When certain bees become infected with a bacterium of the genus Wolbachia, they start to undergo
this process, which is more famously employed by certain types of lizards such as the Komodo Dragon.
However, this process does not occur in hermaphroditic species, because they have both sex organs.
Coming from the Greek for "virgin birth," this is, FTP, what process, by which females produce offspring
without male fertilization of eggs.
ANSWER: Parthenogenesis
This process is analogous to apomixis (ap-uh-MIK-sis) in plants, and before his study of human sexuality,
Alfred Kinsey studied the effect of this process on the evolution of gall wasps. Jacques Loeb showed that
the initiation of mitosis is controlled chemically by inducing this process in sea urchins, and Charles Bonnet
first recognized it by observing the growth of aphid populations. Rotifers reproduce almost exclusively by
this process, which has been recorded in Komodo dragons but is far more common in insects. In this type of
unisexual reproduction, organisms develop from unfertilized eggs. Identify this process named from the
Greek for "virgin birth".
ANSWER: parthenogenesis [prompt on asexual reproduction before "virgin"]
Stelzer et. al observed that the Mendelian transition to this process coincided with dwarfism in a
population of Brachionus calyciflorus. Daphnia exhibits the "cyclic" variety by switching between it
and its counterpart depending on environmental conditions. The obligate form of this process, known
as thelytoky, is not as common as the other types: deuterotoky and arrhenotoky. First observed by
Charles Bonnet in (*) aphids, this process is exclusively used by many species of whiptail lizards and is
used sometimes by worker bees if the queen is dead. If meiosis is involved, this process is termed
"automictic;" in all varieties the result is usually female. For 10 points, name this form of asexual
reproduction in which an embryo forms without fertilization.
ANSWER: parthenogenesis [prompt on asexual reproduction; prompt on reproduction; prompt on virgin birth; accept all forms mentioned in this question, including obligate parthenogenesis, thelytoky, deuterotoky, arrhenotoky, cyclic parthenogenesis, automictic parthenogenesis, apomictic parthenogenesis, and apomixis, until they are mentioned]
Jacques Loeb was the first to induce this process by exposing the zona pellucida of sea urchins to
magnesium chloride. Aphids only perform this process during the summer, and this process has only been
observed in gnats in the larvae stage. One variety of this process observed in nematodes involves the
"activation" of haploid eggs by males, and well-known products of this process include drone bees and
whiptail lizards. For 10 points, name this process by which individuals develop from unfertilized gametes
whose name is taken from the Greek for "virgin birth."
ANSWER: parthenogenesis
This scientist discovered differing optical activity in left- and right-handed forms of tartaric acid. He
disproved spontaneous generation with fly maggots, further supporting the germ theory. He discovered that
bacteria were responsible for souring certain beverages, and developed a process to remove them. For the
point, name this scientist who designed a vaccine for rabies and lends his name to a sterilization process
undergone by milk.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
This scientist separated the crystals in a racemic mixture, determining that tartaric acid was chiral. He
saved Joseph Meister by his development of a vaccine for rabies. He used a flask with a curved neck to
disprove spontaneous generation, and is often regarded as the father of germ theory. For 10 points identify
this man who developed the process of heating milk to extend its shelf life.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
In an experiment expanding on the work of Lazzaro Spallanzani, this scientist used a swan-necked flask
to boil beef broth and disprove spontaneous generation, which he provided evidence against in his earlier
work on fermentation. He also used crystals of tartaric acid taken from wine to demonstrate chirality. For
10 points, name this French scientist, the namesake of a heating process used to kill pathogens in milk.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
This man's work with tartaric acid marked the beginning of stereochemistry. His studies with silkworm
diseases and beer and wine contamination are credited with saving three of his home country's industries.
This scientist's investigations into dried rabbit spines enabled him to cure the child Joseph Meister, who
had suffered fourteen dog bites. For 10 points, identify this French polymath who developed a rabies
vaccine and created a process for heating food and beverage in order to kill harmful microorganisms.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
This man investigated pebrine, a silkworm disease, which he found to be caused by a protozoan
(proh-toh-ZOH-ahn). He also determined the cause of poor-tasting wine and beer to acid-producing
bacteria. This man developed attenuation through inoculating cows from anthrax. This man disproved the
theory of spontaneous generation through an experiment that used boiled broth and a swan-necked bottle.
For 10 points, name this scientist, who lends his name to a process involving the heating of food to prevent
disease.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
This scientist's nationalist sympathies led him to include the phrase "Hatred towards Prussia!
Revenge! Revenge!" in every paper he published, and to invent the "Beer of Revenge" in an attempt
to outdo the German beer industry. He performed an experiment that showed that nothing grew in
boiled (+) broths unless flasks were broken open, disproving spontaneous generation. He tested an
1885 (*) vaccine on a boy who had been mauled by a dog. For 10 points, name this French scientist who
developed vaccines for rabies and anthrax, and is the namesake of a procedure that heats food to destroy
microbes.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
Gerald L. Geison studied the lab notebooks of this scientist, who lied about using a technique developed by
Jean-Joseph Toussaint [too-SAN] involving potassium dichromate. This scientist observed that two
stereoisomers of tartaric acid rotate polarized light in opposite directions, and he recognized the cause of
the disease flacherie [FLASH-eh-ree] in silkworms. This scientist developed a vaccine used on Joseph
Meister against rabies, and he used a meat broth in a swan-neck flask to disprove the theory of spontaneous
generation. For 10 points, name this French scientist who is the namesake of a process used to destroy
harmful microorganisms in food.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
In an effect named for this man, increasing oxygen levels lead to decreasing fermentation activity. He
showed that microbes were the cause of two silkworm parasites. In his "soup of life" experiment, this
microbiologist disproved (*) spontaneous generation in favor of biogenesis, and he separately developed
vaccines for rabies and anthrax. For 10 points, name this French scientist who developed a method of heattreating perishable products, like milk, to give them a longer shelf life.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
This scientist saved the silk industry by identifying the organism causing a silkworm disease. One of his
theories originated from his study of the fermentation of butyric acid. He conducted an experiment with a
swan-necked flask to disprove the theory of spontaneous generation. This scientist also created vaccines for
rabies and anthrax. For 10 points, name this French chemist who names a heating process commonly used
to prevent contamination of milk.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
The genus named after this person is a bacteria that includes the species multocida [mahl-toe-SIGH-duh],
which he discovered caused cholera [KAHL-uh-ruh] in birds. The point named after him is used to explain
the explosion of species during the Cambrian period, and the effect named after this person deals with the
decreased rate of glycolysis [gligh-KOL-uh-sis] in the presence of oxygen. He developed the first anthrax
vaccine in 1881. Name this French scientist whose name is associated with a process of heating and then
cooling drinks to slow down the impact of pathogens.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur
The cartilage under this bone is the most common site of chondromalacia [kon-droe-mah-LAY-shuh], a
disease characterized by the cartilage softening or degenerating [dee-JEN-uh-ray-ting]. This is the largest
sesamoid [SEHSah-moid] bone in the human body, and its shifting out of place is known as tracking
disorder. The rectus femoris [feh-MOHR-is] arises from the pelvis and inserts into this bone, while three
vastus muscles arise from the femur and insert into this. Located in front of a joint, name this bone
commonly called the kneecap.
ANSWER: patella (accept kneecap before it is mentioned, do not accept "knee")
The fidelity of this process can be increased by using Pfx or Pfu instead of one more typical reagent.
More specific types of this are called its "nested" and "touchdown" varieties, and the LATE
modification made its asymmetric type more efficient. Cations such as magnesium are used to
stabilize the product of this process, which is created from (*) dNTPs. Primers anneal to a template
during a lower-temperature step in this technique, which was developed by Kary Mullis and which uses a
special heat-resistant polymerase called Taq in order to extend DNA strands. For 10 points, name this
laboratory technique used to create DNA ex vivo.
ANSWER: polymerase chain reaction
One variant of this technique used to identify the sequence of an RNA strand begins with a reverse
transcriptase step, while another version gradually lowers the temperature of its second step over its time
course. In addition to the real-time and touchdown variants, this technique's first step can be replaced with a
reactive helicase so it can be carried out at constant temperature. Its steps include denaturation, annealing,
and elongation, where the dNTPs are added after the primers. Often utilizing a namesake enzyme from
Thermus aquaticus, for 10 points, identify this experimental technique used to amplify DNA.
ANSWER: polymerase chain reaction [accept PCR]
The LATE type of this process is a special case of the Asymmetric version, and the product thus produced
can be easily verified through SNP screening. The RACE process is an anchored version of this process,
which relies on polyadenylated tails and employs a reverse transcriptase. An enzyme from Pyrococcus
furiosus allows this process to be performed with high accuracy, while enzyme from Thermus aquaticus
rectified the problem of denaturation at high temperatures. It involves separation of the DNA strands,
annealing of primers, and the extension of the complementary strand. Invented by Kary Mullis, for 10
points, identify this procedure, which amplifies a sample of DNA.
ANSWER: Polymerase Chain Reaction
Foster resonance energy transfer between fluorogenic dyes allows for quantification of the products
of this technique in a real-time variant. This technique consists of denaturation, annealing, and
elongation steps, and was developed by Kary Mullis. The bacterium Thermus aquaticus provides a
necessary heat-stable DNA polymerase known as Taq. The presence of free primers and nucleotides is
also necessarily in this technique. For 10 points, name this biological technique used to create numerous
copies of segments of DNA.
ANSWER: PCR [or polymerase chain reaction]
One type of this procedure uses probes with quencher molecules which quench an attached fluorophore
when excited through FRET. In this procedure with a real-time variant, the annealing step occurs at a lower
temperature than the previous denaturation step. After the introduction of primers corresponding to
sequences which flank the DNA region of interest, the namesake Taq enzyme extends the DNA strand
complementary to the template. Developed by Kary Mullis, For 10 points, name this procedure used to
amplify the number of copies of a specific DNA sequence from a sample.
ANSWER: PCR [accept Polymerase Chain Reaction]
One variety of this process uses reverse transcription to deduce gene expression levels based on varying
amounts of mRNA present. One parameter in this process is dependent on the GC-content of primers used
because of differences in stability, and magnesium chloride appears as part of the "master mix" due to its
role as a co-factor for the primary enzyme used. Often using a chemical taken from the bacterium Thermus
aquaticus, this technique uses a thermocycler to carry out the temperature-dependent steps of denaturaton,
annealing, and elongation. For 10 points, name this biochemical technique used to rapidly copy DNA
strands.
ANSWER: Polymerase Chain Reaction [Be lenient and accept any types of PCR.]
This procedure uses a device containing a Peltier sensor in order to maintain the temperature of
the sample. An "overlap" version of this procedure is used to join two halves of a construct via a
linker, and this procedure is also the main step of site-directed mutagenesis. An antibody to the main
reagent of this procedure is added to the buffer in its "hot-start" variant. DMSO is used in this
procedure to work with (*) GC-rich templates. The buffer in this procedure contains magnesium. A
protein from Thermus aquaticus is commonly used in this procedure; that protein has evolved to survive in
hot springs, and is called Taq polymerase. For 10 points, name this procedure used to amplify segments of
DNA, invented by Kary Mullis.
ANSWER: PCR [or polymerase chain reaction]
A salt correction formula derived from 1998 SantaLucia paper is commonly used to design a component
used in this technique. The emulsion variant of this lab procedure uses capture beads and oil in water
microreactors. That variant is used in 454 sequencing. Mastermix is a combination of many of the chemical
components needed in this process. It was enzymes such as TAQ that made this technique possible because
of the high temperatures. This technique typically consists of a denaturation step, followed by annealing and
elongation. It uses primers and DNA polymerase. For 10 points, name this laboratory technique which is
used to amplify DNA samples.
ANSWER: Polymerase Chain Reaction [or PCR]
A higher thoroughput modification of this technique starts at a high temperature but lowers it in small
increments until it reaches a specified point. In addition to that touchdown variant, another variant of this
technique simultaneously quantifies its product in real-time. It employs cations like magnesium 2+ to
stabilize its products and uses dNTPs as building blocks for those products. This process uses different
temperatures for its denaturing, annealing, and elongation stages, and it was greatly improved with the
thermostable Taq polymerase enzyme that carries it out. For 10 points, name this common laboratory
technique used to amplify a sample of DNA.
ANSWER: PCR [or Polymerase Chain Reaction]
One variety of this process can use SYBR green florescent dye to make it quantitative in real-time.
Because Pfu has three-prime to five-prime proofreading ability, its use in this process results in
increased accuracy over an enzyme that produces three-prime adenosine overhangs. Steps of this
process include [*] denaturing, during which the template strands detach, annealing, during which primers
attach, and elongation, during which thermostable Taq ["tack"] polymerase adds new nucleotides to
synthesize a complementary strand. Invented by Kary Mullis, for 10 points, identify this process by which a
strand of DNA is amplified.
ANSWER: polymerase chain reaction [accept prefixation of "real time," "quantitative," "RT," or "Q," before mentioned]
In one type of this process, the first cycles begin at high temperatures and work down to lower
temperatures in subsequent cycles. That is the "touchdown" type. The "emulsion" variant of this
process utilizes dNTP as a (*) primer and includes its annealing phase that is at a lower temperature than
the denaturing phase. This technique makes use of a Taq enzyme in its elongation phase. The presence of
nucleotides is crucial for this process. For 10 points, identify this lab technique in which a sample of DNA
is amplified by a namesake enzyme.
ANSWER: PCR [or Polymerase Chain Reaction]
This technique depends on magnesium chloride donating divalent magnesium cations. Special versions of
this technique depend on compounds engineered by splicing HhH domains into an enzyme that was initially
isolated from Thermus aquaticus. Samples are initially heated in the denaturation step of this technique,
before being cooled to around 60 degrees Celsius to allow primers to anneal to template strands. For 10
points, name this laboratory technique in which thermally stable polymerases are used to amplify sections of
DNA.
ANSWER: PCR [or polymerase chain reaction]
One way to quantify this procedure's results is the delta-delta Ct method, where Ct is the threshold. The
proofreading ability of Pfu is sometimes preferred to another reagent in this technique. Progressively
reducing temperature over the course of this technique serves to remove unwanted background in its
touchdown variant. Determining the initial amount of sample can be done by generating a series of logistic
curves to compare to internal standards in its real-time variant. This procedure goes through denaturation,
annealing, and elongation steps through several cycles, and reagents required for it include forward and
reverse primers, as well as dNTPs, and a certain enzyme denoted Taq. For 10 points, name this technique
used to amplify DNA, developed by Kary Mullis.
ANSWER: polymerase chain reaction [accept real-time PCR or RT-PCR until "touchdown"]
One variety of this process reduces side products by starting at a high temperature and then gradually
lowering it, called the "touchdown" method. Fidelity in this process can be improved by using Pfx or Pfu,
and its helicase-dependent type is carried out at constant rather than cycling temperature. Divalent cations
and dNTPs are also used in this process, which commonly uses Taq, a type of heat-resistant polymerase.
That polymerase extends DNA primers in this process, which was first developed by Kary Mullis. For 10
points, name this experimental technique developed to amplify genetic material outside of the cell.
ANSWER: polymerase chain reaction
The "overlap-extension" type of this process allows the construction of a certain sequence to extend
past the longest primer, making it possible to produce polynucleotides from much smaller fragments.
In this process, single-strand DNA segments are produced, enzymatic activity reforms the DNA, and
various temperature changes allow the newly-formed DNA to remain in a stable conformation. For 10
points, name this biological technique of amplifying DNA, which consists of a denaturation and annealing
step.
ANSWER: polymerase chain reaction (or PCR)
Filip Pattyn and Jan Hellemans established standards for reporting data gained from this technique.
Solutions of betaine, formamide, and DMSO often increase the efficiency of this technique. A trial and
error procedure for reducing background noise in this procedure reduces one variable until optimal
conditions are reached. One undesirable result of this technique is a kind of dimer. The most widely used
variant of this technique uses SYBR ("cyber") Green or oligonucleotides tagged with fluorescent reporters.
It requires magnesium cations, dNTPs, and a polymerase obtained from Thermus aquaticus. Temperature is
varied during the denaturation, annealing, and elongation steps, which are cycled several times in, for 10
points, what technique with a "real-time" variety that uses a primer to amplify DNA?
ANSWER: Polymerase Chain Reaction [accept quantitiative PCR or real time PCR until "trial and error"; prompt afterward until mentioned]
A lariat-dependent version of this process is known as LaNe RAGE, while another variation of this
procedure uses the S-Tbr molecule and smaligos. A digital version of this procedure carries it out within
emulsified droplets, while the Polony method suspends the targets in a solid matrix. Pfu or Pfx can replace
one reagent in order to increase fidelity, and background products can be reduced by ramping down the
temperature in the touchdown variant. SYBR green is a florescent probe often used in the real-time
variation of this procedure, and modifying the amount of magnesium ions, template, and primer
concentration is necessary for optimizing it. FTP, name this technique which amplifies a segment of DNA
using Taq polymerase, developed by Kary Mullis.
ANSWER: Polymerase Chain Reaction or PCR
The methylation-specific form of this procedure is used on CpG islands. Its touchdown variant utilizes a
gradual lowering of the temperature, and cDNA is generated from RNA in the RT version of this procedure.
Typically requiring dNTPs, magnesium ions, and primers, it takes advantage of the ability of its namesake
Thermus aquaticus enzyme to withstand high temperatures. Taking place through denaturation, annealing,
and elongation steps, this procedure typically takes 20 to 40 thermal cycles, each of which doubles the
amount of DNA present. For 10 points, name this lab technique used to amplify short pieces of DNA.
ANSWER: Polymerase Chain Reaction
Fluorescent dyes can be used for quantification in its real-time variety. It uses a thermocycler to change the
temperature in a heat block, and incorporation of didNTPs stops elongation when it is used for sequencing.
It replaced Southern hybridization for forensic analysis, and the reverse-transcriptase variety can be used to
synthesize double-stranded cDNA. It requires two primers, dNTPs, and Taq polymerase, and involves
cycling through denaturing, annealing, and extension steps. The amount of target DNA doubles after each
cycle. Discovered by Kary Mullis, for 10 points, name this lab technique used to amplify short stretches of
DNA.
ANSWER: polymerase chain reaction or PCR
Probes containing both the quencher TAMRA and the fluorophore TET increase the specificity of one
version of this technique, and that method is named after PacMan. This technique is used in emulsified
droplets before using the 454 technique. One technique analyzes RFLPs after the products of this technique
are digested with restriction enzymes. This technique is used for site-directed mutagenesis. This process
sees primers attach to DNA in the annealing phase, which follows the denaturation phase and also sees the
addition of Taq polymerase. With every cycle, the exponential phase doubles the amount of DNA in this
process. Name this process, created by Kary Mullis, that amplifies a small piece of DNA.
ANSWER: Polymerase Chain Reaction
454 Life Sciences and Illumina use it for DNA sequencing, while other companies use its namesake
hybridization assays for the early diagnosis of certain diseases. It comes in asymmetric, allele-specific, hotstart, and methylation-specific varieties, although in all these variations the general procedure of breaking
double-stranded DNA into single-stranded ones for 3' end primer addition holds. Its feasibility was limited
until the discovery of the heat-resistant Taq polymerase. FTP, name this DNA amplification procedure that
doubles the amount of DNA per cycle, a method invented in 1983 by Kary Mullis.
ANSWER: Polymerase Chain Reaction)
The Le gene in these organisms affects their response to gibberellins (GIBB-ur-ELL-ins) and thus their
height. Commonly studied traits in them include axial or terminal buds, inflated or constricted pods, and
purple or white flowers. These plants were first used as a model organism by a monk whose studies led to
the development of the law of segregation and the law of independent assortment. For 10 points, name this
plant that allowed Mendel to develop his namesake model of inheritance.
ANSWER: pea plants [or Pisum sativum_]
These diagrams often display VNTRs and microsatellites next to each entry, and MERLIN is a software
package used to form QTL analysis given one of these diagrams. The recombination frequency theta can be
calculated using these diagrams. These diagrams are used to calculate LOD scores in linkage analysis.
Triangles are used to indicate miscarriages in these diagrams. A double line is used to indicate
consanguineous unions in these diagrams, which use diamonds to show sexually ambiguous persons.
Roman numerals are used to separate out each generation in these diagrams, in which women are displayed
as circles and men as squares. In these diagrams, affected people are usually a darker color. For 10 points,
name these diagrams used to display family relationships and genetic disease.
ANSWER: pedigree [don't take anything else, the term is really specific]
One type of these birds can win favor with females by offering them nice stones and are
characterized by a wide white stripe that extends across their head, from one eye to the other. In
addition to the gentoo, several species in the Eudyptes genus of this family of birds lay two eggs and
kick the first, smaller egg out of the nest once the second one is laid. The Eudyptes are the crested
type of these birds and include the yellow-crested Macaroni. Another species of this bird incubates their
eggs by holding them on top of their feet, and those who consume krill have pink guano. These birds are
characterized by the male incubating the egg. For 10 points, name these birds that include the Emperor.
ANSWER: penguins [or Spheniscidae]
This drug is synthesized in vivo from ACV-tripeptide, and modern derivatives of this compound
are often given with tazobactam (tay-zoh-BACK-tum) or clavulinic (clah-voo-LIN-ick) acid.
Compounds with related structures include monobactams (mah-noh-BACK-tums), carbapenems
(car-buh-PEH-neems), and cephalosporins (seh-phuh-luh-SPORE-ins). Florey and Chain studied the
structure of this (*) beta-lactam compound, which prevents crosslinking of peptidoglycan
(pep-tih-doh-GLY-cuhn) in Gram-positive organisms. It was discovered in a sample of fungus by
Alexander Fleming. For 10 points, name this first antibiotic.
ANSWER: penicillin
These compounds are usually synthesized by treating the precursor 6-APA with acid chlorides, and John
Sheehan pioneered the synthesis of these compounds. These compounds have a four member ring consisting
of three carbon and one nitrogen atom, and that ring can be hydrolyzed by beta-lactamase enzymes. Cells of
the species Pseudomonas aeruginosa are particularly resistant to most variants of these compounds, and
these compounds inhibit the function of transpeptidase enzymes, which subsequently inhibits the cross
linking that occurs in bacterial cell walls. For 10 points, name these antibiotics discovered by Alexander
Fleming, which are derived from a mold.
ANSWER: penicillins [prompt on antibiotics; prompt on antibiotic compounds]
This compound's 6-APA core was produced by John C. Sheehan in the process of developing its total
synthesis. Dorothy Hodgkin confirmed Ernst Chain's theory of its structure, including its beta-lactam ring.
Resistance to one of these compounds is a common selectable marker gene. A "halo" found in a
Staphylococcus culture led to its discovery. For ten points, name this class of antibiotic derived from a
fungus by Alexander Fleming.
ANSWER: penicillins [or aminopenicillins]
Howard Florey and Ernest Chain shared the Nobel Prize for their discovery of a way to mass-produce
this substance. An unethical study in Guatemala tested the efficacy of this substance on STDs. Tom
Daschle was ordered to ingest this substance by the 2001 anthrax attack letters. This substance was found at
St. Mary's Hospital, after a blue-green mold was found growing in a culture of Staphylococcus. For the
point, name this first in a class of antibiotics, discovered by Alexander Fleming.
ANSWER: penicillin [or PCN]
A pathway in its production involves ketoglutaric acid with aminoadipate as an intermediate. Containing a
central ring of three carbons and one nitrogen, its G variety contains a benzyl ring and its structure was
determined by Dorothy Hodgkin. Margaret Rousseau would play a key role in the mass production of this,
which was aided by a cantaloupe found in Peoria, Illinois. Since it works by preventing the formation of
peptidoglycan in the cell wall, its effectiveness is directly related to the result of a Gram test on the sample.
It was discovered in a sample of staphylococcus aureus, when its discoverer noted its ability to hinder
bacterial growth. FTP, this antibiotic discovered in 1928 by Alexander Fleming.
ANSWER: Penicillin
Probenecid is used along with this compound to slow its renal clearance and increase retention. It is
synthesized from a core of 6-APA, which contains a cyclic amide of three carbon atoms and one nitrogen, a
beta-lactam ring. This compound's V form is orally active, unlike the stronger G form. It binds to PBPs and
inhibits the formation of peptidoglycan cross-links, which compromises the structure of the cell wall; thus it
is most effective on Gram-negative bacteria. First isolated from a fungus, for 10 points, name this antibiotic
discovered by Alexander Fleming.
ANSWER: penicillins [prompt on antibiotics or antibacterial agents]
Enzymes that break down this compound are inhibited by clavulanic acid. The mecA gene encodes a
mutant version of this substance's namesake binding protein that prevents the action of this substance. It
inhibits the DD-transpeptidase that crosslinks D-amino acids in peptidoglycan (PEP-tid-oh-GLEYE-can).
This beta-lactam compound inhibits the formation of bacterial cell walls. For 10 points, name this
substance originally found in a dish of mold by Alexander Fleming, an early antibiotic.
ANSWER: penicillin
This drug is often combined with the anesthetic procaine, also known as novocain, when it is used in
intramuscular injections. Its V form can be taken orally but generally is less effective than the G form. It
works by preventing the application of peptidoglycan to new cell walls, which is particularly destructive
against gram-positive bacteria. Along with cephalosporins [SEF-uh-loh-"SPORE"-inz], these antibiotics are
classified as beta-lactams. Name this antibiotic discovered when a halo-shaped region was noticed around
some blue-green mold in 1928 by Alexander Fleming.
ANSWER: (benzyl)penicillin [accept penicillium or penam; prompt on antibiotic until "V form"]
Sedoheptulose is a possible end-product of this pathway and it involves the formation of an unstable
gluconolactonase intermediate. One isomerization process involves the formation of an enediol
intermediate in this pathway. Like the (*) Calvin cycle, it employs transketolase to transfer 2 carbon
units and it begins with the oxidation of glucose-6-phosphate. Its products can be employed in the
biosynthesis of coenzymes like FAD and nucleotides. For 10 points, name this pathway that produces
NADPH and the five carbon sugar ribose-5-phosphate.
ANSWER: pentose phosphate pathway (or hexose monophosphate shunt, or phosphogluconate pathway)
Hydroxybenzotriazole is added in one part of this process to increase stereospecificity in a step which
forms an O-acylisourea using a carbodiimide, such as DCC or DIC. Another step of this process
creates a dibenzofulvene intermediate after beta elimination activated by a weak base, typically
piperidine. This process is terminated with the cleavage of an ester bond with trifluoroacetic acid.
This procedure, developed by Robert Bruce (*) Merrifield, is characterized by repeated couplings of
amines to carboxylic acids and deprotection of either t-BOC or Fmoc. This procedure begins by attaching a
carboxylic acid to an insoluble bead, often polystyrene resin. For 10 points, name this procedure which
assembles biological polymers by attaching amino acids onto a non-liquid support.
ANSWER: solid-phase peptide synthesis (prompt on "SPPS")
Insect species can have up to nineteen different recognition proteins for this substance; those
receptors are divided into hard and soft transcripts. Monomers of this molecule are assembled in the
cytosol where they are attached to a carrier known as bactoprenol. A pseudo- version of this
compound can render ineffective a cell's lysozyme; the lysozyme degrades the normal variety. Its
structure consists of alternating units of N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid liked by
beta one four glycosidic bonds. This substance is dehydrated by alcohol, then traps insoluble (*)
crystal violet-iodine complexes in the usual assay for detecting it; it is surrounded by a lipopolysaccharide
coat in organisms negative for that technique. FTP, name this substance that makes up the majority of the
cell wall in Gram-positive bacteria.
ANSWER: peptidoglycan [or murein]
To make this molecule, bactoprenol chauffeurs N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid through a
membrane. Lysozyme continually breaks its NAG-NAM connections, while penicillin binds to proteins that
provide cross-links between strands, and thus causes the cell to lyse when it tries to reproduce. Gram
negative bacteria use lipoprotein anchors to hold it to the outer membrane, while Gram positive bacteria are
surrounded by about forty layers of this molecule, which is also known as murein. FTP, name this polymer
that makes up prokaryotic cell walls.
ANSWER: peptidoglycan (accept early murein)
Pathogen associated molecular patterns induce paneth cells to produce REG 3 gamma proteins like
HIP/PAP to attack this substance, which they recognize by a conserved EPN motif. Proteins that
bind to it are responsible for the removal of D-alanine to a precursor in its formation. Organisms
that don't have this substance usually have (*) lipopolysaccharides in its place. Some molecules break
down this substance by preventing cross-linking of molecules of N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic
acid. Those drugs are beta-lactams. It can be tested for by soaking the sample in crystal violet, applying an
iodine mordant, soaking in alcohol, and counterstaining with safranin. That procedure is Gram staining. For
10 points, name this substance found in the cell walls of bacteria.
ANSWER: peptidoglycan (accept murein before mentioned)
Dipeptide fragments of this compound are recognized by the NOD2 receptor. One drug that inhibits the
synthesis of this compound has the horrifying side effect of Red Man Syndrome. A transglycosylase is
responsible for crosslinking the subunits of this compound in the final step of its synthesis, after its subunits
are transported by a pyrophosphate-containing lipid called bactoprenol. This compound, which is a complex
polymer of D-amino acids, N-acetyl-glucosamine, and N-acetyl-muramic acid, makes up about 90% of the
dry weight of gram-positive organisms. Beta-lactams like penicillin inhibit the synthesis of this compound,
which is also broken down by lysozyme in tears. For 10 points, name this compound that makes up the cell
wall of bacteria.
ANSWER: peptidoglycan [or murein]
Autolysins effect the breakdown of this substance, and bactoprenol transfers its monomers.
Pentaglycine structures crosslink alanine-glutamine-lysine-alanine chains in this substance. It is
composed of alternating N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid residues, and those
tetrapeptide chains have unusual stereochemistry. Its beta-(1,4)-glycosidic bonds are hydrolyzed by
lysozyme. The differential binding of crystal violet to this layer is used to distinguish between gram positive
and gram negative bacteria in Gram's stain. For 10 points, identify this substance found in bacterial cell
walls, which contains both sugar residues and amino acids.
ANSWER: peptidoglycan
During this period, the salty Zechstein Sea covered much of Europe. The Dimetrodon was a dominant
predator during this period, during which a single large ocean known as Panthalassa surrounded the
supercontinent Pangaea. This last period of the Paleozoic Era succeeded the Carboniferous. For 10 points,
name this period of about 300 to 250 million years ago, at the end of which as many as ninety-five percent
of the then-extant species may have died out in a mass extinction.
ANSWER: Permian Period
During this period, Europe was covered by the inland, hypersaline Zechstein Sea and later stages of
this period saw the rifting of the Cimmerian subcontinent northward, an event that formed the
Neotethys Sea. This period saw the evolution of the fusulinids, an early variety of foraminiferous
protozoa as well as the evolution of the first coelacanths. Another event during the middle years of
this time is known as Olson's extinction after which saw the rise of therapsids such as Gorgonops.
Dominant animal species during this period include pelycosaurs like the sail-backed Dimetrodon and the
cynodonts, the clade that includes modern mammals. Following after the Carboniferous Period, FTP,
identify this last geological period of the Paleozoic era whose boundary with the Triassic is marked by
natural history's largest mass extinction.
ANSWER: Permian period
A sedimentary basin named for this period in western Texas has the world's thickest deposits dating from
here. Its latter part involved the upward rifting of the Cimmerian subcontinent, an event that formed the
Neo-Tethys sea. Swamp-loving lycopod trees were gradually replaced in continental interiors by advanced
species of seed ferns and conifers in this period. Olson's extinction is a small event that occurred is in the
middle of this period. By the end of this period, dicynodonts and gorgonopsians dominated terrestrial fauna.
The supercontinent Pangea existed throughout this period, which the Siberian traps may have ended. The
Carboniferous period preceded, for 10 points, what last geologic period of the Paleozoic, which ended with
a massive extinction event that ushered in the Triassic?
ANSWER: Permian period
Animals extant during this period include Edaphosaurus and Dimetrodon, and the dominant lifeforms
during this period were therapsids, the direct ancestors of mammals. Gymnosperms became the dominant
form of plant life during this period. During this period, the supercontinent of Pangaea was formed. This
was the last period of the Paleozoic Era. For 10 points, name this period lasting from approximately 290 to
248 million years ago, which ended with the largest mass extinction ever recorded on Earth.
ANSWER: Permian Period
Immediately following this event, a "coal gap" is observed, corresponding to a large negative anomaly in
"delta 13-C". Acid rain with pH as low as 2, generated by sulfur aerosols, may have played a role in this
event. A stratum rich in fossil fungi characterizes this event, which may have been the result of severe
anoxia in Panthalassa. The "Murder on the Orient Express" hypothesis refers to the many probable causes
of this event. It is speculated that the cause of the Wilkes Land mass concentration triggered a million years
of volcanism during this event; that volcanism occurred at the Siberian Traps. This event marked the end of
the trilobites, and defines the end of the Paleozoic. For 10 points, name this most severe extinction event of
all time, which marks the beginning of the Triassic.
ANSWER: Permian-Triassic extinction event [or P-Tr event; prompt on "Great Dying"; prompt on answers that mention the "Siberian traps"]
Some speculated causes of it include the reduction of oceanic continental shelves due to the formation of
the super-continent Pangaea, severe climactic fluctuations from glaciations at both the north and south
poles, and volcanic eruptions in Siberia, creating large ash clouds that covered the Earth. Because of the
loss of biodiversity from this event, the recovery process took significantly longer than similar events during
earlier periods. Resulting in the elimination of ninety-five percent of all marine life and seventy percent of
land families, this event was the closest to total extermination that has ever been observed. For 10 points,
name this event that occurred at the end of the Paleozoic era, which ushered in the age of the dinosaurs.
ANSWER: Permian mass extinction [accept the Great Dying]
One of these enzymes performs the first step in the synthesis of leukotrienes from arachidonic acid.
One subset of these proteins produces glutathione disulfide and protects membrane lipids against a
free-radical chain that may terminate in malonaldehyde. These enzymes are abundant in the animal
homologues of (*) glyoxysomes. In those organelles, carnitine acyltransferase initiates beta-oxidation,
producing a substrate for these enzymes as a reduced byproduct. During a respiratory burst, one of these
enzymes generates hypochlorite in azurophilic granules in neutrophils. The most common enzyme of this
type is used in a test to identify Streptococcus; that enzyme is catalase. For 10 points, name this class of
enzymes that split R-O-O-R groups.
ANSWER: peroxidases [accept peroxide oxidases or peroxide oxidoreductases; prompt on "oxidase" or "oxidoreductase"]
A form of this organelle in plants contains isocitrate lyase and malate synthase, and facilitates the
glyoxylate cycle. Humans lack the uric acid oxidase usually found in them, and are thus susceptible to
gout. Fungal (*) Woronin bodies are analogous to these organelles, whose malfunction can lead to
overaccumulation of phytanic acid in Refsum disease and Zellweger syndrome. Very long chain fatty acids
are broken down by, for 10 points, what organelles that use catalase to break down their namesake
compound, H2O2.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
Proteins targeted to this structure have a serine-lysine-leucine sequence on their C-terminus, and they
are absent in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata. One disease caused by problems in this structure
occurs after an accumulation of phytanic acid in myelin sheaths. Another biogenesis disorder caused by
problems with this structure comes from defects in the gene PEX5 and results in the build up of
very-long-chain fatty acids. Those disorders are Refsum's disease and Zellweger syndrome. For 10 points,
name this organelle that uses catalase to convert hydrogen peroxide into water.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
One defect in them results in the accumulation of pythanic acid in the tissue and is called Refsum's disease,
and mutations in the genes coding for one of its receptors results in Zelleweger's syndrome. Involved in the
synthesis of the myelin sheath, in the liver, these organelles synthesize bile acids, while other enzymes
found in them include D-amino acid oxidase and uric acid oxidase. Their most prominent enzyme is
involved in degrading reactive oxygen species and is called catalase. For 10 points, identify this organelle
which breaks down hydrogen peroxide.
ANSWER: peroxisome
A specialized type of this organelle found in plants is the site of the glyoxylate (glai-OCK-sul-ate)
cycle. Acatalasia (UH-cat-uh-LAHZ-ee-uh) results when this organelle lacks a key enzyme. Most
disorders involving this organelle, such as infantile Refsum disease, result from mutations in PEX
genes. A sharp reduction in the number of this organelle is observed in patients with (*) Zellweger
syndrome. This organelle contains the enzyme catalase (CAT-uh-layz). For 10 points, name this organelle
that decomposes its namesake compound into oxygen and water.
ANSWER: peroxisome
The synthesis of plasmalogen occurs in this structure; a deficiency of that synthesis causes Zellweger's
syndrome. In cells, beta oxidation metabolizing fatty acids with more than 22 carbons begins in this
structure and ends once it reaches 8 carbons, only to be resumed by the mitochondria. One enzyme located
in this organelle called catalase is needed for a disproportionation reaction that produces oxygen gas and
water from a certain starting product. For 10 points, name this cell organelle which, as its name suggests,
breaks down a compound with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: peroxisome
Mutations in this structure's ABCD1 membrane protein can lead to adrenoleukodystrophy. This
structure contains DHAP acyltransferase, which is used for plasmologen synthesis. One disease of
this structure results from excess phytanic acid in myelin sheaths, while another disease results from
defects in the PEX5 and PEX7 genes. Those diseases are Refsum's disease and (*) Zellweger
syndrome. A modified version of this structure called a glyoxysome is found in germinating seeds, but this
structure is better known for containing the enzyme catalase. For 10 points, name this structure responsible
for breaking down a compound, with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: peroxisome
Proteins targeted to this organelle contain a series of serine-lysine-leucine residues known as the SLK
sequence. Defects in its ability to process phytanic acid results in Refsum disease, while mutations to its
PTSR receptors lead to Zellweger syndrome. Containing a core with urate oxidase, this organelle is
responsible for plasmalogen synthesis as well as the beta oxidation of fatty acids to acetyl CoA, though it is
better known for its detoxification abilities, a fact which explains its prevalence in liver parenchyma cells.
Also known as a glyoxysome in germinating seeds, FTP, name this organelle that decomposes hydrogen
peroxide via catalase activity.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
These organelles contain GNPAT, which catalyzes the early steps of plasmalogen synthesis. Its
targeting signal is a C-terminal serine-lysine-leucine motif. One disease of these organelles results in
the inability to break down very long chain fatty acids, while another one is caused by a mutation in
Pex2 and is treated with Lorenzo's oil. The glyoxylate cycle occurs in a specialized type of these
organelles called glyoxysomes. Adrenoleukodystrophy and Zellweger's syndrome are malfunctions of
this organelle, which contains an extremely high-speed enzyme called (*) catalase. These organelles are
responsible for stopping damage from reactive oxygen species. For 10 points, name these organelles which
are responsible for breaking down hydrogen peroxide.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
One disease affecting this organelle leads to the over accumulation of phytanic (fih-TAH-nick) acid in
cells and is called Refsum's disease. Plants have a specialized form of this organelle call a gloxysome
(glie-ACKS-ee-some). Oxidation of long chain fatty acids occur in this organelle, which also contains the
enzyme catalase for breakdown of a certain molecule into water. For 10 points, identify this organelle
which breaks down a compound with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: peroxisomes (purr-ACKS-ee-some)
Proteins named for their proliferation of this organelle are activated by thiazolidinedione medications; the
alpha type of those proteins is activated during prolonged fasting in ketogenesis. Proteins to be localized to
this organelle often contain a tripeptide serine-lysine-leucine motif at their C-terminus known as PTS1. The
myelin, central nervous system, adrenal glands and testes are most affected when mutations in ABCD1
cause this organelle to be unable to break down very-long chain saturated fatty acids in X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy. It contains enzymes required for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Defects in PEX
genes cause a group of four namesake "biogenesis disorders" of this organelle, including Zellweger
syndrome. For 10 points, name this organelle abundant in the liver that uses catalase to decompose a
namesake compound into oxygen and water.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
These organelles are the source of structures that have been shown to plug septal pores in
Ascomycota in response to cellular damage, Woronin bodies. These organelles synthesize the most
abundant phospholipid in myelin, plasmalogens. Although not mitochondria, one process that takes
place in this structure requires the enzyme carnitine acyltransferase. One disorder characterized by
an absence of these organelles is caused by mutations in (*) PEX genes. Acetyl-CoA is generated during
beta oxidation by breaking down fatty acids in this structure. In plants, glyoxysomes are specialized forms
of these microbodies, whose absence causes Zellweger's syndrome. One product of superoxide dismutase is
broken down by, for 10 points, what eukaryotic organelle that uses catalase to convert hydrogen peroxide to
oxygen and water?
ANSWER: peroxisomes [prompt on microbodies until mentioned]
In X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, a membrane protein in this organelle is defective, so transport of
a certain enzyme into this organelle fails. It is responsible for the manufacture of many acetyl groups, a
byproduct of its most important function, and it contains the enzyme catalase as well as several
oxidases. Often found in the liver and kidney cells, for 10 points, name this organelle, responsible for
oxidizing fatty acids and other toxic molecules, including this organelle's namesake, H2O2.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
These structures are the primary location of DHAP acyltransferase, which plays a role in plasmalogen
synthesis. Most proteins imported into this organelle require a serine lysine leucine C-terminal signal. One
defect of this organelle is Zellweger syndrome. Along with mitochondria, this organelle converts fatty acids
into acetyl-CoA in a process known as beta-oxidation. However, this organelle uses catalase for its most
notable function. It is most abundantly found in the liver. For 10 points, name this organelle that get rids of
a namesake group of compounds by breaking it into water and oxygen.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
Type 1 rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata is associated with this organelle. Phytanic acid buildup is
implicated in Refsum's disease, and this organelle is also involved in Zellweger's syndrome. Plasmalogen is
generated here, making this organelle necessary for myelination and like the mitochondria, it can perform
beta oxidation of fatty acids. Also notably containg catalase, for 10 points, name this organelle similar to the
lysosome, involved in disposing of namesake toxic substances
ANSWER: Peroxisome
Defects in this organelle can lead to Pipecollic acidemia, while one enzyme here is responsible for
processing of phytanic acid during myelin sheath formation. Mutations in its ABCD1 membrane
transporter result in very long-chain fatty acid buildup in adrenoleukodystrophy, and this organelle
is a secondary site for beta-oxidation. PEX5 and PEX7 are responsible for transport of enzymes to this
organelle, which is disrupted in Zellweger's syndrome. The enzyme with the highest known turnover rate is
found here, and this organelle is responsible for the breakdown of D-amino acids. Its primary function is
carried out by Asn-147 and His-74 around porphyrin rings in the enzyme catalase. For 10 points, name this
cellular structure responsible for breaking down hydrogen peroxide.
ANSWER: Peroxisomes
Defective versions of these can result in RCPD, AMN, and X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. Another defect
results in the inability to metabolize phytanic acid, a condition known as Refsum disease, and it is also the
location where plasmalogen synthesis begins. Some proteins being targeted to this organelle rely on a string
of serine-lysine-leucine residues at the C-terminus, the SLK sequence. Those amino acids bind to PTSR
receptors, defects in which can cause Zellweger syndrome. Fatty acids are oxidized to acetyl CoA here,
though it is best known for the enzyme catalase. For 10 points, name this organelle that isolates and
degrades toxic peroxide species.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
Proteins destined for these structures often possess a C-terminal SKL sequence. Mutations in
the ABCD1 gene lead to a demyelination disease involving these organelles called adrenoleukodystrophy. In
humans, a reduction in their number is the cause of Zellweger syndrome. Beta oxidation of fatty acids to
acetyl CoA occurs in these structures, which also contain the enzyme catalase, which is responsible for
breaking down a certain toxic material into oxygen and water. For 10 points, name these organelles that
isolate and destroy hydrogen peroxide.
ANSWER: peroxisome
Some proteins associated with this structure's matrix, such as thiolase, contain an N-terminal
sequence known as PTS2. Zellweger syndrome occurs when transport of molecules into this structure is
impaired. This structure contains the enzyme catalase, which breaks down its namesake molecule into
water and oxygen. For 10 points, name these organelles that oxidize waste products to hydrogen
peroxide.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
Defects in DHAP acyltransferase and alkyl DHAP synthase result in faulty plasmalogen synthesis,
which causes impaired biogenesis of this organelle in patients suffering from rhizomelic
chondrodysplasia punctata. Mutations in phytanic acid metabolism in this structure are the primary
cause of Refsum's disease, while the congenital deficiency of its characteristic enzyme occurs in patients
with Takahara's disease. They contain an enzyme that requires a haematin prosthetic group to reduce the
product of superoxide dismutase, called catalase. For 10 points, name these organelles which decompose a
toxic namesake hydrogen compound.
ANSWER: peroxisomes
This disease causes the body to create tracheal cytotoxin and is caused by Bordetella genus bacteria. It
results in an inflammation of the respiratory tract, which prevents the removal of secretions. While most
teens and adults do not suffer permanent symptoms, it can cause pneumonia, and care must be taken to
prevent it from spreading to infants, in whom it can cause convulsions, apnea, and occasional death. Name
this disease whose vaccine is often combined with diphtheria and tetanus and can be acellular.
ANSWER: pertussis (accept whooping cough)
Mutations in miR164c cause extra ones of these structures to grow early. These structures are doubled in
mutants of the AGAMOUS gene in Arabidopsis. Both class A and B genes affect the development of these
structures in the ABC model. They are collectively known as the corolla. These structure lie inside of the
sepals, and monocots typically have three, six, or nine of them. For 10 points, name these flower parts that
attract pollinators with their bright colors.
ANSWER: petals [or corolla until it is read]
These features together form a structure that sits above the calyx. The term merosity refers to how many of
these structures a plant has. Monocots have a multiple of three of these structures. Where one might expect
these structures in asters, many "ray florets" are exhibited, which are merely flowers with a single one of
these. The tepals differentiate into sepals and these structures. For 10 points, give this term for the colorful
components of a flower.
ANSWER: petals
In the ABC model, B genes coupled with A genes produce these structures. Symmetry of these structures
is either actinomorphic or zygomorphic. Most dicots have four or five of these structures, while monocots
typically have three or six of them. Smaller structures called sepals lie beneath these structures, the
collection of which is known as the corolla. For 10 points, name these modified leaves that surround the
reproductive organs of a flower.
ANSWER: petals [prompt on leaf or word forms thereof; accept flowers before "four"]
These structures are diminished in genus Ranunculaceae. In the ABC model of development, both A
and B genes affect the development of these structures, which are abolished when AP1, AP2, or AP3
genes are mutated. AP3 and PI have to interact in order for these structures to be generated.
Organisms in which these structures are identical are termed actinomorphic, while those of
zygomorphic organisms are of different shape and color. Eudicots typically have four or five of these
structures, while monocots have multiples of 3, and collectively they are known as the corolla. They form
the perianth along with the sepals. For 10 points, name these floral structures which are often colored to
attract pollinators.
ANSWER: Petals
Two hallmark symptoms of type I diabetes are hyperglycemia, high ketone levels, and a low value for
this variable. The central chemoreceptors in the medulla oblongata activate in response to changes in this
variable. This variable is lowered when the arterial PCO2 is higher, since carbonic anhydrase converts CO2
and H2O to H2CO3, which becomes HCO3 and H+. For 10 points, name this variable that is 7.35 to 7.45 in
the blood, a measure of alkalinity or acidity.
ANSWER: pH
The surface type of this process can happen to encapsulated bacteria after they are attached to a blood
vessel. In other cases of it, bacteria are covered with proteins, allowing other molecules to adhere to them.
The granules of neutrophils can begin this process, which is completed by hydrogen peroxide and
superoxide. Leukocytes, or white blood cells, also use this process to protect the body from bacterial
infections. Name this process also carried out when protists use their cell membranes to ingest nutrients, a
form of endocytosis [en-doh-sy-TOH-sis].
ANSWER: phagocytosis [FAY-goh-sy-TOH-sis] [prompt on endocytosis]
Dendritic cells use this to elaborate a specific immune response, while Ilya Mechnikov revealed this process
in 1882, which played a large role in his winning of the Nobel Prize. Trichoplax adhaerens is the only
multicellular organism to use this process for feeding. When this process is impaired, autoimmune diseases
may occur due to apoptotic cell remnants. Hydrogen ion transport acidifies the lysosome after a vacuole is
created in this process, so as to digest that vacuole's contents. Name this process in which a cell envelops a
particle with its pseudopodia to form an interior phagosome.
AN SWER: phagocytosis
Protein A disrupts this process by jumbling the orientation of IgG. IgM cannot be used to aid this
process, since the Fc receptor is not present on the cells that facilitate it; Cb3 and other (*) opsonins
are thus necessary to accomplish this process. Immature dendriditic cells can engage in a "lite" form of this
process known as nibbling. It is carried out by monocytes and macrophages. For 10 points, identify this
process in which immune cells engulf and "eat" foreign bodies.
ANSWER: phagocytosis (prompt on "opsonization"; prompt on general answers like "immune response")
The activation of the phosphatidylserine receptor triggers this process. This process is followed
by a pathway in which NADPH oxidase and myeloperoxidase create an oxidative burst.
Streptococcal M protein prevents this process, as do polysaccharide capsules. The binding of
complement proteins and antibodies primes this action in a process known as opsonization. It results
in the creation of a (*) vesicle which then fuses with a lysosome, and among the cells capable of it are
microglia and neutrophils. Other cells that perform this action differentiate from monocytes and are known
as macrophages. For 10 points, name this process in which cells engulf debris and food from their
surrounding environment, whose name means "cell eating".
ANSWER: phagocytosis [prompt on "endocytosis"]
In addition to creating a namesake convertase, C3b functions to facilitate this process, which is conducted
by TLRs of immature dendritic cells. The actual action is a function of actin-myosin contraction, and
initiates using NF-kB activation on PAMP sites. Most factors in Yersinia pestis, which causes plague, are
particularly resistant to this process, which is necessary for Helper T cells to activate and functions via
opsonins. In amoeboid organisms, this process is carried out by using pseudopodia to capture particles
which are then moved to a pteroid or vacuole. Monocytes, neutrophils, and white blood cells all function
via, FTP, what biological process in which the cell membrane engulfs foreign solids, whose name comes
from the Greek for "eating"?
ANSWER: phagocytosis
A followup to this process may include an oxidative burst. This process follows opsonization, which can
be carried out by antibodies. Antigen presentation in dendritic cells follows this process, which is also
carried out by neutrophils. This process uses the creation of pseudopods to surround the target, and is
followed by fusion of the resulting namesake organelle with a lysosome. For 10 points, name this form of
endocytosis in which a vesicle is formed from the intake of a pathogen.
ANSWER: phagocytosis [prompt on endocytosis until mention]
Several of the genes activated during this process are controlled by p38, which is acted upon by the
Myd88 adaptor protein. In the liver, this process is primarily performed by Kupffer cells, and Lyn
and Syk are responsible for activating the opsonin-dependent version of this process. It creates an
internal (*) vesicle whose contents can be degraded by defensin-containing granules or reactive oxygen
species, and neutrophils perform this process when encountering IgG-coated bacteria. For 10 points, name
this process often performed by immune cells like neutrophils and macrophages, the ingestion of a foreign
material by a cell.
ANSWER: Phagocytosis [prompt on endocytosis; prompt on cell eating; do not accept "pinocytosis"]
Two models of this action are the zipper and sinking hypotheses. Lactoferrin stimulates this activity and
sometimes can be found in an organelle resulting from this. C3b is one element that can cause opsonization
to better allow for this process to occur. Like related processes, it is triggered by Fc receptors. Microglia,
neutrophils and monocytes are cells that perform this action. Some protists use this process to acquire food,
but its also used as immune response against bacteria. For 10 points, name this form of endocytosis where a
cell engulfs a particle or other cell.
ANSWER: phagocytosis
A key insight into this condition came from Timothy Pons's research on the fluidity of the
Penfield map, which was conducted on a group of 12 chimpanzees that had suffered denervation
during a previous experiment. The neuromatrix theory, proposed by Ronald Melzack, was an
attempt to explain this disorder, which was originally explained by the formation of neuromas by
irritation. VS Ramachandran showed that this syndrome occurs due to reorganization of the
postcentral gyrus, which contains the S1 somatosensory cortex, in a classic example of neural
plasticity. It can be treated by using a mirror-box, so that the brain is tricked by a mirror image.
This condition most commonly occurs in amputees. For 10 points, name this syndrome in which
a missing part of the body is still believed to be there.
ANSWER: phantom limb pain [or phantom pain; prompt on "pain"]
The plateau principle of this field concerns exponential approaches to steady states, and Patlak plots
are employed in compartment models of one part of this field. Concepts in this field include the
"therapeutic window," which is very small for molecules like warfarin, and (*) Schild regression may
be preformed to estimate dose-response curves. Its two major branches include the study of its subject
compounds' absorption, metabolism, and excretion and the study of their actual interactions with receptors.
For 10 points, name this field that studies the interaction between organisms and drugs.
ANSWER: pharmacology
Richard Dawkins created an "extended" version of this concept to include manifestations of behavior, such
as beaver dams. Silent mutations are called "silent" because they do not alter this feature. Heterozygous
crosses display a three to one ratio for this quality, which is part of a distinction advanced by Wilhelm
Johannsen. For 10 points, name this term for the physical manifestation of a genetic sequence, the
complement to an organism's genotype.
ANSWER: phenotype
A namesake ammonialyase of this amino acid converts it into cinnamate, and Seymour Kaufman first
discovered the importance of the coenzyme tetrahydrobiopterin in this amino acid's hydroxylase. Nirenberg
and Matthaei began decoding the genetic code by finding that the codon UUU encoded this amino acid.
With aspartic acid it makes Aspartame. Chorismate mutase catalyzes the formation of prephenate, a
precursor to both tyrosine and this other amino acid. Failure to convert this amino acid into tyrosine results
in a buildup of phenylpyruvic acid in the metabolic disorder PKU. For 10 points, name this amino acid
abbreviated Phe.
ANSWER: phenylalanine [prompt on Phe and F]
Named by Peter Carlson and Martin Luscher, these can be detected by the VNO or Jacobson organ.
Geranic acid is an example of one and Adolf Butenadt identified the first one, which caused a "flutter
dance". The McKlintock effect theorizes the synchronization of menstrual cycles due to them and is named
after their discoverer in humans. The nasonov type is used to help BEEEES! return to the colony, while
Bombykol is used by female silkworms to attract males during mating. Also containing alarm and sex types,
these are, FTP, what hormones released by animals to trigger responses in the same species.
ANSWER: Pheromones
The first one of these identified, bombykol, induces the flutter dance in silkworm moths. The
Flehmen response aids in the detection of these by helping them reach the vomeronasal organ. Social
insects have alarm ones. Aphrodisin is an example in hamsters, and others are believed to be
responsible for (*) menstrual cycle synchronization. Ants uses these to mark paths to food. For 10 points,
name these chemicals that allow for communication within a species which often aid in sexual
reproduction.
ANSWER: pheromones [prompt on semiochemical]
The secondary type can have dilated rays which result from localized anticlinal divisions. In some
organisms, it can utilize raffinose in the polymer trap mechanism. The plugging of pores with callose also
occurs in these objects, distinguished by their possession of fiber caps. Specialized parenchyma cells such
as albuminous or companion cells facilitate movements of particles into sieve cells, while apoplastic and
symplastic loading allow translocation; a movement from sources to sinks via turgor pressure. For 10
points, name this tissue concerned with the transport of food, contrasted with xylem.
ANSWER: Phloem
In conifers, this tissue contains cells that secrete phenol derivatives that defend against fungi. Van Bel
offers a three-part classification of this tissue. Gymnosperms contain cells in this tissue named for
Strasburger. It contains cells with extra ribosomes and mitochondria, many of which collect material
through plasmodesmata connections; those cells work along with cells with few vacuoles and no nucleus
that form a channel terminated by a sieve plate. Munch's pressure flow hypothesis addresses its transport
mechanism. Unlike its counterpart, this tissue is alive. For 10 points, name this tissue found in vascular
plants that transports food, unlike the water-transporting xylem.
ANSWER: phloem
This tissue has a significantly higher sugar concentration than mesophyll [MEHS-oe-fill]. The movement
within it away from sugar sources, the so-called loading of this tissue, is explained through the mass flow
hypothesis, which is also known as the pressure flow hypothesis. Two of its components are companion
cells and sieve [siv] tubes. This is the innermost bark layer in trees, and it transports the products of
photosynthesis. Name this living tissue located just outside of the xylem [ZIE-lem].
ANSWER: phloem
Necrosis of this tissue is probably caused by mycoplasma-like parasites and produces symptoms similar to
Dutch elm disease. In many legumes, proteinaceous forisomes act as valves for cellular elements in this
tissue. Strasburger cells associate with cells of this tissue in gymnosperms, which is supported by sclereids.
Ernst Munch hypothesized that turgor pressure drives movement in this tissue, which is formed exterior to
the vascular cambium. This tissue consists of companion cells that are connected to sieve-tube elements.
For ten points, name this type of vascular plant tissue consisting of sieve cells and companion cells that
transport sugars and which is contrasted with xylem.
ANSWER: phloem
This material loses effectiveness after an action called girdling, which leads to tissue death. Ernst Munch
proposed that this material works via the pressure flow hypothesis. This material consists of parenchymal,
sieve-tube, and companion cells. In trees, this material is found in the inner bark, which is why its name
derives from the Greek for "bark." For 10 points, name this living vascular material that transports nutrients
within a plant, contrasted with the water-carrying xylem.
ANSWER: phloem
Apoplastic loading in this tissue is facilitated by SUC2. Damage to this tissue leads to the deposition of
callose in their plasmodesmata plates. According to the pressure flow hypothesis, bulk movement through
this tissue is driven by positive hydrostatic pressure, while localized movement of solute occurs by active
transport, in a process called translocation. It lies immediately interior to the sclerenchyma, outside a tissue
that may make up wood. This tissue, which contains photosynthate, is primarily composed of parenchymous
companion cells and conducting sieve-tube cells. For 10 points, name this plant vascular tissue which
transports sugar and nutrients.
ANSWER: phloem
Strasburger cells directly aid and support this tissue's proper function. Extra solute in this tissue leads to a
net movement of matter into sugar sources through this tissue's sieve plates, causing hydrostatic pressure to
force a flow of solute into sugar sinks. That movement is aided by this tissue's companion cells, whose
active transport of solute drives movement of sap according to the pressure flow hypothesis. The vascular
cambium separates this tissue from its counterpart, which, unlike this tissue, consists of mostly dead cells.
Primarily consisting of sieve tube members, for 10 points, name this plant tissue that transports sugar,
contrasted with xylem.
ANSWER: phloem
The plasmodesmata mediates the diffusion via the symplastic pathway in this tissue. Specialized cells found
here include the albuminous cells, though they are replaced by companion cells in angiosperms. Ernst
Munch hypothesized a mechanism for the translocation for this tissue, wherein a gradient is created and
turgor pressure becomes the primary actor. They also contain the sieve elements and sieve cells which
perform their most important function. For 10 points, identify this tissue which is used to transport nutrients,
and is present in the inner layer of bark.
ANSWER: phloem
The secondary type can have dilated rays which result from localized anticlinal divisions. Specialized
parenchyma cells such as albuminous or companion cells facilitate movements of particles into sieve cells,
while apoplastic and symplastic loading allow translocation, a movement from sources to sinks driven by
hydrostatic pressures and active transport. The primary type develops from the apical meristem, and it is
generally considered the innermost layer of the bark. For 10 points, name this tissue concerned with the
transport of food, contrasted with xylem.
ANSWER: phloem
One of this tissue's two component cell types has endoplasmic reticula lined up at its side. That type
of this tissue does not have a nucleus because the other type can produce proteins for it. Ernst Munch
created the Pressure Flow Hypothesis to describe the function of this tissue. Unlike its counterpart, it
uses loading and unloading to move its contents. Beavers kill trees by chewing this part of the bark
away, and its functioning is regulated by the bulk flow of materials via [*] translocation, from sources
to sinks. Made up of companion cells and sieve tubes, for 10 points, name this plant tissue that shuttles
sugar and nutrients around, contrasted with the xylem.
ANSWER: phloem
Ernst Munch used the pressure flow hypothesis to explain movement of substances in this tissue. This
tissue is composed of companion cells, which aid elongated cells with nuclei, the sieve-tube members.
Movement in this tissue is bidirectional, but always goes from sugar sources to sugar sinks. It is formed on
the outside of the vascular cambium, and transports food throughout a plant. For 10 points, name this tissue
of vascular plants, which is contrasted with xylem.
ANSWER: phloem
The triphenyl derivative of this ion is commonly used as a flame retardant in cellulose acetate films.
The charging of tRNA with amino acids leads to the release of a compound known as the "pyro"
form, which consists of two of these ions linked together. The minerals known as apatites are
characterized by the presence of this anion, which notably forms a weak (*) triprotic acid that is often
used at 85 percent concentration in the lab. It is released in the production of ADP from ATP and is a
common trigger for eutrophication. Responsible for linking adjacent sugars in the backbone of DNA, for 10
points, name this polyatomic ion with a formal charge of negative three, whose formula is PO4.
ANSWER: phosphate [accept PO4-3 before mention]
The EnzCheck and PiPer assays are two methods of spectrophotometrically determining the concentration
of this ion. Two of these ions are attached to dimethylallyl and isopentenyl groups in precursors of terpene;
when dimerized in that way, this ion is prefixed with "pyro." Kinases append these molecules to certain
amino acid residues on proteins, and electrophoresis works by using a voltage to drive these ions in DNA
toward the positive ends of the gel. This anion forms a weak triprotic acid, and the breaking of bonds to it
often provides the energy for biochemical processes. For 10 points, name this ion found once in the
structure of AMP and three times in ATP.
ANSWER: phosphate ion [or PO43-]
In the urea cycle, it is produced along with citrulline in the reaction catalyzed by ornithine transcarbamylase. Minerals containing this group include turquoise and apatite. In the first step of the Calvin
cycle, a substance with two of these groups is carboxylated. Glycolysis begins with the transfer of one of
these groups to glucose by the enzyme hexokinase. The major energy source in the cell consists of the
nucleo-base adenine, the sugar ribose, and three of these groups. For 10 points, name this ion that is found
in the backbone of DNA and has the formula PO4 three minus.
ANSWER: phosphate [prompt on formula answers]
The removal of this functional group is inhibited by sodium orthovanadate and sodium fluoride. PTB
and SH2 domains bind to this functional group. Two equivalents of this functional group are
connected to a thiazole ring in a cofactor for transketolase and pyruvate dehydrogenase. That
cofactor contains thiamine bonded to the "pyro" version of this functional group. This functional
group is added to glucose in the first step of (*) glycolysis. This functional group is added to tyrosine,
serine, and threonine residues by kinases. The cell membrane's bilayer contains lipids modified by this
functional group. Sugars in the backbone of DNA are connected by, for 10 points, what anion with charge
minus three, three of which bind to adenosine in ATP?
ANSWER: phosphate [accept diphosphate or pyrophosphate due to those clues and triphosphate due to the giveaway]
During DNA replication, the addition of each nucleotide sees the release of two equivalents
of this ion in a "pyro" form. The addition these groups to proteins usually occurs on
serine [SAIR-een], threonine ["THREE"-uh-neen], and tyrosine [TEER-oh-seen] residues. One group
of enzymes responsible for the addition of this group must bind to a cyclin [SYKE-lin] to function,
and are an example of kinases [KY-nayss-iz]. This group is found on lipids in the cell membrane,
and one common molecule consists of three of these groups bound to an adenosine [uh-DEN-oh-seen].
Name this ion with a minus-three charge, which is cleaved from ATP as a common source of energy.
ANSWER: phosphate [accept PO4 3- or PO4 -3]
The level of this ion in the blood is controlled by FGF23. Upon recieving a signal, epidermal growth
factor receptor adds this to itself, starting an intercellular signaling cascade. Three of these ions are found in
hydroxylapatite, which is a calcium containing compound that makes up bone. This ionic group is attached
to proteins by kinases. It is found on the five prime end of DNA. Three of them are attached to adenosine in
ATP. For 10 points, name this ion composed of four oxygens and one phosphorus.
ANSWER: phosphate ion [prompt on PO4 3-]
This ion is present at the six position of a molecule that targets compounds for the lysosome. A third one of
these ions is added to a central molecule by an enzyme that employs rotating beta subunits. Nauru's rich
deposits of minerals containing this ion are used to produce fertilizers. These ions are found attached to a
nucleoside in a molecule often called the "energy currency of the cell." For 10 points, name this polyatomic
ion with formula PO4-three-minus, three of which are found bonded to adenosine in ATP.
ANSWER: phosphate ion/s [or phosphates; or PO4-three-minus before mentioned]
The breakdown of one of these compounds, PIP2, is the initial step in the IP3/DAG signaling pathway. A
type of these compounds forms amide, rather than ester linkages because its backbone is made of
sphingosine, and is called sphingomyelin. The movement of these compounds from one leaflet to the other
is catalyzed by flippases. In the cell, liposomes are composed of these molecules, which have a three-carbon
triol backbone from glycerol. Choline is often found in their hydrophilic "heads," contrasted with their
hydrophobic "tails." These molecules allow only small nonpolar molecules to enter the cell. For 10 points,
name these molecules that make up the plasma membrane.
ANSWER: phospholipids [accept sphingolipids or sphingomyelin before mention; prompt on "lipids"; do not accept or prompt on "fatty acids" or "cell membranes" or "lipid bilayers"]
The Gla domain in prothrombin allows it to bind to these molecules, which have been shown to form
annular structures around the calcium ATPase. One example of them is formed by adding a glucose
molecule to sphingosine, and cleaving one that carries an inositol group yields IP3 and diacyl-glycerol. A
key indicator of apoptosis is the loss of the asymmetric distribution of them, since a certain negatively
charged molecule of this class is normally concentrated on the cytosolic leaflet by flippase. For 10 points,
ethanolamine, choline, and serine are common headgroups of what components of cell membranes that form
a namesake bilayer?
ANSWER: phospholipids
Degumming of plant oils is the removal of these specific molecules, which are used to build plasmalogens
in animal cells. The enzyme flippase moves these molecules from the inner to the outer surface, and it
is possible to scramble egg yolk into white because lecithin, one of these molecules, acts as a natural
emulsifier. Some of these are used as surfactants. When arranged in a single layer, these molecules
can form a micelle, but usually the hydrophilic heads points out while the hydrophobic tails point in,
forming a namesake bilayer. Name this type of lipid composed composed of fatty acids, glycerol, and
an anion, which makes up most of the cell membrane.
ANSWER: phospholipid [prompt on lipid]
A dimer (DIE-murr) of an ion of this element is referred to as the "pyro" form. This element combines
with calcium to form hydroxyapatite, a structural component of bones. Adenosine is linked to 3 molecules
named after this element in a compound that our cells break down to release energy. This element is found
in the head of a molecule that links it to a lipid in the bilayer creating most cell membranes. For 10 points,
name this element, with atomic number 15 and symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P before mentioned]
Hexokinase adds a functional group with a central atom of this element in the first step of glycolysis. The
radioactive 32-isotope of this element was used to track viral DNA in the Hershey-Chase experiment. The
electron transport chain reattaches a functional group containing it. The backbone of DNA consists of
oxygen, carbon, and this element. This element and oxygen break off when ATP is hydrolyzed. For 10
points, name this element which is bonded to four oxygen atoms in phosphate.
ANSWER: phosphorus
The last electron acceptor in this process, which reduces TPN, is ferredoxin. In this non-electron transport
process, the water-lysing complex in PS II transfers electrons to the primary donor complex, which releases
them to the plastoquinone shuttle. In a subprocess of this procees, a (*) carboxylase oxygenase makes two
molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate by adding carbon to a ribulose derivative. That enzyme, isolated in
bundle-sheath cells of C4 organisms, is RuBisCO. The thylakoid membrane and stroma are the respective
sites of its light reactions and Calvin cycle. For 10 points, identify this process which uses light to convert
carbon dioxide and water into oxygen
and sugars.
ANSWER: photosynthesis [accept "photophosphorylation" or "light-dependent reactions before (*)]
One type of this process uses nocturnally activated stomata, common in cacti, and is called
crassulacean acid metabolism. Compounds involved in this process include xanthophylls and
carotenes, and both niacin and (*) NADPH can be synthesized during this process, which generally takes
place in the mesophyll. For ten points, name this biologic process in which carbon dioxide and water are
combined to form oxygen and glucose, made possible by chloroplasts in the cells of plants.
ANSWER: Photosynthesis (prompt on light reactions or Calvin cycle)
The rate of this process is graphed on the y-axis of a P.I. curve, and one of the first scientists to demonstrate
this was Jan Ingenhousz [EEN-gen-house]. Near the end of this process, the iron-containing protein
ferredoxin [fehr-uh-DAHK-sin] is used for phosphorylation [fahs-for-uh-LAY-shun], and an earlier part of
this process uses pheophytin [fee-ah-FIE-tin] for electron transfer. This process often creates sucrose and
oxygen, using up water and carbon dioxide. Name this process that uses light in green plants.
ANSWER: photosynthesis (prompt on "light"- dependent "reaction"s or "photophosphorylation")
Phloem [flow-um] is used to carry the products of this reaction, and carbon fixation in the Calvin
cycle is the last step of this process. Most organisms that perform this process are cyanobacteria, and
(*) chloroplasts are the site of this process in plants. For 10 points, name this process which converts carbon
dioxide and water to sugar by using light energy.
ANSWER: photosynthesis
In one phase of this process, the Z-scheme provides energy to reduce adenine (ADD-uh-neen)
derivatives. One type of this process requires PEP carboxylase (car-BOX-ih-lace) and physically separates
its two phases; that process is called CAM. One component of this process is the reaction of RuBP
catalyzed by rubisco (roo-BISS-ko); that reaction is part of the Calvin cycle. For 10 points, name this
process, which occurs in and around the chloroplasts (KLOR-oh-PLASTS) in leaves, by which plants turn
carbon dioxide and light into sugars.
ANSWER: photosynthesis [or light-dependent reactions until "two"]
One part of this general process uses the molecule plastoquinone while another part uses the enzyme
Rubisco. In CAM organisms, one part of this process occurs during night. Part of this process occurs in
stacks called granum which are composed of individual thylakoids. One of the main parts of this process is
the Calvin cycle, and this process converts carbon dioxide and water into sugar. For 10 points, name this
plant process which uses sunlight to produce food and occurs in the chloroplast.
ANSWER: photosynthesis (prompt on light dependent reaction or light reaction before Rubisco is mentioned)
One part of this process can be represented by a z-scheme diagram, which contains upward arrows from
P680 and P700. These lead to the production of ferredoxin, and then the other part of this process receives
both NADP and NADPH molecules. That other part converts ATP into ADP using reduction and carbon
fixation and is sometimes called the Calvin Cycle. Overall, this process turns water and carbon dioxide into
sugars and oxygen. Name this process which takes place in plants.
ANSWER: photosynthesis (prompt Light(-dependent) Reaction(s))
The last stage of this process has forms known as C3, C4, and CAM, but the carbon fixation is more
commonly done via a process whose first step combines RuBP and Rubisco, the Calvin cycle, which uses
NADPH and ATP. An electron transport chain and two photosystems are involved in this process's lightdependent reactions. Name this process where carbon dioxide and water form carbohydrates in green plants.
ANSWER: photosynthesis (accept dark reactions or light-independent reactions before "chain" is read)
In some bacterias, this process is carried out in molecules containing retinal similar to rhodopsin
("row"-DOP-sin). This process takes place in the mesophyll, the first part in the thylakoids and the second
part in the stroma. That second part of this process involves the creation of a glucose molecule during the
light-independent reaction, which includes the Calvin cycle. For 10 points, name this process by which
plants convert light energy into chemical energy using chlorophyll in chloroplasts.
ANSWER: photosynthesis
In some bacteria, this process's energy transfer occurs due to the Fenna-Matthews-Olson complex.
Ferredoxin and plastocyanin transport electrons in this process, which contains a cycle that uses the
reactions of gluconeogenesis to create glucose-6-phosphate after a step involving the enzyme RuBisCO.
The Z-scheme is often used to represent one part of this process in which light causes the splitting of water.
In includes a series of steps that form NADPH and ATP. For 10 points, name this process in which plants
use light to generate energy.
ANSWER: photosynthesis [accept light reactions; or dark reactions; or light-independent reactions; or photorespiration; or Calvin cycle]
PEP carboxylase is an enzyme important to one variant of this process. One part of this process creates 2
molecules of 3-PGA. The first steps in this process involve an electron transport chain that ends with the
reduction of NADP+. An important enzyme in this process is Rubisco, which takes part in the Calvin cycle.
This process releases oxygen as a waste product and occurs in the chloroplast. For 10 points, name this
process in which carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight are used to create energy.
ANSWER: photosynthesis [accept Crassulacean acid metabolism photosynthesis; accept CAM photosynthesis; accept C4 photosynthesis]
One part of this process can be cyclic or non-cyclic, and its "Z-scheme" makes use of iron-sulfur proteins,
P680 and P700 reaction centers, and plastoquinones. One molecule used in this process consists of pyrrole
units surrounding a magnesium ion. Some species perform one part of this process via the C4 or CAM
pathways, and RuBisCO catalyzes the Calvin cycle, also known as the "dark" part of this process. Water
and carbon dioxide are converted into oxygen and sugars in this process using chlorophyll. For 10 points,
name this process in plants that harnesses energy from sunlight.
ANSWER: photosynthesis [prompt on "light-dependent reactions" until "C4" is read]
In some bacteria, this process's energy transfer occurs due to the Fenna-Matthews-Olson complex.
Ferredoxin and plastocyanin transport electrons in this process, which contains a cycle that uses the
reactions of gluconeogenesis to create glucose-6-phosphate after a step involving the enzyme RuBisCO.
The Z-scheme is often used to represent one part of this process in which light causes the splitting of water.
In includes a series of steps that form NADPH and ATP. For 10 points, name this process in which plants
use light to generate energy.
ANSWER: photosynthesis [accept light reactions; or dark reactions; or light-independent reactions; or photorespiration; or Calvin cycle]
The Bunsen-Roscoe law, or reciprocity theorem, explains this effect but cannot explain why both its
positive and negative kinds can occur in the same tissue. Null nph1 mutants of Arabidopsis do not display
it. Etiolation occurs when this phenomenon cannot operate, resulting in characteristically thin, yellow stems.
Certain hormones activate proton pumps on one side of a cell, leading to a pH decrease that weakens the
cell wall, and this phenomenon is driven by turgor in that direction. FTP, name this tendency of plants to
grow toward or away from a light source.
ANSWER: phototropism (accept heliotropism before "light source")
This process has been linked to the degradation of IAA19, which binds to and inactivates certain
transcriptional regulators. Those regulators, ARFs, may promote this process by controlling the expression
of genes containing auxin response elements. Some mutants unable to perform this process contain lower
levels of a protein whose domains bind to flavin chromophores. That namesake protein is
autophosphorylated in response to a certain stimulus, resulting in accumulation of the hormone auxin in
areas where the stimulus is absent. For 10 points, name this process that occurs under blue light and is
principally controlled by the plant protein phototropin.
ANSWER: Phototropism
Charles Darwin studied this phenomenon in oat coleoptiles (koh-lee-OP-tils), and Frits Went used agar
blocks to determine that it was not the result of electrochemical impulses. Explained by the acid growth
hypothesis, this process begins when indoleacetic (in-dohl-uh-SEE-tihk) acid lowers the pH ("P H") of cell
walls, allowing turgor pressure and expansin enzymes to elongate cells. Occurring only in response to
wavelengths under 500 nanometers, name this type of growth in which auxin stimulates a plant to bend
toward a light source.
ANSWER: phototropism [accept word forms; prompt on tropism or word forms thereof]
An outgroup is typically used to root these objects. Like cladograms, these objects are used to visualize
relationships in the field of systematics. These objects can be used to determine whether a group of
organisms is monophyletic, paraphyletic, or polyphyletic. Branch points on these objects represent the
point at which two lineages split from a common ancestor. For 10 points, identify these "trees" that show
the evolutionary relationships between species or other taxons.
ANSWER: phylogenetic trees [or evolutionary trees; or phylogeny; prompt on cladograms until it is read; prompt on tree of life; prompt on dendrograms; prompt on phylograms; prompt on chronograms]
A pharyngosellar deformation of this organ occurs when Rathke's pouch does not lose its connection
to other tissues until the sella turcica. In women who have just given birth, Sheehan's syndrome
disrupts function in one portion of this organ. Vision loss and atypical breast milk production can
result when a prolactinoma tumor forms on this organ, which is connected to a nearby structure via
the infundibular stalk. Diabetes (*) insipidus can result from underproduction of one substance in this
organ, which can cause acromegaly when it overproduces growth hormone. The anterior portion of this
organ produces ACTH and FSH, and the posterior portion produces oxytocin. For 10 points, name this
endocrine gland situated under the hypothalamus at the base of the brain, often described as the "master
gland."
ANSWER: pituitary gland [or hypophysis]
Part of this structure develops from Rathke's (RATH-kay) pouch. Cells located here include
gonadotropins (goh-nad-oh-TROH-pins). In women, this structure secretes prolactin, while in both
sexes this structure's anterior lobe secretes important hormones such as follicle stimulating hormone
and (*) growth hormone. It releases a compound that facilitates breastfeeding and causes contractions
during labor called oxytocin. For 10 points, name this endocrine gland, located in the brain, known as the
master gland.
ANSWER: pituitary gland [accept posterior pituitary until mention of "anterior"; accept anterior pituitary throughout]
During the embryonic stage of human life, the first sign of this organ is Rathke's pouch. In the fetal stage,
the pars intermedia of this organ causes the release of melanin in the skin although it disappears in adults.
Vasopressin, which controls the reabsorbtion of liquids in the kidneys, and oxytocin, a key component in
female reproduction, are both produced by the posterior lobe of this organ. The front lobe is responsible for
diseases such as not only acromegaly and progeria after epiphyseal plates have closed, but also gigantism
and dwarfism before growth plates have closed, all due to the production of growth hormone. For 10 points,
name this endocrine gland that lies beneath the hypothalamus.
ANSWER: pituitary gland [accept hypophysis]
This structure is located in the sella turcica (TUHR-sih-kah) of the sphenoid bone. It releases a
compound that binds to receptors on the adrenal cortex, thereby releasing cortisol and aldosterone.
Another compound it releases known as vasopressin regulates water retention in the body. One
compound produced by this structure is inhibited by increased levels of somatostatin
(soh-MAH-toh-stah-tin). Another compound is released by this structure during (*) labor and
breastfeeding. For 10 points, name this gland located at the base of the brain that releases growth hormone
and oxytocin and is known as the "master gland".
ANSWER: pituitary gland
Abnormal levels of chemicals produced by this organ can result in Sheehan's syndrome and diabetes
insipidus. In embryos, part of this structure forms from a depression in the roof of the mouth called
Rathke's Pouch. This organ is separated into the neurohypophysis and the adenohypophysis, the
latter of which produces endorphins in addition to gonadotropins like luteinizing hormone and (*)
follicle-stimulating hormone. Childbirth and breastfeeding are regulated by the oxytocin produced by the
posterior lobe of this gland. Antidiuretic hormone and growth hormone are secreted by, for ten points, what
"master" endocrine gland situated below the hypothalamus?
ANSWER: pituitary gland (accept hypophysis before "neurohypophysis" is mentioned")
One part of this organ is affected by Gagel's granuloma, which is a form of Histiocytosis X. Tumors
of this organ can be diagnosed by inferior petrosal sampling and are removed by trans-sphenoidal
resection. Craniopharyngiomas of this organ may spontaneously bleed to cause apoplexy. One section
of this organ expresses pro-opio-melanocortin, which is the precursor to several forms of melanocytestimulating hormone. Another product of this organ (*) spikes at ovulation. This organ, which secretes
TSH and ACTH from its anterior lobe and oxytocin from its posterior lobe, responds to signals from the
hypothalamus. For 10 points, name this gland in the skull that controls several other parts of the endocrine
system.
ANSWER: pituitary gland
Sheehan's syndrome results in damage to this organ, which is located inside a structure known as the sella
turcica, a pocket of the sphenoid bone. Also known as the hypophysis, this organ is responsible for the
production of oxytocin, thyroid-stimulating hormone and antidiuretic hormone. Located at the base of the
brain and attached to the hypothalamus, this pea-sized gland has posterior and anterior lobes, the latter of
which produces prolactin. For 10 points, name this "master" endocrine gland responsible for producing
growth hormone.
ANSWER: pituitary gland [accept hypophysis before it is read]
This organ located in the sell turcica develops from a depression called Rathke's pouch. Its anterior
section release two materials abbreviated LH and FSH. One material secreted by this organ sometimes
known as vasopressin regulates the body's water retention while another material is released in females
during labor and breastfeeding. For 10 points, name this organ that secretes antidiuretic hormone, oxytocin,
and growth hormone, earning it the nickname the "master gland".
ANSWER: pituitary gland
This body's necrosis due to blood loss from childbirth is known as Sheehan's syndrome. In developing
embryos, part of this structure forms from Rathke's pouch, and it is located in a depression known as the
sella turcica, which is found in the sphenoid bone. Herring bodies are found in the axons that connect this
entity to the hypothalamus. It regulates the body's water content by releasing vasopressin from its posterior
lobe. For 10 points, name this "master gland" that releases prolactin and sits at the base of the brain.
ANSWER: pituitary gland
A cleft-like structure sometimes remains in Rathke's pouch which forms its pars tubullaris and pars
distillaris, and infarction of this organ occurring during pregnancies is known as Sheehan's syndrome. It is
situated in a depression in the sphenoid bone called sella turcica. Its adenohypophysis is divided into
acidophil, basophile, and chromophobe regions, and herring bodies are found on the axons of the neurons
that connect it to the hypothalamus. Divided into an anterior and posterior lobe, for 10 points, name this
organ often called "master gland" which secretes prolactin and growth hormone, and is located at the base
of the brain.
ANSWER: pituitary gland
Sheehan's syndrome is the post-partum necrosis of this structure, one portion of which originates from
Rathke's pouch. Excessive secretion of one hormone by this structure causes acromegaly. One hormone
stored in this structure stimulates uterine contractions during labor, and another hormone secreted by this
structure stimulates milk secretion. This gland is part of the HPA axis, and it is connected to the
hypothalamus by the hypophyseal [hi-pof-uh-SEE-al] portal system. For 10 points, name this endocrine
gland divided into anterior and posterior lobes that secretes growth hormone, oxytocin, prolactin, FSH, LH,
and many other hormones.
ANSWER: pituitary gland [or hypophysis before mentioned (prompt after)]
Craniopharyngioma is a type of tumor of this organ that develops from the remnants of Rathke's pouch.
This organ sits in a saddle-shaped depression known as the sella turcica. Sheehan syndrome affects only the
frontal part of this organ, and visual problems usually indicate a tumor on this organ because of the
proximity of this organ to the optic nerve. Diabetes Insipidus is caused by an underproduction of a hormone
produced by this organ that regulates the amount of water in the blood, vasopressin. The aforementioned
Sheehan syndrome normally only affects the anterior part of this gland because the posterior part has a
direct arterial supply of blood. For 10 points, name this gland located under the hypothalamus that secretes
hormones such as thyroid stimulating hormone and oxytocin.
ANSWER: Pituitary Gland
One hormone produced by this structure stimulates the adrenal cortex to release corticosteroid hormones,
and another hormone produced by this structure stimulates gamete production. In addition to
adrenocorticotropic hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone, this structure secretes antidiuretic hormone
and a hormone which stimulates the ejection of breast milk and contraction of the uterus, oxytocin. FTP,
name this tiny endocrine gland located below the hypothalamus in the brain.
ANSWER: Pituitary Gland
This organ develops from the remains of Rathke's pouch, and Sheehan's syndrome leads to a decrease in
the functionality of this organ in women who have recently given birth. This organ stores vasopressin, and
one disorder in this organ known as acromegaly results from the overproduction of a certain chemical. This
organ releases a chemical known for the positive feedback loop it creates during uterine contractions, and
this organ produces oxytocin in its posterior lobe, which is separated from its anterior lobe. For 10 points,
name this endocrine gland, the "master gland" at the base of the brain responsible for growth hormones.
ANSWER: Pituitary Gland [accept Hypophysis]
The intermediate part of this structure produces intermedins, or MSH, and this structure develops
from Rathke's pouch. This organ is situated on the fossa of the sella turcica ("sell-uh tur-chi-kuh") on
the sphenoid bone. This organ secretes a chemical studied for its role in emotional bonding and the
positive feedback loop it creates during uterine contractions. Herring bodies on axons store the [*]
oxytocin and anti-diuretic hormone produced by this organ. Located beneath the hypothalamus and divided
into anterior and posterior lobes, for 10 points, name this "master gland" at the base of the brain that
controls much of the body's endocrine function.
ANSWER: pituitary gland [or hypophysis; prompt on "pars intermedia" before "Rathke"]
This organ is part of an "axis" with the adrenal gland and hypothalamus. The posterior of this organ
releases oxytocin and a hormone whose secretion is blocked by alcohol, vasopressin, or ADH. The
gondatropins FSH and LH are secreted by this organ. Cushing's disease results from it releasing too
much of a hormone that signals the adrenal gland to produce (*) cortisol. That hormone is ACTH,
which is secreted from the anterior region of this gland. This gland also produces endorphins. For 10 points,
name this endocrine gland whose anterior section secrete growth hormone.
ANSWER: pituitary gland [or hypophysis]
This structure is located within the sella turcica. Cysts can be found in the pars intermedia, which
separates this structure's anterior and posterior sections. Cancer of this structure often leads to
excess levels of ACTH and Cushing's disease. It is connected to the (*) hypothalamus through the
infundibulum (IN-fun-DIB-yoo-lum). It secretes hormones like oxytocin (OCK-see-TOH-sin) and
vasopressin, or ADH, to regulate different systems in the body. For 10 points, name this gland in the brain,
an important part of the endocrine system.
ANSWER: pituitary gland
Post-partum necrosis in this structure can lead to Sheehan's syndrome. This structure is protected by the
sella turcica of the sphenoid bone. Adenoma here can lead to the excessive release of ACTH in Cushing's
disease. One region of this structure initiates the positive feedback loop of uterine contractions by releasing
oxytocin; that portion also releases ADH. It is connected by its median eminence to the hypothalamus. For
ten points, name this endocrine gland that secretes growth hormone.
ANSWER: pituitary gland
This structure is located in the sella turcica and is the site of intermedin synthesis. The pars distalis
and pars tuberalis are part of the adeno- section of this organ. This organ receives secretions from
the paraventricular nucleus, and one of its functions is promoted by GnRH. A malfunction of its
(*) neurohypophysis can lead to diabetes insipidus, which is caused by insufficient release of vasopressin
from it. This organ is divided into anterior and posterior sections and located under the hypothalamus.
Responsible for the secretion of ADH and oxytocin, for 10 points, name this endocrine gland that is
important in homeostasis and sex development.
ANSWER: pituitary gland [accept hypophysis before "neurohypophysis"]
It lies within a saddle-like depression of the sphenoid bone known as the sella turcica. One of its regions
develops from Rathke's pouch while another arises from neuroectoderm of the diencephalon. That region
contains neurosecretroy neurons with cells bodies located in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of a
superior structure. Cortiotropes and gonadotropes can be found within its pars distalis while its secretions
include ACTH, somatotropin, FSH, and LH. Composed of the adenohypophysis and the neurohypophysis,
for 10 points, name this structure located below the hypothalamus that is divided into an anterior and
posterior lobe.
ANSWER: Pituitary gland [or hypophysis]
During embryogenesis, part of this organ results from Rathke's pouch, and Sheehan's syndrome is
underproduction in it. It is covered by a small fold called the diaphragma sellae and resides in the sella
turcica beneath the hypothalamus. This organ is responsible for producing the hormones facilitating birthing
of babies and production of milk during breastfeeding. In addition to producing prolactin and oxytocin, it
produces the hormones responsible for maturation during puberty and ovulation. For 10 points, identify this
endocrine gland in the brain, which produces FSH and LH in its anterior portion.
ANSWER: pituitary gland [accept anterior pituitary gland until "birthing"]
Alternate mutations causing this disease can occur in factors responsible for synthesizing or recycling
tetrahydrobiopterin, and the most common mutation abolishes a splice donor site for exon 12. The
pathology of this disease occurs due to accumulation of transamination derivates with glutamate, which
leads to saturation of the LNAA transporter in the blood-brain barrier. It is diagnosed using mass
spectrometry, which has replaced the bacteriological Guthrie's test. Often caused by an autosomal recessive
mutation on the PAH gene, it is treated with a specialr diet. FTP, name this disease which prevents patients
from processing phenylalanine.
ANSWER: PKU or phenylketonuria
Lofenelac is given to patients with this disease, some sufferers of which respond to sapropterin
hydrochloride. Many cases of this disease are due to a mutation of a 5' splice donor site of intron 12
in the affected gene. A variant of this disorder is caused by mutations of DHBR that inhibit
tetrahydrobiopterin recycling. One test for this disease takes a drop of blood on a disk of filter paper,
then places it on an agar plate containing B. subtilis. Its phenotype arises due to shunting into
transamination pathways, whose products can cross the (*) blood-brain barrier. Infants affected with
this disorder, which is diagnosed using tandem mass spectrometry, have a mousy order to their sweat.
Caused by a mutation in the PAH gene, this disorder is treated using a restricted diet. For 10 points, name
this inborn error of metabolism in which people cannot produce tyrosine from phenylalanine.
ANSWER: phenylketonuria or PKU
This organ unusually expresses the nonclassical MHC class I antigens HLA-E and HLA-G. Hofbauer cells
are specialized macrophages of this organ. The ToRCH infections are capable of crossing this structure.
Part of this non-plant structure contains the cotyledons, which are segments of the decidua basalis. This
structure, which consists of cells fused together into a syncytium, is permeable to IgG antibodies. It is
derived partly from trophoblast tissue and one portion of it is the chorion. It is responsible for exchanging
gases and nutrients between fetal and maternal blood. For 10 points, name this structure that is expelled
from the uterus after birth and connected to the umbilical cord.
ANSWER: placenta [prompt on cyto- or extravillous trophoblasts]
One polymer produced by this organ is found in higher concentrations in pre-eclampsia sufferers,
and contains phosphocholine which it can use to suppress immune responses. In addition to producing
Neurokinin B, it increases the amount of lipids and glucose present by producing somatomammotropin.
The syncytiotrophoblast, a part of this organ, digests the walls of blood vessels in the endometrium,
and is part of the chorion. It is short-lived in marsupials, leading to short gestation periods. For 10
points, name this organ, which in mammals nourishes the fetus.
ANSWER: placenta
In a similar mechanism to that used by some nematodes, this organ secretes neurokinin B, which allows
suppression of the immune system. In Metatheria, the nutrients it supplies are derived mainly from the egg
sac. Administration of Rhogam prevents erythroblastosis fetalis, which can be caused by IgG antibodies
crossing it. Abruption of it can be triggered by infection or trauma, but is most often caused by high blood
pressure. It develops from the trophoblast and produces progesterone, estrogen, and hCG, and failure to
remove it after birth can cause hemorrhaging. For 10 points, name this organ that provides nutrients to
developing fetuses through the umbilical cord.
ANSWER: placenta
One genus of organisms in this family commonly used in experiments is Dugesia. These organisms,
which belong to the subgroup Turbellaria, lack an epidermic cuticle and possess cilia and microvilli
used for motion. These acoelomate organisms use (*) ocelli and auricles to sense light and sound. They
can regenerate large parts of their bodies, including the head, and some of them were ground up and fed to
others in a series of biological memory experiences performed by McConnell and Thompson. For 10 points,
name this family in the phylum Platyhelmenthes that includes non-parasitic flatworms.
ANSWER: Planarians [or Planariidae; prompt on flatworms]
These organisms are either holo- or mero-, depending on how long they remain in this form. Types of
these organisms include coccolithophores, dinoflagellates, diatoms and cyanobacteria. These organisms use
diel vertical migration, but unlike nektons, they rely on the currents to move horizontally through the photic
zone. They are the favorite food of filter-feeders like the Baleen whale. For 10 points, name these primary
producers that drift in the water column.
ANSWER: phytoplankton
Specialized peroxisomes called glyoxysomes are found in organisms of this kingdom. The rosette terminal
complex is found only in members of this taxon. In preprophase, these organisms form a phragmoplast,
which allows for the development of the cell plate in cytokinesis. Stromules and plasmodesmata form
between cells in this kingdom. An organelle specific to these organisms contains grana, which are stacks of
thylakoids. Turgor in these cells in maintained by the central vacuole, which can make up 90% of the cell's
volume. For 10 points, name this kingdom which has cells with walls made of cellulose, as well as
chloroplasts.
ANSWER: plants [or plant cells; or Plantae]
Liebig's law of the minimum was originally applied to the growth of these organisms, which can
protect themselves using jasmonates ["jasmine-eights"]. Hormones in these organisms are found at
extremely low concentrations and their effects are based on the ratios of their concentrations to
those of other hormones. These organisms can be infected by a pathogen consisting of a circle of
single-stranded RNA called a viroid, and the first virus discovered was one that gave members of this
kingdom a "mosaic"-like appearance. Name this kingdom whose members can produce compounds
such as taxol and quinine, and have cell walls made of cellulose.
ANSWER: plants [or plantae; accept crops]
One class of these compounds is synthesized via the octadecanoid pathway from linoleic acid. Besides
jasmonates, another class of these compounds was discovered during Kurasawa's investigation of the
bakanae disease. Another of these compounds regulates dormancy, and is known as abscisic acid. Ethylene
functions as one of these compounds by causing ripening. One class of them leads to apical dominance and
the elongation of stems. For 10 points, name these compounds that signal plants to grow, classes of which
include gibberellins and auxins.
ANSWER: plant hormones [accept jasmonates until "Kurasawa"]
One of these chemicals forms through the Yang Cycle and is thought to be connected to the hyponastic
response. The balance between two types of these compounds determines the differentiation of parenchyma
cells, and Kurosawa discovered a type with an ent-kaurene precursor responsible for bakanae. Different
members of this group are famous for promoting apical dominance, cell differentiation, phototropism, stem
elongation, and flowering. For 10 points, name this class of signaling molecules including auxins,
cytokinins, and gibberellins, responsible for inducing physiological processes in plants.
ANSWER: plant hormones [Accept ethylene before differentiation of parenchyma cells, accept equivalents.]
One of these molecules was discovered by Frederick Addicott and eventually got the name abscisic acid.
Another one of these compounds causes trippling and is known as ethylene, which also stimulates ripening.
Another one of these compounds, gibberellins, stimulates stem growth and elongation, like auxins. Name
these molecules that regulate development in certain leafy organisms.
ANSWER: plant hormones (prompt hormones)
One type of these compounds are brassinosteroids. Another type of these compounds regulates
dormancy, and another is responsible for apical dominance. A separate type of these substances
induces shoot formation. Another type of these compounds was discovered by Eiichi Kurosawa and is
called (*) gibberellins, a surplus of which can cause foolish seedling disease. One variety of these
compounds regulates fruit ripening. For 10 points, name this class of compounds that also includes abscisic
acid, ethylene, and auxins, which are responsible for regulating growth in certain non-animal organisms.
ANSWER: plant hormones [prompt on partial answer]
Antithrombin III deficiency can be treated using the "fresh frozen" variety of this substance, which
prominently features albumin. The hematocrit is found by taking one hundred percent and subtracting the
volume fraction of this liquid, which is known as serum if it does not contain clotting factors. It is separated
using a centrifuge. For 10 points, name this yellow liquid that makes up slightly over half of the volume of
blood.
ANSWER: plasma
tRNA controls transcription in the Col type of this, and if one is attached to the cell membrane, it is
called an episome. The Shigella bacteria contains the R type of these while the F type facilitates
conjugation. It can be incorporated into a cell through transformation and replicates through (*)
binary fission, and it can often confer antibiotic abilities to cells. For ten points, name this small circular
DNA molecule, which replicates separately from the bacterial chromosome.
ANSWER: Plasmid
One of these called Ti (tee-eye) is often used in experiments involving Arabidopsis, and a
commonly used one has a hok/sok killing system. Similar to episomes in eukaryotes, they were
discovered by Joshua Lederberg. These structures are (*) transferred by conjugation, and the R one is
responsible for conferring antibiotic resistance. For 10 points, name these short segments of DNA that exist
outside of the bacterial chromosome.
ANSWER: plasmid
Col and R factors are two types of these, and they can be cut at specific sites using restriction enzymes to
allow for the insertion of foreign genetic elements. Episomes are a variety connected to the cell membrane,
and all self-replicate autonomously and can impart specific properties to the organism. They have found
uses as vectors in gene cloning and recombinant DNA technologies, but are better known for their potential
in imparting bacteria with antibiotic resistance. Exchangeable through sex pili-mediated conjugation, FTP,
name these circular DNA constructs which can replicate independently of the bacterial chromosome.
ANSWER: plasmid
Classes of these structures in bacteria include those associated with a repH gene and the pRN family. The
FLP-FRT recombination system derives from yeast's 2u one. BACs and YACs are based on these, but
larger. Agrobacterium's Ti one is useful for genetic engineering. They commonly use rolling circle
replication. The tra operon allows them to be transferred as part of the F factor. Infectious bacteria often
have virulence ones along with ones containing genes for antibiotic resistance. They can be transferred
through transformation or conjugation. For 10 points, name these self-replicating extrachromosomal pieces
of DNA that are often circular and found in bacteria.
ANSWER: plasmids
In some species, these bodies may be surrounded by segrosomes, and a convenient method of creating them
is the LR/BP clonase gateway system. Some contain an addiction mechanism via the Hok/Sok factors, while
another set are referred to as "col". Alkaline lysis followed by column fractionation is one method of
isolating them, while they may be introduced via cesium chloride, electroporation, or heat shock. Synthetic
ones often contain a polylinker region and are extracted via the miniprep, and they were originally
discovered by Joshua Lederberg in his studies of conjugation. Including the F-factor and R-factor, FTP,
name these short, circular, extrachromosomal segments of DNA found in bacteria.
ANSWER: plasmid (prompt on "vector")
The Rop protein regulates the concentration of the coLE1 example of these objects. These biological
objects can be isolated through miniprep. BACs are large examples of these objects used in genomic
libraries. The F example of these can be generated through recombinational excision in HFR strains of E.
coli. The R type of these objects contain antibiotic resistance genes and they can be transferred through
conjugation. For 10 points, name these small circular pieces DNA found in bacteria that are that replicate
independently from the bacteria's main chromosome.
ANSWER: plasmid [or episome; prompt on DNA; prompt on bacterial chromosomes]
These structures can possess postsegregational killing systems, such as the hok/sok system in E. coli.
A hybrid variety of them contains cos sequences, which contain DNA from lambda phages. These
structures can be used to encode zinc finger nucleases, which can aid in gene therapy. BACs and
YACs are larger versions of these structures. Tra genes allow these structures to be (*) transferred
through conjugation. Infectious bacteria have virulent ones, and the "R" one of these structures can confer
antibiotic resistance. For 10 points, name these extra-chromosomal circular strands of DNA found in
bacteria.
ANSWER: plasmids
The yeast-two hybrid strategy utilizes a bait and a fish type of these entities. Genetically engineered
ones of these have a region with multiple restriction enzyme cut sites known as polylinkers. All types
that are connected to the cell membrane are called episomes, while those that can impart antibiotic
resistance are known as R factors. Cells that contain these are called F plus and are capable of acting as a
donor in conjugation, while these entities do not require telomeres to replicate indefinitely. For 10 points,
identify this type of circular, extrachromosomal DNA that occurs in various unicellular organisms often
used as vectors in molecular genetics.
ANSWER: Plasmid
These structures are the primary producers of colicin [KOLE-i-sin] proteins, which can be toxic for some
strains of E. coli [ee KOE-lie]. These are generally reliant on transfer genes, and some of these are also
responsible for the hok/sok system which kills future E. coli bacteria that do not contain these structures.
Like viruses, these replicate within a host, and it is possible that viruses evolved from these structures.
Name this naked DNA that is often circular.
ANSWER: plasmids
These structures allow companion cells to regulate sieve-tube members in phloem (FLOH-um), and the
movement of substances through them is called symplastic transport. These structures occur at densities up
to one million per square millimeter in primary pit fields, and they form when the endoplasmic reticulum of
a parent cell gets caught in the cell plate during mitosis. Analogous to gap junctions in animal cells, name
these cytoplasmic channels that cross adjacent cell walls, allowing the transfer of molecules between plant
cells.
ANSWER: plasmodesmata
The presence of Schuffner's dots indicates infection by members of it, and its erythrocytic stage proceeds
from merozoite to trophozoite to schizont and follows repeated segmentation at the end of the liver stage.
Immunity to the disease it causes is conferred by carrying an allele of sickle-cell anemia, therefore
demonstrating the heterozygote advantage. Varieties that infect birds are carried by Culex, and a phase of
male gametogenesis called exflagellation was used to observe its falciparum species. This microorganism is
commonly transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito. For 10 points, identify this genus of protazoa that causes
malaria.
ANSWER: Plasmodium
This organism contains a plastid acquired from green alga, but is categorized as a parasitic
protozoan. Blocked by chloroquine, it takes a merozoite form with changing surface proteins in
human blood and liver, leaving gametocytes to be picked up by Anopheles, where the zygote produces a
cyst that divides into sporozoites with an apex of organelles specialized for host penetration into the
salivary gland of mosquito. The most prominent member of the apicomplexans, For ten points, name this
protist with an elaborate life cycle in humans and mosquitoes, the cause of malaria.
ANSWER: Plasmodium
Important to the virulence of this organism is the gene PfEMP1, and surface markers on those organisms
include the vaccine candidate MSP-1. This organism's genome has one of the most AT rich genomes
sequenced, and it uses the glycophorin-C protein on its host cells. This organism also has apicoplasts.
Different phases of it see populations of schizonts, merozoites, and sporozoites. At various stages of the
disease caused by this organism, both red blood cells and liver cells are infected, and it is transmitted
through the Anopheles mosquito. For 10 points, name this genus of protozoan which causes malaria.
ANSWER: Plasmodium [or Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium falciparum, etc.]
One derivative of these structures that synthesizes tannins was discovered in 2013. The elaio- type
are used to store fats, and the etio- type appear in those not exposed to light. Some protists absorb
these from algae they digest, which is also practised by some sea slugs, a process called kleptoplasty.
Another type, found in large numbers in potatoes and used to store starch, are the amylo-these.
Xanthophylls, carotenes, and other pigments,are synthesized in one type of these, and one of these entities
comes from the endosymbiosis of cyanobacteria. For 10 points, what group of plant organelles includes the
location of and photosynthesis.
ANSWER: plastids [Prompt on chloroplasts or leucoplasts]
One variant of pre-eclampsia, the HELLP syndrome, is characterized by a reduced number of these
entities. A significant role in angiogenesis is played by a growth factor derived from them, and these
entities function in signaling cytokines and often correspond with the receptor GP IIb or IIba. Their best
known function is mediated by the hormone thrombopoietin, and these bodies often contain von
Willebrand factors. Fibrin is absent during hemophilia, which results from the improper function of, for
10 points, what cytoplasmic bodies involved in blood clotting?
ANSWER: platelets [or thrombocytes]
Adenosine diphosphate inhibitor drugs, such as Plavix and Ticlid, will decrease the aggregation of these
cells thereby decreasing the chance of forming their final product. Their aggregation or clumping together
can be caused by a number of agents, such as ADP and collagen. Their aggregation is a part of a sequential
mechanism leading to the initiation and formation of a hemostatic plug. Also known as thrombocytes, FTP,
name these fragments of cells that are responsible for blood clotting.
ANSWER: platelets (also accept thrombocytes before mentioned)
These entities become gigantic in the May-Hegglin anomaly, and their namesake factor 4 can
bind to heparin (HEH-puh-rin). ADP actives their Gp-2-b-3-a integrins to aggregate. They contain
dense and alpha granules, and are activated by the binding of von Willebrand factor. They originate
from the megakaryocyte (meh-gah-KAH-ree-oh-sites) and cause a condition called (*) thrombosis.
These fragments also form a hemostatic plug before the formation of a clot during an injury. For 10 points,
name these small fragments responsible for blood clotting.
ANSWER: platelets
Petechiae can occur due to decreased function of these cells, which are derived from megakaryocytes.
They have four namesake factors, one of which is proaccelerin, and surface receptors on these cells bind to
fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor. Aspirin decreases the activation of these cells, which release
thromboxanes during the formation of their namesake "plug." For 10 points, name these blood cells that
accumulate to seal small tears in the blood vessel wall and are important in clotting.
ANSWER: platelets [prompt on thromboxanes]
These cells namesake activating factor was the first phospholipid found to have messenger functions.
The integrin complex IIb/IIIa ("two-b, three-a") is found on the surface of these cells, which
malfunction in Hermansky-Pudlak and Bernard-Soulier syndromes. Adhesion of these cells requires
(*) von Willebrand factor and is followed by deposition of fibrin. The protein thrombin activates these cells,
which are produced in the megakaryocytes of bone marrow. Also known as thrombocytes, for 10 points,
name these cells that form a plug at the wound site and facilitate blood clotting, named for their small,
circular shape.
ANSWER: platelets (or thrombocytes before mentioned)
The Kozak polymorphism is found in membrane proteins of these structures. Certain phosphocholinecontaining phospholipids act as activating factors for these units. These cells are the products of a lineage
that is identified by CD61. Low levels of this body component can be caused by the formation of IIb-IIIa
antibodies. These structures have difficulty interacting in both Glanzmann's disease and Bernard-Soulier
syndrome. They contain dense bodies and alpha-granules. These cells produce TX lipids. Their ability to
bind collagen is aided by von Willebrand factor. These anucleated cells develop from megakaryocytes.
They can be stimulated by thrombin and participate in the process that produces fibrin. For 10 points, name
these cell fragments that aid in clotting.
ANSWER: platelets [accept thrombocytes before thrombin, prompt on it afterwards]
These cells are enlarged and ineffective in individuals with Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Alpha granules
within these bodies contain the protein vitronectin and von Willebrand Factor, which allows these cells
to bind to collagen. These cells, produced from megakaryocytes in the red marrow, are sometimes
called thrombocytes due to their release of thromboxanes during the formation of a namesake plug.
For 10 points, name these cells found in blood that assist in clotting.
ANSWER: platelets [accept thrombocytes before read]
The "alpha 2b beta 3" integrin is found on these cells, which are the namesake of a phospholipid
"activating factor" that binds to leukocyte integrins during extravasation. Kistrin binds to receptors
present on these cells. Like enterochromaffin cells, they act as reservoirs of serotonin for the body.
These cells are activated by ADP, which they store in their dense granules. They are produced by
megakaryocytes. A cascade of serine proteases in the (*) extrinsic and intrinsic pathways forms a protein
that binds to these cells. A glycoprotein on these cells binds to the von Willebrand factor. Fibrin, formed
from its zymogen by thrombin, meshes these cells together during secondary hemostasis. For 10 points,
name these cells which aggregate in a blood clot.
ANSWER: platelets [or thrombocytes]
Dense granules in these cells contain ADP. These cells display the glycoprotein 2-b-3-a integrin complex
on their surfaces. Aspirin prevents heart attacks by preventing the activation of these cells. These cells,
which form from the fragmentation of megakaryocytes, are irregularly shaped and reside in the buffy coat
after centrifugation. For 10 points, name these jagged cells that are important in blood clotting.
ANSWER: platelets
The activation of these molecules results in scramblase transport of negatively charged phospholipids to the
surface of these molecules and also involves the activation of the arachidonic pathway, thus triggering the
production of TXA2. Deficiency of one structure found in them results in a "grey" disease, and they contain
delta or dense granules in addition to alpha granules, which produce von Willebrand's factor. They are
regulated by thrombopoeitin and bud off megakaryoctyes. For 10 points, name these cytoplasmic bodies
which lead to blood clots.
ANSWER: Platelets or thrombocytes
The glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (TWO-b-THREE-a) allows the protein fibrinogen to bind these cells together. A
disease affecting glycoprotein Ib on these cells causes them to be giant and is named for Bernard and
Soulier. The deficiency of von Willebrand factor causes these cells to lose effectiveness in performing their
function, which is activated by the protein thrombin. They form by budding off of megakaryocytes in the
bone marrow. For 10 points, name these cells that are also called thrombocytes, blood cells that aid in
clotting.
ANSWER: platelets [or thrombocytes before mentioned]
The lysis of foam cells triggers the activation of these cells, which contain alpha and dense
granules. These cells are activated when they run into collagen and begin adhering to collagen when
they bind to von Willebrand factor. Clopidogrel and aspirin inhibit the function of these cells, which
are created by fragmentation of (*) megakaryocytes. They use fibrinogen to mediate their clumping
together in coagulation. For 10 points, name these cells involved in blood clotting.
ANSWER: platelets [or thrombocytes]
The cohesion of these entities is mediated by a GP IIb/IIIa receptor. Their dense granules contain
nucleotides, ATP, calcium, and serotonin, and among the growth factors they secrete from their alpha
granules are TGF-beta and fibronectin. One receptor deficiency in these structures weakens their interaction
with the von Willebrand factor secreted by the endothelium of blood vessels. They form by pinching off of
large, multinucleate cells called megakaryocytes, and aspirin inhibits their function by irreversibly
inactivating COX-1 enzymes, which inhibits the clotting cascade. For 10 points, name these cell fragments
whose aggregation initiates the clotting process.
ANSWER: platelets [or thrombocytes]
These cells contain both alpha and dense granules, and they are activated by ADP and inhibited
by NO and PGI2. COX-2 inhibitors prevent the activation of these cells, which are created after the
fragmentation of a megakaryocyte (meh-gah-KAH-ree-oh-site). These cells are found in the buffy
coat of a centrifuged sample. Proteins like von Willebrand (VILL-uh-brawnd) factor and Factor VIII
aid in the activation of these cells, which form a (*) plug at the site of a wound. For 10 points, identify
these small cell fragments important for blood clotting.
ANSWER: platelets
Some members of this phylum contain a hook for gripping onto objects called a rostellum and an
adhesive patch called a myzorhynchus. One member of this phylum reproduces by generating a
zygote that is surrounded by an oncosphere, which eventually becomes the hexacanth protective
covering. The tegument that covers this phylum of animals is lined with folds called microtriches.
This phylum's class Monogenea is distinguished by the presence of its (*) haptors, while its class
Cestoda is noted for its proglottids. Although they are not rotifers, this phylum of animals osmoregulate by
groups of flame cells that are called protonephridia. This phylum of animals includes flukes and tapeworms.
For 10 points, name this phylum that mostly consists of flatworms.
ANSWER: platyhelminthes [prompt on "flatworms" before mention]
One class in this phylum uses a reproductive structure called Laurer's canal. The life cycle of that
class in this phylum includes the stages miracidia and cercariae. The hermaphroditic species P.
hancockanus in this phylum engages in penis fencing to determine which organism will become the
father. Its members cause the infection schistosomiasis. This bilaterally symmetric, triploblastic,
acoelomate phylum contains bundles of flame cells called protonephridia that regulate excretion. A non-
parasitic class in it is Turbellaria, which includes planarians, and common parasitic organisms include
flukes and tapeworms. For 10 points, name this phylum of flatworms.
ANSWER: Platyhelminthes [or flatworms until it is read]
One member of this phylum, Taenia solium, causes neurocysticercosis, which is a major cause of
acquired epilepsy in the world. One member of this phylum produces proglottids, which, with the
help of flame cells, are excreted and then release eggs. Flame cells in these organisms also help to
excrete wastes from the mesenchyme through tube cells; that system is called the protonephredia.
Some members of this phylum contain a (*) scolex, as well as hooks and suckers. One division of this
phylum is Turbellaria, which contains planarians. Flukes and tapeworms are, for 10 points, part of which
phylum of mostly parasitic flatworms?
ANSWER: Platyhelminthes [accept flatworms before mentioned]
Organisms in this phylum detect light through a pair of eyespots on top of their triangular heads. Like
rotifers, they have a set of tubules called protonephridia that terminate in flame cells. Despite being
bilaterians, they lack a body cavity and have only one orifice, and excrete via diffusion. These
hermaphroditic organisms reproduce through a ritual of "fencing" one another with the male organ.
Including monogeneans and planarians, this phylum also contains tapeworms and other parasites. For 10
points, name this phylum of flatworms.
ANSWER: platyhelminthes [or flatworms before it is read]
Members of this phylum that cause infections in humans include schistosomes [SHIS-tuh-sohms]. A
member of this phylum, the triclad Dugesia tigrina, reproduces by snapping in half. Some members of this
phylum have the life cycle stage cercaria, and others engage in penis fencing. Members of class Cestoda in
this phylum are divided into proglottids and have a scolex. Other classes in this phylum include Turbellaria
and Trematoda, and its members have bilateral symmetry. For 10 points, name this phylum that includes
planarians, flukes, and tapeworms.
ANSWER: Platyhelminthes [plat-ee-hel-MIN-theez] [or flatworms]
One disease caused by a member of this phylum can be diagnosed using the Kato technique and had
its disease cycle first elucidated by Piraja da Silva; that disease's acute form is also called
Katayama's fever. One class possesses opisthaptors, while another class possesses proglottids.
Microtriches are folds that line the tegument that cover the members of this phylum, whose members
include one that causes (*) schistosomiasis. One group of structures possessed by organisms of this class
are called solenocytes if flagellated and flame cells if ciliated. Those structures are called protonephridia,
and unlike other organisms with bilateral symmetry, these organisms have no body cavity. For 10 points,
name this phylum contrasted with annelids and nematodes, which consists of flukes, tapeworms, and other
flatworms.
ANSWER: Platyhelminthes (accept flatworms)
A Swedish scientist named Sixten Bock discovered a primitive member of this phylum, though that
organism was later reclassified as a deuterostome. This phylum is home to a subclass that produces
redia, cercaria and sporocysts, Miracidia, and one member has a body part called a haptor and is
part of genus Gyrodactylus, which has oncomiracidia larvae. Some members of this phylum contain
an upper body part called a strobila, and more generally those members have proglottids. It contains
the classes (*) cestoda, monogenea, and turbellaria, as well as the agent that causes schistosomiasis. FTP,
identify this phylum which contains trematoda, or fluke, a group of organisms which lack a ceolom and are
more commonly known as flatworms.
ANSWER: Platyhelminthes (accept Flatworms before mentioned)
Members of this phylum have specialized RNA-rich stem cells called neoblasts. In this phylum,
females' reproductive systems are divided into ovaries and vitelline glands, which contain yolk. In
humans, members of this phylum can cause schistosomiasis. The bodies of members of this phylum
are divided into (*) proglottids, each of which usually has both male and female reproductive organs.
Classes in this phylum include turbellarians, planarians, and flukes. For 10 points, name this phylum of
flatworms.
ANSWER: Platyhelminthes [or flatworm until it is read]
Many animals in this phylum release miracidia from their eggs, which then infect hosts and become
sporocysts. These in turn may become rediae and then cercariae, which grow inside the host mollusk and
often affect its behavior until eaten by the final host. Some of its members are composed of proglottids,
which contain eggs, attached to a scolex with hooks and suckers. It includes the divisions of Cestodes,
Trematodes, and Turbellaria, whose members include some which will regenerate when split in half, the
planarians. Flukes and tapeworms are other members. For 10 points, name this mostly parasitic phylum of
flatworms.
ANSWER: Platyhelminthes [prompt on flatworms before mentioned]
A subgroup of this phylum is considered paraphyletic because of its non-parasitic nature; that subgroup is
Turbellaria. Another species in this phylum grows large numbers of proglottids, which detach and release
eggs. These organisms extract reusable material and send it into other cavities by using flame cells. This
phylum is the cause of the second-most devastating parasitic disease, schistosomiasis. Because they lack an
internal body cavity, they are classified as acoelomates. Name this phylum of flatworms which includes
planaria and tapeworms.
ANSWER: platyhelminthes
This animal's Y chromosome shares genes with the ZZ/ZW sex chromosomes found in birds. It is one
of the only animals known to use electroreception to locate its prey, by detecting electric fields
generated by muscular contractions. The males have ankle spurs which deliver a cocktail of (*)
venom. When this mammal was first discovered by Europeans in the 1700s, most scientists thought it was a
hoax. It is one of the five remaining species of monotremes, or egg-laying mammals. FTP, name this semiaquatic mammal commonly described as "duck-billed".
ANSWER: platypus or Ornithorhynchus anatinus (accept "duck-billed platypus")
This organism is one of the only in its class to have a sense of electroreception, and it spends more time
in REM stage sleep than any other mammal. The males of this animal use their ankle spurs to produce
venom, and is one of the only extant monotremes along with the echidna. For 10 points, name this egg
laying mammal, part of whose name is derived from the mallard-like appendage on its nose.
ANSWER: duck-billed platypus (accept echidna before "REM")
Unlike those of all other members of its taxonomic class, the retinas of these organisms contain scleral
cartridges and double cones. Although female members of this genus have two ovaries, only one is
functional, and due to their lack of nipples, they secrete milk through pores in the skin. Members of
the family Ornithorhynchidae, these organisms are capable of (*) electrolocation, and male members
have ankle spurs that can deliver venom. These organisms, along with echidnas, are the only members of
the order monotremata. Known for having beaver-like tails and duck like bills, for ten points, name these
semi-aquatic egg laying mammals.
ANSWER: platypus (Accept Ornithorhynchus anatinus before "Ornithorynchidae")
This animal experiences approximately 8 hours of REM sleep per day, which is the highest of any mammal.
Like snakes, certain defensin-like proteins are found in this animal's venom. Both males and females have
ten sex chromosomes, and they may be the only mammals that follow the ZW sex determination system, a
characteristic shared with birds. They belong to genus Ornithorhynchus, and other similarities to birds,
including the use of a cloaca for reproduction, show these animals' early divergence from the placentals and
marsupials. For 10 points, name these primitive mammals, certain egg-laying monotremes with duck bills.
ANSWER: duck-bill platypus [or Ornithorhynchus anatinus]
An extinct relative of this animal had its condyle situated above the teeth and was called Teinolophos.
These animals contract their muscles to activate their rare ability of electroreception to detect
electric fields. OvCNP peptides comprise the (*) venom that they eject through their ankle spurs. Many of
their characteristics are similar to that of birds, although they are more closely associated with an animal in
the same order, the echidna. For 10 points, name these egg-laying monotremes that can have prominent
"duck-bills."
ANSWER: Platypus [accept Ornithorhynchus anatinus]
A pathogen named for this disorder is susceptible to optochin. An appearance similar to "currant
jelly" is used to diagnose the Klebsiella form of this disorder. Prevnar is a vaccine against a
bacterium named for this disorder, and that pathogen was used by Frederick Griffith to prove DNA,
not protein, was transformed by bacteria. Legionnaire's disease is a (*) form of this disorder. A variant
of this disorder called PCP and transmitted by fungi kills many HIV patients. This disorder is classified as
either "hospital-acquired" or "community-acquired" since it's so contagious. For 10 points, name this
disorder which can be caused by bacteria or viruses and generally refers to inflammation of the alveoli,
causing breathing trouble.
ANSWER: pneumonia
It's not rickets, but recent research indicates that patients suffering from Vitamin D deficiency are more
likely to die from this condition. Mortality for one form of this condition is predicted using the CURB65
score. C-reactive protein got its name because it reacts with the C polypeptide of a causative agent of this
condition. Klebsiella cause a form of this condition that results in bloody sputum, cultures of which are
commonly used to test for it. An empyema results when microorganisms infect the pleural effusion caused
by this condition, the most common cause of death in intensive care units. This condition can be
community-acquired and may be caused by parasites, fungi, viruses, or bacteria. For 10 points, name this
condition associated with pulmonary consolidation and inflammation of the lungs.
ANSWER: pneumonia
Mikhail Chumakov led a Research Institute focusing on this disease in the Soviet Union. Two of the men
who studied how to cure this were the scientists H.R. Cox and Hilary Koprowski. In trying to stop this
disease, Thomas Francis Jr. directed a nationwide field trial that involved nearly two million children. This
disease was the original focus of the March of Dimes, and it led to many patients being place in "iron
lungs." This disease had two different vaccines developed in the 1950s. For 10 points, name this disease
that was rampant before the oral and injected vaccines were created by Albert Sabin and Jonas Salk.
ANSWER: poliomyelitis [or infantile paralysis]
Strains of this virus include MEF-1, Mahoney, and Saukett. This enterovirus binds to CD155, which is
sometimes called its namesake receptor. Karl Landsteiner was the first to identify this virus, which causes a
disease first discovered by Jakob Heine. The first vaccine against this virus used inactivated cultures, in
contrast to the attenuated viruses used in the Sabin vaccine against it. Jonas Salk developed the first vaccine
against this virus. For 10 points, name this virus, which causes a paralysis-inducing disease that affected
Franklin Roosevelt.
ANSWER: polio [or poliovirus; or poliomyelitis]
CD155 protein is a receptor for this virus that was moderately treated in the 1900's by Sister
Elizabeth Kenny. Often times, this virus will cause a recoverable condition known as aseptic
meningitis. The bulbar form of this virus attacks the upper portion of the brain stem. The iron lung,
originally developed for victims of gas poisoning, was most prominently used for patients with this
virus. The common spinal variety of this virus attacks grey matter in the front portion of the spinal cord,
causing atrophy. The first widely used vaccine preventing this disease was developed by Jonas Salk. For 10
points, name this virus that crippled Franklin Roosevelt.
ANSWER: Poliomyelitis
The Francis Field Test supplied evidence in favor of a possible cure for this condition. Enders,
Weller, and Robbins won a Nobel Prize for producing the virus that causes this disease, and (+)
Albert Sabin was the first to develop an oral vaccine for this disease. An ongoing WHO campaign
aims to make this disease the third to be eradicated, after smallpox and rinderpest. (*) Jonas Salk
developed the first vaccine for this disease that afflicted Wilma Rudolph and Franklin Roosevelt. For 10
points, name this disease that causes paralysis.
ANSWER: poliomyelitis
Fossils found in Oman show four of these structures clumped in a tetrad, suggesting
that they did not separate until much later in their evolution. Species that exhibit
apomixis do not produce these entities, and in the genus Gingko they pass through
the micropyle before settling under the integument. Mitosis in their haploid
precursor produces a(*) tube cell and a generative cell, and monocots and eudicots differ
in the number of furrows on their exterior. In some species, they are produced in anthers and
spread by insects, but those for conifers are spread by wind. For ten points, name these carriers
of male gametes in plants sometimes spread to owers by bees.
ANSWER: pollen
The surface of this structure has sculpture elements which hold proteins in place on the outer
layer known as the sexine. That layer is separated from the inner layer by the columella. Individual
ones have a vegetative and a generative cell. This microgametophyte (MY-kro-guh-MEE-toe-"fight")
contains both a generative nucleus and a tube nucleus. It forms a namesake tube to the (*) ovules and
is itself released from the anthers. For 10 points, name this type of particle containing male plant gametes
which insects help move around.
ANSWER: pollen grains
This substance is produced by and targets the same organism in cleistogamy. Different traits that
encourage different ways of transferring this substance are known as "syndromes". The organism that
produces this substance is classified as either insect-loving or wind-loving, depending on its method of
transmission. It makes its way from the stigma and style to the ovary of a female. For 10 points, name this
substance which people are allergic to in hay fever.
ANSWER: pollen
The wall surrounding this substance has an intine [IN-teen] layer and a sculptured exine [EK-seen] layer.
This substance is not used by (*) ferns, and this is produced in structures called microsporangia [my-kroespoe-RAN-jee-uh]. Brownian motion was discovered by observing these grains in water. These cells often
start on an anther at the end of a stamen [STAY-men] and are transported to a pistil. Name these grains
containing microspores that are transported by wind or bees to fertilize many plants.
ANSWER: pollen (accept spores before (*))
These things are covered by a wall made up of a cellulose "intine" layer and a columella-fortified "exine"
layer. They contain vegetative cells, which produce tubes to penetrate the micropyle, and generative cells,
which release two sperm cells used in "double fertilization." They are produced in the microsporangium of
the anther and are often spread by bees, butterflies, and hummingbirds. For 10 points, name these grains
that plants spread to fertilize other plants.
ANSWER: pollen grains
The red viscacha-rat was recently discovered to exhibit this phenomenon, which is demonstrated in the
Triangle of U for members of the Brassica family. It can also be seen in the salivary glands of Drosophila,
mammalian livers, and megakaryocytes, and it can be induced in cell culture upon treatment with
colchicine. The allo type of it is seen in Triticale, a derivative of rye and wheat, and it can serve as a form
of speciation, especially in angiosperms. It can result from non-reduction in meiosis or endo-replication, in
which replication occurs without mitosis. For 10 points, name this condition in which cells possess more
than two homologous sets of chromosomes.
ANSWER: polyploidy
Aurora kinase inhibitors can induce this phenomenon in cells with acute myeloid leukemia, while
cardiomyocetes with low levels of Survivin also displayed this phenomenon. This phenomenon has also
been observed in the salivary glands of Drosophila. The allo version of it occurs when organisms have DNA
from different species. It notably occurs in angiosperms, and it can also occur due to endoreplication and
non-reduction during meiosis. For 10 points, name this condition in which a cell possesses more than one
pair of homologous chromosomes.
ANSWER: polyploidy
Some members of the genus Brassica differ mostly in the extent of this phenomenon, as depicted on
the Triangle of U, and this phenomenon's namesake complexes are groups of unrelated plant species
that can exchange genetic material. In vitro, this property can be induced by colchicine, and it may occur
because of endoreduplication, and organisms with this property often must reproduce via
parthenogenesis. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which organisms have more than two sets of
homologous chromosomes.
ANSWER: polyploidy [prompt on ploidy; prompt on aneuploidy; do not prompt on "haploidy" or "diploidy" or "euploidy"]
The Leslie Matrix was developed to give the rate of change of this quantity. The rate of change of this
quantity is given by the Verhulst Equation. Two ways of estimating this quantity are the Lincoln-Peterson
method and the marked recapture method. Two different values of this quantity are the independent
variables in the coupled Lotka-Volterra differential equations. This quantity approaches its highest
sustainable value in organisms exhibiting K-selection. The upper bound for this quantity is known as the
carrying capacity. For 10 points, name this ecological quantity, which for humans on earth is around 7
billion.
ANSWER: population size [Accept any clear equivalents such as number of species, size of the population, accept population density until Lotka. Do not accept community size. Until "K-Selection" accept humanity's size or same equivalents]
The Schnabel method estimates this quantity as the sum of MC over R plus one, and is an
extension of the Lincoln-Peterson method for determining it. In the Allee effect, fitness increases as
this quantity increases. If p is allele frequency, then p times one minus p over the variance of p is the
"effective" form of this quantity. The ratio of this quantity at consecutive time steps is called the
finite rate of increase. Genetic diversity decreases when this quantity (*) plummets during a bottleneck.
The Hardy-Weinberg equation assumes that this value is infinite. According to the logistic equation, its
time derivative is proportional to the difference between it and the carrying capacity. For 10 points, name
this quantity estimated by mark-and-release.
ANSWER: population size [or population size; or population density; or N]
A certain pair of coupled differential equations relates the time derivative of this quantity to a competition
coefficient and an intrinsic rate of increase, as well as a quantity denoted "K". One technique for estimating
this extrinsic quantity is mark-and-recapture. Genetic drift occurs because this quantity is always finite. As
may have happened to humankind after the Toba event, bottleneck events occur when it suddenly decreases.
When it overshoots an environment's carrying capacity, it is likely to sharply decline thereafter. For 10
points, give this property of a population which, when divided by the area it occupies, gives the
population's density.
ANSWER: population size [or just population until it is read; or obvious equivalents like the number of organisms or how many animals there are; be lenient]
The first extant example, Paleophragmodictya, contained a reticulated net of megascleres reminiscent of
the modern hexactinellid variety and they compose the basal branch of metazoans. Some species can form
internal buds known as gemmules and they posses three main body plans, the Asconoid, Syconoid, and
Leuconoid. The genus Aplysina can be affected by red band syndrome, and water flow through ostia is
achieved by flagella located on choanocytes. Members posses a gelatinous matrix called mesoglea which
houses collagenous skeletal elements as well as calcareous and siliceous spicules. For 10 points, name this
animal phylum possessing characteristic pores through which water is drawn.
ANSWER: Sponges or Porifera
Organisms of family Cladorhizae (CLAD-o-RIZZ-ay) in this phylum capture and digest small crustaceans,
though most other members of this phylum get nutrients by filtering bacteria from seawater. Members of
this animal phylum contain a system of canals with numerous entrances and exits, though they do not
contain a defined body cavity and thus do not exhibit definite symmetry. For 10 points, name this phylum
that contains sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [prompt on sponges before mentioned]
One group in this phylum probably descended from heteractinids, which went extinct during the Paleozoic
Era. This phylum's immune response includes the accumulation of grey cells. In organisms in this phylum,
totipotent amoebocytes allow for reproduction and the distribution of nutrients digested by currentproducing choanocytes. Those choanocytes, with epidermal pinocytes, bound a gelatinous matrix known as
the mesohyl, which separates the two layers of organisms in this phylum. The asconoid and syconoid body
forms also feature an osculum along with spicules produced by sclerocytes. For 10 points, name this
invertebrate phylum of sessile, suspension-feeding animals commonly known as sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [accept sponges before the end]
Cladorhizidae is a family under this phylum which has become carnivorous. Calcarea and hexactinellida
are the smallest classes which fall under this phylum, which is divided into classes based on the type of
spicules found in their skeletons. Although they lack a circulatory system, an artificial one is created by
water current. Also lacking nerves, muscles, and distinct tissues, this is, FTP, what simplest animal phylum
known as the sponges?
ANSWER: Porifera Accept sponges before end
One member of this phylum found primarily in tropical environments is known as a homoscleromorph and
they can reproduce using an internal bud known as a gemmule. This phylum can be classified into various
body types known as asconoids, leuconoids and synconoids, or they can be divided into material types of
calcium or glass known as either calcarea or hexactinellida. Members of this phylum have an outer skeleton
composed of spicules and they contain a jelly like matrix in their interior known as mesohyl. For 10 points,
name this phylum of animals known for the small holes in their outer walls and which include sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [prompt on sponges]
One member of this phylum can produce glass fibers and is named "Venus's Flower Basket." Members
of this phylum can reproduce by producing gemmules, but more commonly do so through fragmentation or
budding. Organisms in this phylum contain layers of mesohyl, though they lack true tissue; they also
possess "collar cells," or choanocytes, which generate water flow through these organisms. For 10 points,
identify this phylum of sessile aquatic animals, also known as sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [or sponges before mentioned]
Many carnivorous species in this phylum are found in the family Cladorhizidae, and members of this
phylum have oscula, which are used to excrete waste. Members of this phylum have either an asconoid,
leuconoid, or syconoid body type, and sclerocyte cells in these organisms produce a skeletal structure made
up of spicules. Organisms in this phylum consist of a jelly-like substance known as mesohyl, and they are
composed of either calcium carbonate or silica. For 10 points, name this phylum made up of sessile
invertebrates, more commonly known as sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [accept Sponges until mentioned]
The prefixes exo- and basi- distinguish a characteristic of these organisms called the pinacoderm.
Specialized spicules called megascleres provide support for these organisms. Wandering cells named
amoebocytes are located in the gel-like substance that takes up most of these organisms' (*) mesohyl.
These organisms possess collar cells called choanocytes and are composed of two distinct layers of cells.
Water flows from these organisms via a large opening called the osculum. For ten points, name these
sessile, simple organisms which are members of the phylum Porifera.
ANSWER: sponges (accept "Porifera" until the end)
Scientists disagree as to whether this phylum contains the Archaeocyatha, which probably is extinct.
Usually classified as leuconoid, this type of animal has collar cells that use flagella and
microvilli, and its excretory structure is an osculum. Their reproduction sometimes involves buds called
gemmules, and they can be broken down into individual cells and survive. These contain an acellular gel
layer known as mesohyl or mesenchyme, and some of them have skeletons made of spicules. These
generally take in water at their bottom and release it at the top. Name these invertebrates that generally do
not move about.
ANSWER: Porifera or sponges
"Glass" species of this phylum's class Hexactinellida have silica structural elements. Its members have
small amebocytes that carry food to the gelatinous mesohyl from their feeding cells, which have a flagellum
surrounded by a collar. Those feeding cells, called choanocytes, line these organisms' inner chambers,
whose outlets are called osculua. These sessile suspension feeders have structures based on spicules and
were once used as cleaning tools. For 10 points, name this phylum of porous organisms, the simplest
animals, which are also called sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [or poriferans; or sea sponges before mentioned]
This phylum is divided into three distinct groups, one of which is Hexactinellida. Another group
features a aragonite or calcite based skeletal structure which is secreted by amoebocytes. In this
phylum, water enters through the (*) apopyle and nutrients are distributed by choanocytes, which line a
gelatin matrix layer called a mesohyl. They reproduce by budding and reshaping the mesohyl, and two
common body forms are asconoid and syconoid. Featuring excretory structures called oscula and spicules
produced by sclerocytes, for ten points, what phylum contains sessile, invertebrate organisms commonly
known as sponges?
ANSWER: Porifera (accept "sponges" until mentioned)
Calcarea and hexactinellida are groups within this phylum that have excretory structures known as oscula.
These organisms, whose bodies consist of the gelatinous mesohyl, depend on cells called choanocytes to
produce sperm because they do not have reproductive organs. Most of these organisms are hermaphrodites
and all are sessile. With bodies consisting of spicules of silica or calcium carbonate are, for 10 points, what
phylum of organisms more commonly known as sponges?
ANSWER: Porifera [accept sponges until mentioned]
Paleophragmodictya are among the oldest life forms in this phylum. Cladorhizadae are a carnivorous family
in this phylum, while some of its members use the totipotent archeocytes to reproduce. Members of this
phylum have excretory structures called oscula, and their silica-based skeletal structure is secreted by
sclerocytes. Apopyles are pores which allow water to enter the atrium from the choanocyte chamber in the
syconoid arrangement for them, and they are also found in asconoid and leuconoid types. All members of
this phylum possess a gelatinous tissue called the mesohyl. For 10 points, identify this phylum of animals
commonly referred to as sponges.
ANSWER: porifera [accept sponges until mentioned]
Animals in this phylum have a rudimentary immune system mediated by grey cells, and their choanocytes
digest nutrients. Organisms in this phylum can have asconoid, syconoid, or leukonoid body plans, and they
take in food through the ostium. These hermaphroditic organisms can reproduce sexually or asexually by
budding. They contain a gelatinous substance called mesohyl, and calcium carbonate spicules serve as their
skeletons. Adults in this phylum are asymmetric, sessile invertebrates that eat by filter feeding. For 10
points, name this phylum containing sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [or sponges before mention]
Members of this phylum can reproduce by releasing masses of amoeboid cells called gemmules. Some
members of this phylum create circulating water currents using cells with flagella that trap and filter food
with microvilli. In addition to possessing choanocyte cells, some members of this phylum have sycon and
leucon body forms. These organisms absorb water through an opening called the osculum, and they possess
a skeleton made from spicules. Members of this phylum possess a jelly-like layer in the interior called
mesohyl, but they lack tissues and organs. Less complex than cnidarians, for 10 points, name this simplest
animal phylum, which contains the sponges.
ANSWER: porifera [accept sponges early]
Organisms in this phylum have ameobocytes (uh-MEE-boh-sites), which move around in the mesohyl
(MESS-oh-hill) and secrete spicules (SPY-cools) that give support. The internal body lining of organisms
in this phylum contains choanocytes (co-ANN-oh-sites), which use flagella to obtain nutrients. Members of
this phylum have an asymmetric body plan and do not move, obtaining nutrients from water flowing
through them. For 10 points, name the simplest animal phylum, which is comprised of sponges.
ANSWER: porifera [or poriferans; or sponges until it is read]
In these organisms, two layers of cells are divided by the amoebocyte-containing mesohyl. These
animals are divided into the groups Silicea and Calcarea depending on the material of the spicules that
make up their skeletal system. "Glass" ones belong to the clade Hexactinellida. These animals excrete
water through the osculum and consume food through the use of flagella-beating choanocytes. These
suspension feeders take in food particles from the surrounding water. For 10 points, name these organisms
belonging to the phylum Porifera.
ANSWER: sponges [or Porifera before it is read]
Sclerocytes form the skeletal structure of these organisms by making spicules. Their outsides contain the
multi-purpose archeocytes, also known as amoebocytes, and in many of these organisms, flagella-bearing
cells known as choanocytes maintain an internal water flow, which is used for feeding and respiration
before being expelled through a hole called the osculum. The most primitive member of the Animal
kingdom, for 10 points, name this phylum consisting mainly of sea sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [accept sponges until "name this phylum" is read]
One kind of these creatures creates ovoid larvae with exactly thirty-two cells. Carnivorous genuses of this
type of organism include Neocladia and Chondrocladia, and one early type of these organisms is
Archaeocyatha. They can have three types of body plan, syconoid, asconoid, and leuconoid, and their
sclerocytes secrete mineralized spicules, which serve as skeletons and sometimes as defense spines. They
take their name from their ostia, which take in water to be ejected from the osculum. For 10 points, identify
this phylum that contains the sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [accept sponges until the end]
Some organisms within this phylum produce an antibacterial compound called ageliferin, and members
of this phylum can be classified as asconoids, leuconoids, or syconoids. Some organisms within this
phylum produce spicules, and choanocytes within these organisms use flagella to regulate water flow.
Members of this phylum possess an internal jelly-like matrix called mesohyl, and they lack a nervous or
circulatory system. For 10 points, identify this phylum made up of porous organisms sometimes known as
sponges.
ANSWER: porifera [accept sponges before it's read]
Organisms in this phylum collect food through amoebocytes and can be found in three body types known as
the asconoid, leuconoid, and syconoid. In the syconoid type, choanocytes create currents in them, while
apopyles serve as pores that allow for water transport from the atrium into the choanocyte chamber.
Totipotent archeocytes allow them to reproduce, though they are better known for an epidermis layer of
pinocytes as well as excretory systems known as oscula. Sclerocytes produce their skeletal system, which
features spicules. FTP, name this invertebrate phylum that shares a common name with an absorbent
cleaning material.
ANSWER: Porifera (also accept sponges)
Sclerocytes and Spongocytes secrete substances that make up the central matrix of these creatures, and the
outer layer of these creatures is made from pinacocytes. These creatures are defended by silicate
projections called spicules, and the central excretory structure is the osculum. Members of this phylum
appear in asconoid, synconoid, and leuconoid body types, and their digestive systems are composed of rings
of microvilli with interspersed collar cells. Made of a central matrix called the mesohyl, these creatures
belong to the classification parazoa because they are thought to contain no tissues. For 10 points, name
these simple organisms, also known as sponges.
ANSWER: Porifera [or Sponges before mention]
One type of protein named after this element has a voltage-gated type that causes the falling phase of
the action potential, and is this element's namesake "channel." A cellular exchange between this element
and another is motivated by an enzyme that is a "pump" for this element and sodium, while high quantities
of this element are ingested upon drinking orange juice and eating bananas. For 10 points, name this
element with atomic number 19 and chemical symbol K.
ANSWER: potassium
Mutations in hERG, which is one of these entities, may result in the Short QT Syndrome. The protein
responsible for the occurrence of sleep apnea in rats, TASK-1 is one of these, and Rod MacKinnon was one
of the first to elucidate the mechanism of these entities. The BK, SK, and IK varieties are activated by
calcium ions and can be voltage dependent, and their activities result in action potentials across neurons.
For 10 points, identify these proteins which are responsible for the transport of monovalent ions of the
element with atomic number 19.
ANSWER: potassium channels [prompt on channel protein]
The shaker mutation, which results in shaking under anesthesia, causes a defect in these proteins.
The S5 and S6 trans-membrane helices of this protein are homologous in both voltage-gated and
nonvoltage-gated types of this protein. The voltage-gated ones remain open as long as the membrane is
depolarized, and hyper-polarization occurs because these channels also have a delayed closing. For 10
points, name these ion channels, which allow the efflux of a positive ion that is neither calcium nor sodium.
ANSWER: potassium ion channels [or K+ion channels]
The Apex Chert fossils date from this geologic unit of time. Zircon deposits at the Jack Hills in Western
Australia give credence to the idea that bolides repeatedly struck earth during it, which is called the Cool
Early Earth Hypothesis. The Huronian Glaciation occurred during this section of time, and that event was
followed up by the Great Oxygenation Event. Sub-periods of time within this one include the Eoarchean,
the Neoproterozoic, and the Hadean, the last of which is its first subdivision. It is the only super-eon that is
currently defined and consists of everything before the Paleozoic Era. It ended with the inauguration of a
geological era that featured a burst in the biodiversity of life. For 10 points, identify this period of time that
was followed by the next period's namesake explosion.
ANSWER: Precambrian Supereon
Animals engaging in this action do not have unlimited supplies in the Lotka-Volterra model. "Stotting" is
one way that animals avoid this behavior, which is also avoided by "mobbing." Engaging in this may allow
a species to be an apex species. Animals that engage in this behavior are contrasted with other consumers
known as detritivores. For 10 points, name this behavior in which an animal hunts prey.
ANSWER: predation [accept word forms like predator; or hunting; or preying on other animals; do not accept "prey"]
The DRM model suggests this behavior is partially governed by the accumulation of materials like
chitin or cellulose in certain organisms. Handling and search times govern this behavior according to
an "Optimal" theory about it. Arditi and Ginzburg challenged the classical equation modeling this
behavior, which sometimes triggers trophic (*) cascades. Responses to this behavior include mobbing,
aposematic coloring, and both Mullerian and Batesian mimicry. Nonlinear differential equations named for
Lotka and Volterra model this behavior. For 10 points, name this central behavior of population ecology in
which one organism hunts and consumes another.
ANSWER: predation (accept word forms; accept reasonable synonyms; accept "being preyed upon" or equivalents, which necessarily implies the same behavior; prompt on "foraging," "eating," or similar answers)
This type of organism has a namesake pit that can occur when limited states exist. The functional responses
of these organisms are divided into three types, with "type two" including saturation and extinction. The
canonical differential equation for them includes a conversion efficiency factor. Changes in their population
size lead to trophic cascades. Their interaction is described by the Lotka-Volterra equation. Mobbing is a
response to them, as is aposematism and mimicry. Those that do not have any organism in a similar
relationship to themselves are apex ones. For 10 points, name this type of organism that kills prey for
sustenance.
ANSWER: predator
When these species affect each other, it's called IGP or the "intraguild" form of their namesake interaction.
These species are the ones most affected by biomagnification. They are symbolized by a y in the LotkaVolterra equations. Aposematism and mobbing are commonly used to resist these organisms. These species
can only acquire about 10% of the energy from the lower trophic level. They are known as "apex" when
they are at the end of a food chain. They are located at least at the third trophic level, and include secondary
and tertiary consumers. For 10 points, name these carnivores, animals that eat prey.
ANSWER: predators [or apex predators; prompt on "consumers" of any type; prompt on "heterotrophs"]
One unique property of this region is its ability to sustain activity when confronted with interference, and
damage to this region of the brain impairs patients' ability to successfully perform the Stroop test. This
region is closely linked to a structure that generates fear-based responses, the amygdala, which itself is in
the limbic system. Damage of this region can lead to difficulty in decision-making, regulating emotions,
and social control, as was the case with Phineas Gage. For 10 points, identify this region, whose name
reflects its location as the foremost structure in the brain.
ANSWER: prefrontal cortex [prompt on frontal lobe]
Ignaz Semmelweis' pioneering use of antiseptics occurred at a clinic for patients with this condition.
One type of cancer associated with it usually follows a hydatidiform mole. Tests for this condition
measure the level of HCG, and higher intake of the vitamin folic acid is advisable during it. The
ectopic form of this condition often results from implantation in the Fallopian tube, while morning
sickness is common in the first trimester. Name this condition that usually lasts about 38 weeks, in
which a woman carries her developing child in her uterus.
ANSWER: pregnancy [accept word forms]
Those with Factor V Leiden are at high risk of clotting during this condition, and Hegar's sign, Goodell's
sign, and Chadwick's sign all indicate it. Hemolytic anemia, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet counts
are seen in one complication of it called HELLP syndrome. Another complication results in hypertension,
proteinuria, and seizures and is known as eclampsia. It results in the proliferation of milk-secreting alveoli
and it is tested for by the presence of human chorionic gonadotropin. During this time, the corpus luteum is
maintained, inhibiting ovulation, and adequate folic acid intake should be maintained for proper
development. Miscarriages may occur in, for 10 points, this condition that, in human females, usually lasts 9
months.
ANSWER: pregnancy
Complications of this condition include HELLP syndrome, and another which causes tonic-clonic seizures,
hypertension, and proteinuria. It can be resolved via dilation and currettage or vacuum aspiration. During
this physiological phenomenon, the secretion of human chorionic gonadotropin causes the corpus luteum to
continue progesterone production. Sometimes complicated by eclampsia, it can be ectopic. It normally lasts
9 months and sometimes ends in a miscarriage. For 10 points, name this condition leading to the birth of a
human infant.
ANSWER: human pregnancy or gestation
Gaarder and Gran developed a common method of measuring this quantity. This quantity is in the
denominator of Eppley and Peterson's f-ratio. The ratio of this quantity to the APAR is called the light use
efficiency, and the log of this quantity varies linearly with the leaf area index. One way to measure it is to
take one dark bottle and one light bottle, and subtract the difference in oxygen levels between the two. This
quantity, which has units of kilograms per meters squared per second, equals the standing crop divided by
the turnover rate. To calculate the net amount of this quantity, you must first subtract the amount used for
respiration. For 10 points, name this quantity, the rate at which chemical energy is made by autotrophs in
photosynthesis and turned into biomass.
ANSWER: net primary production [or gross primary production; or NPP; or GPP; or productivity instead of production; prompt on production; do not accept or prompt on "biomass"]
These molecules can be designed to selectively bind to templates treated with bisulfite or selectively
bind to methylated templates. Dimers of these molecules can be visualized by adding SYBR ["cyber"]
Green I and generating a melting curve. The formation of those dimers can be avoided through the
use of a "hot-start" technique. These molecules hybridize to the template during the (*) annealing step
of a certain technique which often uses Taq to bind to them. Prior to the action of DNA ligase, each
Okazaki fragment is attached to one of these molecules, which serve as the starting points for amplification
during PCR. Required for the action of DNA polymerases but not RNA polymerases, for 10 points, name
these strands of nucleic acids which serve as a starting point for DNA synthesis.
ANSWER: primers
These have been shown to contribute to normal hippocampal development in mice, and they may
be beneficial to certain fungi. One pathogenic type has extra beta pleated sheets in its structure.
Astrogliosis occurs as a result of a protease-resistant form of these in disorders like scrapie and fatal
familial insomnia. Discovered by Stanley Prusiner, these entities can form amyloid plaques in brain, and
they cause a disease that required the slaughter of millions of infected cattle in Britain. For 10 points,
name these infectious proteins that cause ailments like mad cow disease and Creutzfeld-Jakob disease.
ANSWER: prions [or protineacous infectious particles]
Tikvah Alper and John Stanley Griffith's theory of them posed a challenge to Francis Crick's "central dogma
of molecular biology." Their non-infectious form is known as p-r-p-c, while the infectious form is
characterized by having a beta sheet structure instead of the normal alpha helix structure and is known as pr-p-s-c. The 1997 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was given to Stanley Prusiner for their discovery
and for coining the term which is derived from the phrase "porteinaceous infection". Common diseases
associated with them in humans include Kuru, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and Mad-Cow Disease. FTP,
name these infectious misfolded proteins.
ANSWER: Prion(s)
Several fungal varieties of these particles afflict yeasts and are helpful in mammalian research. These
particles are responsible for a disease that eventually leads to complete sleeplessness, fatal familial
insomnia. Though research is being done in skeletal cells, these agents are known to develop in brain,
spinal, and lymphatic tissue. They convert into pathogens despite being the only known infective agents that
lack genetic material. For 10 points, name these proteins which can be harmful when they fold, causing such
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies as Creutzfeldt-Jakob and mad cow disease.
ANSWER: prions [accept proteinaceous infective particles]
One of the "fungal" type of these entities is found in organisms like P. anserina where it induces
heterokaryon formation in order to prevent the merging of incompatible colonies. A group of
diseases called TSEs are believed to be spread by these structures, although Spiroplasma infections
may also be the reason. All known types of these objects cause the formation of insoluble fibrous (*)
proteins called amyloids, which consist of at least 18 inappropriately folded proteins. Infected organisms of
one disease caused by these entities suffer from a spongy degeneration in the brain and spinal cord. For ten
points, name these infectious agents that cause mad cow disease.
ANSWER: prions
In a 2010 study, it was found that the cleavage of these entities in peripheral nerves causes the
activation of myelin repair in Schwann cells. These entities can cause Gerstmann-StrausslerScheinker Syndrome and a disease that leads to sleeplessness, fatal familial insomnia. These entities
are formed from mutations in the PrP protein, which creates (*) amyloid folds of beta-pleated sheets
instead of the normal alpha helices. These entities can cause kuru, scrapie, and other transmissible
spongiform encephalopathies. For 10 points, name these misfolded and infectious proteins which cause
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans, as well as mad cow disease.
ANSWER: prions
The Doppel protein is homologous to the PrP isoforms of these entities and a the so-called "laughing
sickness" is caused by these entities. A substitution of asparagine for aspartic acid on the (*) PrNP
gene causes fatal familial insomnia in humans infected by these agents. Resistant to degradation, these
entities were the cause of an epidemic of kuru among cannibalistic tribes in Papua New Guinea. They are
the causative agents of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies including Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and
scrapie. For 10 points, what are these infectious proteins that cause fatal neurological disorders including
Mad Cow Disease?
ANSWER: prions
PSI+, one of these structures in yeast, may be evolutionarily beneficial. The creation of these entities is
related to gene CD230, which is located on the short arm of chromosome 20. PrP becomes mutated in
diseases related to these entities, and they can create tissue deposits that resemble amyloidosis (AM-ill-oyDOSE-iss). They cause diseases like kuru, scrapie, and Creutzfeld-Jakob disease. For 10 points, name these
misfolded proteins that can also cause "mad cow" disease.
ANSWER: prions [or proteinaceous infectious agent]
The Doppel gene product is structurally and functionally similar to these. URE3 is an example of one in
yeast. These can lead to the formation of amyloid fibers. The SC isoform is responsible for their behavior.
They were discovered by Stanley Prusiner and it the non-misfolded state they play a normal role in the
nervous sytsem. Diseases caused by them include scrapie, kuru, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. For 10
points, name this infectious proteins that cause mad cow.
ANSWER: prions
In Podospora, the HET-S one of these molecules regulates heterokaryon incompatibility in its
normal state. The PSI-plus type in yeast is generated from Sup35p. A thirty-minute wash with one-N
sodium hydroxide is required to kill them. Startle myoclonus and high 14-3-3 protein in the
cerebrospinal fluid are diagnostic of one disease caused by them. They were described by Stanley
Pruisner and Carleton Gajdusek. They cause a transition from an alpha-helix-dominated form to a
(*) beta-sheet-dominated form. These molecules are responsible for GSS, Scrapie, Creutzfeld-Jacob
disease, and kuru, the last of which was discovered due to the Fore people eating the brains of their dead.
For 10 points, name these misfolded proteins that in bovines cause Mad Cow Disease.
ANSWER: prions [prompt on proteins or peptides]
Stanley Prusiner (PROOZ-ner) won a Nobel Prize for his work on these objects. Diseases caused by
them include the rare fatal familial insomnia, and they are sometimes thought to be an exception to the
central dogma of molecular biology. They cause the neurodegenerative Creutzfeld-Jakob (KROITS-feld
YA-cup) disease, the human equivalent of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (en-sef-uh-LOP-uh-thee).
For 10 points, name these misfolded proteins which cause diseases such as mad cow disease.
ANSWER: prions [or proteinaceous infectious agents]
Models for the action of these proteins include the cooperative autocatalysis model and the heterodimer
model. Examples of them in yeast include Mod5, which promotes drug resistance, as well as URE3 and PSI.
They are produced by the abnormal Sc version of PrP. Stanley Prusiner received the Nobel Prize for
discovering how these objects propagate. They cause a disease that was distributed via cannibalism among
the Fore tribe of Papua New Guinea, called kuru, as well as Creutzfeldt-Jakob diseas and mad cow disease.
For 10 points, name these misfolded proteins that cause correctly-folded proteins to become similarly
misfolded when they enter the body.
ANSWER: prions
In podospora, one of these molecules called Het-S regulates heterokaryon incompatibility, and in yeast,
the PSI one is formed from Sup35p in the presence of the PIN one. One of these molecules contains a
PHGGGWGQ repeat at its N-terminus. One disease caused by them has startle myoclonus as a symptom
and is diagnosed by assaying for 14-3-3 levels; that disease is linked to polymorphisms at codon 129. Fatal
familial insomnia is caused by a mutation in one protein that creates them. One disease caused by these
molecules was first found in the Fore tribe, who eat the brains of their dead. These molecules are
responsible for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. For 10 points, name these infectious agents
responsible for CJD, Kuru, and Mad Cow.
ANSWER: prions
In fungi, these entities are believed to cause the PSI+ trait. Fatal familial insomnia is caused by these
entities and these entities are composed of PrP units notated by an "sc" superscript. The only human
epidemic caused by these entities occurred on Papua New Guinea when the Fore tribe was ravaged by Kuru.
Scrapie is one condition caused by these entities, which were first hypothesized in their role in causing
transmissible spongiform encephalopathy. For 10 points, name these poorly folded proteins known to cause
such diseases as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and Mad Cow disease.
ANSWER: prions
These cause the only known diseases that can be sporadic, genetic, or infectious. They behave
somewhat like ice-nine in Kurt Vonnegut's Cat's Cradle. Initially controversial because they violate
the central dogma of molecular biology, the abnormal ones propagate themselves by causing the
normal molecule to fold itself into the abnormally structured form, without the use of nucleic acids.
They can cause Kuru, (*) as well as scrapie in sheep and goats, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans.
They aggregate to form plaques called amyloids, which disrupt tissue structure and make brain tissue appear
"spongelike". FTP, name these infectious agents responsible for mad cow disease.
ANSWER: prions or proteinaceous infectious particles
These structures can result from a proline to leucine switch on chromosome 20, which causes a
disease attributed to them. The fungal varieties of these, such as PSI+, are not always harmful. In
humans, mutations in the gene that creates PrP can result in the production of these. They cause
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (en-SEH-fah-loh-path-ees) such as (*) scrapie. Fatal
familial insomnia, Creutzfeldt-Jakob (CROITZ-felt-Jacob) disease, and kuru are all caused by these. For 10
points, name these dangerously folded proteins that cause mad cow disease.
ANSWER: prions
Chaperone proteins such as Hsp104 aid in the propagation of URE3 and PSI, which are examples of these
in yeast. They are resistant to degradation by proteases and are produced by mutations in the gene encoding
for the PrP protein, which results in them possessing beta-sheets instead of alpha helices. They are known to
cause a rare inheritable disease associated with sleeplessness and ultimately death, fatal familial insomnia.
Also causing Creutszfeld-Jacobs disease in humans, these are, for 10 points, what entities which earned
Stanly Prusiner the 1997 Nobel Prize for his discovery of these infectious proteins linked with kuru and
mad cow disease.
ANSWER: prions
A mouse model of this disease contains a mutation in the protease ZMPSTE24. The autosomal form of
Emery-Dreyfuss muscular dystrophy is caused by a mutation in the same gene as the mutation that causes
this disorder. During its synthesis, the protein mutated in this disease is unable to have its farnesyl group
cleaved off, which causes blebbing. This disease is caused by the activation of a cryptic splice site at
position 1824 of Lamin A, a component of the nuclear lamina. Symptoms of this disease, which is often
named for Hutchinson and Gilford, include complete alopecia, a large head, and the early appearance of
wrinkles. For 10 points, identify this genetic disease which causes rapid aging.
ANSWER: Hutchinson-Gilford progeria
One synthetic form of this molecule is levonorgestrel and AKR1C1 catalyzes the metabolism of it. In sperm
this molecule promotes the release of Ca2+, which regulates chemotaxis. When secreted this hormone
prevents the creation of a new follicle and it can also reduce the likelihood that a woman who has had a
preterm birth will have another. Mifepristone, also known as RU-486, acts by antagonizing the receptors for
this hormone. Luteinizing hormone stimulates production of this hormone that is produced in the corpus
luteum with estrogen and it prepares the uterine wall for a fertilized egg. For 10 points, name this hormone
that causes menstruation when its levels decrease.
ANSWER: progesterone
Along with deoxycorticosterone, metabolites of this hormone have been found to have sedative and
anesthetic effects in animals. A derivative of this hormone, allopregnanolone, is a GABA receptor
and can be used to treat anxiety. In humans, production of this hormone can be maintained with
hCG, while another one of its derivatives, (*) aldosterone, is part of the pathway for making testosterone
and estrogens. Its levels start to increase during ovulation and are kept high during the luteal phase,
contributing to the preparation of the endometrium for implantation. Produced in the ovaries, then the
corpus luteum, then the placenta, for 10 points, name this hormone that maintains pregnancy in females.
ANSWER: progesterone [accept P4]
Most of these organisms possess a stretch of nucleotides at the start site of translation called the
Shine-Dalgarno sequence. The comparison of these organisms' nucleic acid sequences found that the
SSU-rRNA regions of these organisms' genes contain so-called "signature sequences," discovered by
(*) Carl Woese. Unlike their counterparts, these organisms possess single-stranded DNA and not-asdeveloped organelles. For ten points, name this group of organisms which consists of Bacteria and Archaea
and possess no nuclei, distinguishing them from the eukaryotes.
ANSWER: prokaryotes (accept "Bacteria" or "Archaea" at any point before they are mentioned)
Xerophytes with inadequate water supply accumulate this amino acid to lower the osmotic potential
required to extract water from the soil. Aliphatic but not averse to water, its inability to hydroxylize
without vitamin C in collagen causes scurvy. Derived from glutamate, it is found at the bends of folded
protein chains such as beta turns. With a side chain bonded both to the alpha carbon and the alpha amino
group, For ten points, name the only ringed aliphatic amino acid.
ANSWER: proline
A mutation in this kind of sequence is responsible for the nondeletion form of beta-thalassemia, and one of
these from the cytomegalovirus is commonly used in animal and cell culture studies because it is
constitutively active. Footprinting has been used to determine which parts of them are bound to an enzyme
that makes use of their -35 region and Pribnow box in prokaryotes, while in eukaryotes, a protein that then
recruits its "associated factors" binds to the minor groove of their TATA box. For 10 points, name these
sequences of DNA that can be silenced via hyper-methylation, which work in concert with enhancers and
silencers to facilitate transcription.
ANSWER: promoters
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome can be a result of microdeletions in these elements, while the U6 element is one
type that is responsible siRNA production. Those that associate with bHLH elements have an E-box, while
the ChIP-on-CHIP assay can be used to find them globally. Potassium permanganate footprinting was used
to find the very strong T7 bacterial one, and when activated they form a bubble called the open complex. In
prokaryotes, they contain the Pribnow box at the -10 site, and the sigma factor recognizes it. FTP, name
these sequences in DNA which in eurkaryotes often contain TATA boxes and are recognized by
transcription factors, and by RNA polymerase in prokaryotes, resulting in gene transcription.
ANSWER: Promoter
Dragon is a tool for finding these biological components in vertebrates. The interaction of NtrC with the
glnA example of these components is facilitated through loop formation. The LTR of the mouse mammary
tumor virus contains a GR triggered example of these elements. One part of this region binds the TFIID
complex. These regions often contain CpG islands. Some of these in E. coli bind Sigma 70. The proximal
elements of these are usually located downstream from similar functioning upstream activating sequences.
In many prokaryotes, the minus 10 and minus 35 locations in these sequences are highly conserved. The
cannonical core part of this in Eukaryotes is the TATA box. For 10 points, name these start sites for gene
transcription.
ANSWER: promoters [prompt on recognition elements]
At the beginning of this process, there is a sharp separation between RAN guanosine (GWAN-oh-seen)
triphosphate [try-FAHS-fayt] and RAN guanosine diphosphate. Towards the end of this phase, Polo-like
kinase [KYNE-ase], sometimes with Aurora B, causes cohesin [co-HEE-sin] to separate from chromosomes
as part of its namesake pathway. In this stage of mitosis the nucleolus disappears, and once condensin
causes chromatin condensation, the chromatin becomes visible. This phase leads to prometaphase [proMEH-tuh-fayz], which in turn leads to metaphase, and it follows the second gap of interphase. Name this
first stage of mitosis.
ANSWER: prophase [prompt on mitosis before "pathway"; do not accept "prophase I" or "prophase II"]
The end of this phase is marked by terminalization of chiasmata. In animal cells, asters appear during this
phase and bind to the chromatids. Human oocytes remain frozen in the fourth part of this phase until they
are released during a monthly ovulation. Synaptonemal complexes begin to form during the leptoptene part
of this phase, causing chiasmata to become visible. Towards the very end of this phase, centrosomes
migrate to opposite ends of the cell. In this phase, chromatin condenses into chromosomes, and crossing
over occurs. For 10 points, name this stage of meiosis I that follows the G2 checkpoint and precedes
metaphase I.
ANSWER: prophase I [do not accept "prophase II"; do not prompt on or accept "meiosis" or "mitosis"]
During the "pre" version of this process in plants, a dense microtubule ring is formed around the
phragmosome, known as this process's namesake band. The first time this process occurs during meiosis,
synapsis leads to the formation of tetrads, and recombinant chromosomes are created through crossing over.
During this stage in mitosis, asters are formed in animal cells, both the nuclear membrane and the nucleolus
disappear, and two sister chromatids are connected at a centromere. For 10 points, name this stage that
precedes metaphase, the first stage of mitosis.
ANSWER: Prophase
The condensin complex begins this phase, in which gamma-tubulins position the centrosomes.
Crossing over occurs in this phase where chromatin coils into chromosomes and the (*) centromeres
attach to the spindle fibers. The nuclear membrane breaks down at the end of, for 10 points, what phase, the
first of mitosis and meiosis, which comes before metaphase.
ANSWER: Prophase I
In plants, the formation of a dense microtubule ring occurs directly before this process, and some plant cells
require transverse sheets of cytoplasm called phragosomes. Recruitment of gamma tubulin helps
centrosomes nucleate microtubules and those centrosomes are driven apart, eventually allowing
microtubules to attach to kinetochores. Condensation of chromatin makes it visible in chromosomes. For 10
points, name this part of mitosis usually preceded by interphase.
ANSWER: Prophase (take preprophase until "gamma", prompt on mitosis until said)
This event sees the non proteolytic dissociation of a majority of cohesins from chromosomes by Polo-like
kinase in Xenopus. Plant cells sometimes also need a phragmosome to split large vacuoles during it, and
this stage sees the use of Gamma Tubulin to drive the centrosomes apart. The nuclear membrane and
nucleolus disappear during this stage, which also sees the connection of two sister chromatids at a
centromere. The chromatin material condenses into chromosomes in, for 10 points, which first stage of
mitosis, which is followed by metaphase?
ANSWER: prophase [accept "prometaphase" until "plant cells;" do not accept "prophase I" or "prophas II"]
This process has a "pre" version which sees a namesake band form around the phragmosome. In the
first meiotic version of this process, which takes up about ninety percent of the time required for
meiosis, synapsis creates tetrads and allows homologous recombination to result in crossing-over at
the chiasmata. Because plants lack centrioles, microtubule organizing centers activate during this
phase of mitosis. In this phase of mitosis, the nucleolus [*] disintegrates, spindle fibers begin to form
asters, sister chromatids attach at centromeres, and chromatin condenses into chromosomes. For 10 points,
name this first stage of mitosis.
ANSWER: prophase
The meiotic counterpart to this phase sees the collection of transverse filaments to create a
synaptonemal complex and the packing of homologs to form bivalents. In plants, during this phase,
actin fibers line up; they will later guide the formation of cell plates during cytokinesis. During this
phase, microtubules connect to (*) kinetochores, the mitotic spindle forms, the nuclear envelope
disappears, and chromatin is condensed to form chromosomes. For 10 points, name this phase preceded by
metaphase, the first phase of mitosis.
ANSWER: prophase
Plant cells see the AAA protein katanin accumulating during this stage, which also sees the translocation of
annexin XI. It sees the phosophorylation of lamins, and gamma-tubulin is recruited by the centrosomes to
upregulate microtubule nucleation. In one process, it is divided into leptotene, zygotene, and pachytene subphases, and in order for microtubules to reach the kinetochores, the nuclear membrane breaks down, ending
this stage. For 10 points, name this stage of mitosis in which chromatin condenses into chromosomes and
which precedes metaphase, the first stage.
ANSWER: prophase
In plant cells, an event preceding this stage of mitosis sees the formation of a phragmosome. Cyclin
B1-Cdk1 localizes to the nucleus during it. During this event microtubules form the spindle. In this stage,
the nucleolus disappears, and the nuclear envelope dissolves at the end of this stage. In this stage of mitosis,
chromatin condenses to form chromosomes. For 10 points, name this first phase of mitosis, which precedes
metaphase.
ANSWER: prophase
During its diplotene stage a bivalent starts to pull apart though they still remain attached to chiasmata.
Following diplotene is diakinesis in which there is further condensation of chromatids. Before the diplotene
stage is pachytene stage where there exists full synapsis of homologues, and recombination nodules appear
showing that crossing over is occurring. In its zygotene stage, the chromosomes are completely visible and
homologous ones begin pairing along the synaptonemal complex. All of these are stages that must be
undergone in, FTP, this first stage of meiosis.
ANSWER: prophase I (prompt on prophase, accept meiosis before mentioned)
The structure of one type of these entities was solved in 1958 by Max Perutz, who shared the 1962
Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Sir John Cowdery Kendrew, while another type of these compounds
can be allosterically changed by a calcium ion, an important step of the sliding filament model. That
compound is tropomyosin, which prevents (*) myosin from binding to actin, both of which are also types
of these polymers. For ten points, name this class of biologic compounds exemplified by myoglobin and
hemoglobin, which consist of polypeptide chains of amino acids.
ANSWER: Proteins
These molecules are quantified using the Bradford assay. Tandem mass spectrometry is usually applied
to these molecules. These molecules are assembled in the N terminal to C terminal direction. Salt bridges
and hydrophobic core collapse help form their three-dimensional structure. Their monomers are sorted into
polar, nonpolar, and charged groups by their side chains, which are linked during translation. For 10 points,
name these molecules that are synthesized from amino acids by ribosomes.
ANSWER: proteins [or peptides; or enzymes]
The "heat shock" variety of these entities is a subset of the "chaperone" type of these molecules, which
are tagged for destruction by the attachment of ubiquitin (yoo-BIH-kwih-tin). Denaturing undoes the
tertiary and quaternary structure which these molecules gain from folding, and they contain
carbon-nitrogen linkages called peptide bonds. They are synthesized at the ribosome. For 10 points, name
these biological molecules composed of amino acids, a key nutrient besides fats and carbohydrates.
ANSWER: proteins [prompt on polypeptides]
This process is coupled with binding and recognition in the fly-casting mechanism. Drummond and
Wilke proposed that failures in this process create a universal anti-correlation dN/dS and expression.
This process is often described using an energy (*) funnel. Levinthal's paradox says that if this occurred
via totally random changes in state, it would take more time than the age of the universe, which argues
against Anfinsen's dogma that this process is determined only by the original structure. This process
involves the formation of structures like the DNA clamp, the TIM barrel, and disulfide bonds. It is often
mediated by chaperone proteins and it is stabilized by interactions between amino acids. For 10 points,
name this process where polypeptides gain tertiary structure and become functional.
ANSWER: protein folding [accept anything involving getting tertiary or quaternary structure for proteins; prompt on partial answers]
In bacteria, this process occurs when each one of seven subunits of a dual-ringed protein is bound to a
molecule of ATP, causing a conformation change so that the target is trapped in the GroEL-GroES
complex. The addition of urea and beta-mercaptoethanol to species in the Anfinsen experiment showed that
mistakes in this process are corrected spontaneously. A calculation by Cyrus Levinthal proved that this
process doesn't occur randomly. An intermediate in this process is the molten globule, which forms after the
burial of hydrophobic side chains. Assisted by chaperone proteins, this process is simulated @home on
computers participating in a Stanford project. For 10 points, prions result from failures in what process that
creates tertiary and quaternary structures in proteins?
ANSWER: protein folding
This process is assisted by a type of PPIase proteins known as trigger factors. This process can be
modeled by a rugged funnel-shaped energy landscape which contains a molten globule intermediate.
The appearance of a peak at 222 nm can be used to monitor this process using circular dichroism
spectroscopy. The addition and removal of 2-mercaptoethanol and urea showed that this process
occurs (*) spontaneously in vitro in the Anfinsen experiment. This process is assisted by heat shock protein
70, which is an example of a chaperone. This process sees the formation of disulfide bonds, alpha helices,
and beta sheets. Occurring irregularly in prions, for 10 points, name this process in which a protein acquires
its three-dimensional structure.
ANSWER: protein folding
The kinetics of this process is often studied using laser temperature jump spectroscopy, and it can also be
studied using dual polarization interferometry. A common technique used to study this process is phi-value
analysis, and chevron plots are used to depict this process. The timescale of this process is the subject of the
Levinthal paradox. Anfinsen showed that this process is solely dependent on the sequence of the molecule
undergoing it in an experiment using ribonuclease, and this process is often assisted by chaperones in the
cell. When this process goes awry, prions can form, and this process results in the formation of tertiary and
quaternary structures. For 10 points, name this process by which a protein assumes its three-dimensional
shape after synthesis.
ANSWER: protein folding
One method for accomplishing this employs a Curtius rearrangement followed by the hydrogenolysis
of the resulting benzyl carbamate. This process can benefit from labeling with Sanger's reagent or
dansyl chloride. One method for accomplishing this ends each step with the cleavage of a
thiazolinone; that adduct resulted from the reaction of phenylisothiocyanate with the N-terminal
residue; those processes are the Bergmann and Edman degradations. Anfinsen's hypothesis suggests that
determining this allows the reconstruction of tertiary structure. For 10 points, name this process through
which the primary structure of a polypeptide is determined.
ANSWER: protein sequencing
Members of one phylum in this kingdom have axopods and are known as radiolarians, and kinetoplasts are
used to contain the mitochondrial genome in members of another phylum in this kingdom. Laver and other
types of seaweed are part of this kingdom, which also includes other red algae and ciliates. Slime molds are
considered part of this kingdom, and so are the agents of malaria. Amoebas and paramecia are, for 10
points, members of what kingdom of eukaryotic microorganisms that are mostly unicellular, whose best
known members are the protozoa?
ANSWER: Protists or Protista
Although they are not fungi, some members of this group of organisms produce hydrogen anaerobically
using an organelle derived from symbiotic bacteria, the hydrogenosome. Some of these organisms contain
specialized organelles called glycosomes, whereas others have a flexible outer layer called a pellicle and
have a macronucleus and micronucleus. Volvox is a biflagellate example of these organisms which also
include diatoms, dinoflagellates, and slime molds. For 10 points, name these organisms which constitute a
kingdom including algae and protozoans.
ANSWER: Protists [accept Protista; accept Protozoans before "Volvox"]
Some members in this group of organisms use apicoplasts to achieve a parasitic relationship with animals.
These organisms can protect themselves by forming protective coatings known as cysts, which can defend
these microorganisms against toxic chemicals in extreme temperatures. Members of this group of organisms
mainly use pseudopods, flagella, or cilia for motion, and examples of members in this group of organisms
are amoeba and red algae. For 10 points, name this kingdom of eukaryotic organisms, some of which are
characterized as plant-like or animal-like.
ANSWER: Protista [accept Protists]
A gradient of these particles provides the energy of ATPase. Drugs like Prilosec help treat heart burn by
inhibiting compounds that pump these particles. In the body, the amino acids lysine (LIE-seen) and
arginine (AR-gih-nine) bear an extra one of these particles. In an aqueous solution, this particle exists as the
compound hydronium. According to Bronsted-Lowry theory, a base can accept these particles that define
the atomic number. For 10 points, name this positively charged particle found in the nucleus.
ANSWER: proton (prompt on H+)
This class of drugs contains a benizimidazole group linked to a pyridine, and these drugs all bind to
cysteine 813 between TM5 and TM6 of their target protein. A recent FDA warning states that long
term use of these drugs may cause chronic low magnesium, and these drugs are known to decrease
absorption of vitamin B12. These drugs, which have replaced H2 blockers like cimetidine, are used to
treat Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. A triple therapy regimen with amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and one
of these drugs is used to treat H. Pylori infections. These drugs target the parietal cell H/K ATPase,
resulting in a decrease in acid production. For 10 points, identify this class of drugs which includes
omeprazole, or Prilosec, where are used to treat ulcers and acid reflux disease.
ANSWER: Proton Pump inhibitors
These are temporary projections of cells formed by microtubule and filament structures. The cell surface
projects a membrance process called the lamellipodium via actin polymerization, which then fills with
cytoplasm. These projections play a locomotive role in some unicellular organisms but are also important in
eurkaryotic cells for cell signaling and phagocytosis.
ANSWER: pseudopodia
Polymorphisms in CCHCR1 confer susceptibility to this disease. A form of this disease that occurs
almost exclusively in pregnant women is impetigo herpetiformis. Histologically, this disease is
characterized by Munro microabscesses and regions of both hyperkeratosis and parakeratosis, and it
is diagnosed by finding clubbed rete pegs. A form of arthritis partly named for this disease is
associated with (*) HLA-B27. Sufferers of this disease show bleeding when affected areas are poked with
an instrument, a sign named for Auspitz. This disease, which comes in plaque, guttate, and erythrodermic,
typically shows red silvery plaques on its affected organ. For 10 points, name this skin disease.
ANSWER: Psoriasis
Examples of these organisms include Sordes Pilosus , which is so-named because it is covered in
pycnofibres. The propatagium and brachiopattagium are two types of membranes that comprise
these organism's most notable features. Large examples of these organisms include
Rhamphorrhynchus , and what is possibly the world's largest example, (*) Quetzalcoatlus . Fossilized
remains of baby types of these animals are called flaplings, which were discovered alongside a species of
archaeopteryx , an animal with which they are sometimes confused. For 10 points, name these dinosaurs
whose wings are supported by their fingers.
ANSWER: pterodactyls [or pterosaurs or pteranodon or pterodactylus or pterodactyloids; prompt on "dinosaurs" and "flying dinosaurs"]
Cryptozoologists believe that the Ropen of Papua New Guinea is a member of this order.
Rhamphorhynchoids and Ctenochasmatoids were basal species of this order; the basal species with longer
tails evolved to a later suborder with shorter tails, including Quetzalcoatlus. Most species in this order ate
fish and were slow bipedal runners with hollow bones; often wings were attached to their hind legs and
fourth finger. Scientists think that species in this order were adept flyers, not just gliders. For 10 points,
name this extinct order of flying reptiles.
ANSWER: Pterosaurs [or Pterodactyls or Pterodactyloids; accept flying reptiles before it is read]
Jackson and Cheetham attempted to test this theory and Peter Williamson controversially claimed to find
evidence for this in Lake Turkana. A mathematical toy model of this theory and its destructive counterpart
replaces the the lowest value in the system and the neighbors of the lowest value with random values. That
toy model of this theory was proposed by Bak and Sneppen. This theory downplays the role of anagenesis.
The unofficial motto of this theory is "stasis is data." This theory built upon Ernst Mayr's ideas about the
importance of peripatric modes. This theory was first published by Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould.
For 10 points, name this theory that states that evolution happens in periodic bursts.
ANSWER: punctuated equilibrium
The Bak-Sneppen model incorporates self organized criticality in an attempt to explain this
hypothesis, and Geliser and Walker attempted to explain the existence of homochiral biological
molecules in the light of this theory. The paper in which it was introduced began with a discussion of
a passage by N. R. Hanson regarding the "cloven hoofprint of theory." It was proposed as an
interpretation of the stability of morphospecies, and it suggests that periods of stasis are interspersed
with cladogenic events. It contrasts with the theory of phyletic gradualism. For 10 points, identify this
theory which suggests that evolution happens in bursts rather than proceeding at a linear rate.
ANSWER: punctuated equilibrium
The advocates of this theory use Wright's rule, which states that new species do not evolve into any
particular direction during species sorting. The central advocates also contrast this theory with
phyletic gradualism. This theory drew on Ernst Mayr's theory of allopatric speciation and was
analyzed by Stephen Jay Gould and Nils Eldridge. For ten points, name this theory that argued evolution
occurred in a small amount of localized bursts.
ANSWER: Punctuated Equilibrium
The first paper modeling this theory discussed C. Loring Brace's catch phrase
"hominid catastrophism", and that work also used the example of the number
of whorls on Liassic oyster and opened with a section titled The Cloven Hoof
print of Theory. Richard Goldschmidt's theory of hopeful monsters often leads
to confusion of this theory with saltation. This theory, which argues against(*)
anagenesis, was proposed after studies of trilobites by Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay
Gould. Contrasting with phyletic gradualism is, for ten points, this theory that suggests
that evolution proceeds in rapid bursts rather than gradual change.
ANSWER: punctuated equilibrium
Dixon applied this theory to the Australian languages. A mechanism behind this theory, posited by
Barnosky, is called the Court Jester hypothesis. It was originally conceived as an extension to the work of
Ernst Mayr, and it was criticized in Richard Dawkins's The Blind Watchmaker. This idea is opposed to
phyletic gradualism and can explain stasis in the fossil record. For 10 points, name this theory developed by
Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould which states that evolution occurs in bursts.
ANSWER: punctuated equilibrium [prompt on evolution]
This theory assumes the existence of Cladogenesis, but not anagenesis, and it rejects the idea of
saltation. It was first said to have been introduced by Ernst Mayr's work, and it is based on
allopatric speciation. A special case of phyletic gradualism, much controversy exists over the rate at
which evolution occurs in this theory. For 10 points, identify this theory proposed by Niles Eldridge and
Stephen Jay Gould, which states that evolution occurs in short, rapid bursts.
ANSWER: punctuated equilibrium
A 2006 paper by Given explored how this biological mechanism related to social policy towards the
tobacco industry, while Kathleen Eisenhardt used it to describe how administrative organizations change.
Richard Dawkins has argued that the fossil record does not validate this mechanism. One of the coproposers of it stated that cladogenesis predicted by it would occur in small, isolated populations. Based off
of Mayr's theory of allopatric speciation, it was first proposed in a 1972 paper by Nils Eldredge and Steven
Jay Gould. For 10 points, name this theory of evolution which states that relatively long periods of
evolutionary stability occur between relatively short periods of rapid change.
ANSWER: Punctuated Equilibrium
The originator of this theory used the metaphor of a "rolling polyhedron" to contrast it with the orthodox
"rolling ball" metaphor, according to a study written by Donald Prothero entitled this theory "at twenty."
Elisabeth Vrba has created many models for this theory. A later publication admits that using Lingula as
evidence for it was a mistake, but maintained that pulmonary gastropods and trilobites exhibited it. It was
originally conceived as an extension of Mayr's theories of peripatric and allopatric speciation. Criticised in
The Blind Watchmaker, this theory contrasts periods of cladogenesis with periods of stasis, contrary to the
model of phyletic gradualism. For 10 points, name this theory proposed by Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay
Gould, which states that evolution occurs in short bursts.
ANSWER: punctuated equilibrium
The tree method is a way to mathematically calculate the values of that this construct gives without actually
creating it. This construct is only valid if genes are independent of each other. For a monohybrid cross,
there are four sections to this construct, and for a dihybrid cross, there are sixteen. This construct only
yields genotypic frequencies. When one performs a test cross with one of these, the result is a 1:1 ratio
between homozygous recessive and heterozygous. If heterozygous individuals mate, one of these can be
used to show the genotypic frequencies for a dihybrid cross as 9:3:3:1 and for a monohybrid cross as 1:2:1.
Identify this visual representation of Mendelian inheritance.
ANSWER: Punnett Square (prompt on partial answer)
This tool can be used to describe a certain interaction known as epistasis. A notable deviation from their
predicted results can occur with linkage, while another deviation can occur with imprinting. They will not
apply when only one parent has the gene such as the mother's lack of a Y chromosome, or when a trait is
inherited from only one parent. Used to predict a 1:2:1 ratio for codominance, in a more familiar form they
predict a 3:1 ratio of dominant to recessive traits in a monohybrid cross. FTP, name this tool used when
studying Mendel's pea experiments that predicts a child's phenotype from the parents' genotypes.
ANSWER: Punnett Square
These diagrams can be used to graphically show expected three-to-one and nine-to-three-to-three-to one
ratios. These diagrams typically show combinations of letters that are capitalized for dominant and
lower-case for recessive. They do not accurately model epistasis, linkage, incomplete dominance, or other
situations where Mendel's law of independent assortment do not hold. For 10 points, name this diagram that
shows the possible outcomes of genetics breeding experiments.
ANSWER: Punnett square
Sulfur-containing analogues of these compounds are particularly toxic in people with TPMT
deficiency. Their synthesis of these compounds is inhibited by the chemotherapeutic cladirabine and
the immunosuppressant mycophenolate. The synthesis of these compounds requires GAR and
AICAR transformylase, which have a folate cofactor. The salvage of these compounds requires the
enzyme HGPRT, which is mutated in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Inosine and hypoxanthine fall into this
(*) class of compounds. Uric acid is a common byproduct of their metabolism, which causes gout. These
compounds contain a six-membered ring fused to a five-membered ring. For 10 points, name these
heterocyclic compounds that include guanine and adenine, which along with pyrimidines make up DNA.
ANSWER: purines [prompt on "nucleotides" or "nucleosides" or "nitrogenous bases" or "bases"]
The enzyme HPGRT, whose deficiency causes Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, is critical to the salvage pathway of
these molecules. Another pathway involving these molecules results in buildup of uric acid, a metabolite of
these molecules. The most famous of these compounds can be fused to ribose and phosphorylated to serve
as a cellular energy carrier. By Chargaff's rules, their percent composition in DNA must equal those of
pyrimidines. For 10 points, identify these nitrogenous compounds consisting of a six-member ring fused to
a five-member ring, examples of which include adenine and guanine.
ANSWER: purines
The carboxylation of this substance is catalyzed by a biotin-dependent namesake enzyme, and is an example
of an anaplerotic reaction. A lack of phosphofructokinase leads to Tarui's disease, in which the inability of
fructose-6-phosphate to phosphorylate prevents this compound from being produced. 1,3 bisphoglycerate is
one intermediate in the conversion of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to this compound. This compound can be
used to produce ethanol through fermentation, and to construct the amino acid alanine. Name this
compound, the desired product of glycolysis.
ANSWER: pyruvate [accept pyruvic acid]
The inhibition of one enzyme that acts on this compound can result in primary biliary cirrhosis. Its hydroxy
form can be formed by deamination of serine in the peroxisome during photorespiration, and an alternative
pathway for succinate production begins with its decarboxylation product and involves glyoxylate. In other
reactions, it can be transaminated by PLP to make alanine, dehydrogenated to make lactate, decarboxylated
by TPP, or carboxylated to make oxaloacetate to begin gluconeogenesis. Also produced by a loss of
phosphate from PEP, for 10 points, name this compound that can be decarboxylated and added to CoA to
make acetyl-CoA, a 3-carbon ketoacid.
ANSWER: pyruvate
Over 90% of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis have antibodies against an enzyme that breaks
down this compound. In the Cori cycle, this compound is created in the liver from lactate. One enzyme that
breaks down this compound contains E1, E2, and E3 subunits and uses lipoic acid and thiamine
pyrophosphate as cofactors. Transamination of this compound produces alanine. A namesake carboxylase
converts this compound to oxaloacetate in gluconeogenesis, and a namesake dehydrogenase converts it to
Acetyl CoA for entrance into the Krebs Cycle. For 10 points, name this three-carbon compound, two
molecules of which are the final products of glycolysis.
ANSWER: pyruvate [or pyruvic acid]
Lander and Borstein introduced the method of analyzing these units through maximum-likelihood maps.
The aberrantly positive results that arise from looking at these on a small sample size is known as the
Beavis effect. The Haley-Knott regression approximates the interval mapping approach to studying these
genetic entities. Classic examples of them can be found in monkey flowers. Analyses of these tend to be
coarser than association mapping and unlike simple traits, the relationship between the genotype of a site in
one of these will not explain close to 100% of the variance in phenotype. Height is a classic example of one
of these with many components. For 10 points, name these continuous phenotypes that are the result of
many genes and the environment acting together in a numerical fashion.
ANSWER: quantitative trait loci [accept quantitative trait locus]
In hematopoietic stem cells, the protein p53 has been shown to have a major role in regulating this state.
This was initially thought to be reached passively via the decay of cyclins and CDKs, although it has
recently been shown that cells actively seek to enter this under certain conditions. Cells in this state are
resistant to cytotoxic agents, which can cause a problem as some cancer cells need to be induced out of this
state to be treated. This can be induced by serum starvation, although unlike senescence, this is only
temporary, and can be reversed by exposure to cytokines, hormones, or growth factors. Name, for 10 points,
this cell state that is outside of the cell cycle.
ANSWER: quiescence [accept alternate word forms or G-0 or G-sub-0; prompt on post-mitotic, resting, or non-cycling]
Negri bodies are a clear indication of this disease, which has been treated by inducing coma in the
Milwaukee protocol. After an eclipse phase, the virus is transported via retrograde axoplasmic flow to the
central nervous system. Caused by a bullet-shaped rhabdovirus, its symptoms include encephalopathy,
paralysis, hypersalivation, and hydrophobia. A vaccine against it was first developed by Louis Pasteur. It is
transmitted through saliva and bites, and causes foaming at the mouth. For 10 points, name this disease that
causes the aggressive behavior of "mad dogs."
ANSWER: rabies
An experimental treatment for this disease consists of delivering antivirals while the patient is in a
coma and is called the Milwaukee protocol. It is transmitted by a rhabdovirus that creates
characteristic Negri bodies in infected cells. A vaccine whose creation was assisted by Emile Roux
prevented (*) Joseph Meister from developing it after a bite and was directed by Louis Pasteur. Symptoms
of this disease include a fear of water called hydrophobia and foaming at the mouth. For 10 points, name
this disease whose transmission through saliva is helped by the aggressiveness it imparts to afflicted dogs
and other animals.
ANSWER: rabies
This is the most notable disease caused by a pathogen with single-stranded anti-sense RNA. Jeanna Giese
survived this disease with help of the Milwaukee protocol. Visible Negri bodies in the hippocampus are
symptomatic of this disease. Almost no one survives this bullet-shaped rhabdovirus without post-exposure
prophylaxis, which was originally administered via a painful shot to the abdomen. Symptoms of this
disease, which is mostly spread by bats in the US, include hallucinations, excess salivation, and a
characteristic inability to drink water. For 10 points, name this zoonotic disease which can be transmitted
via a bite.
ANSWER: rabies [or hydrophobia]
The controversial Milwaukee protocol treats this disease by using ketamine [KEH-tuh-meen] to induce
a temporary coma, and the presence of Negri bodies is used to diagnose it. It is the most widespread
illness caused by a lyssavirus [LISS-uh-"virus"]. In 1885, nine-year-old Joseph Meister survived this
disease after receiving a new vaccine developed by Louis Pasteur. The major reservoir of this disease
in North America is bats, and the high density of viral particles in salivary glands leads to the
characteristic foaming at the mouth. Name this disease of the central nervous system that can cause
aggressive behavior in dogs and other mammals.
ANSWER: rabies
Leonardo da Vinci first recognized the 2/5 arrangement of leaves; that arrangement possesses this property.
Two special forms of this happen when an organism repeats one part either four or five times; those are
called tetramerism and pentamerism. This property is usually prevalent in animals that are either slowmoving or entirely sessile, and some phyla exhibit this feature only upon maturity, such as Echinodermata.
Name this type of symmetry in which an organism is roughly similar through planes cut through it,
contrasted with bilateral symmetry.
ANSWER: radial symmetry
Many plants in this biome use cauliflory to aid in seed dispersal. The theory of Pleistocene refugia
explains its diversity of bird species. Ants produce devil's gardens in one region of this biome, and
another region's fauna are separated by Wallace's line. Despite a high rate of decomposition, only
10% of nutrients are retained in this biome's soil, forcing slash-and-burn techniques to be used when
this land is converted for agriculture. Lianas and epiphytes are common in this biome, while the
largest species form a canopy where animals like birds of paradise, monkeys, and sloths live. Name
this equatorial biome home to greater biodiversity than any other ecosystem, known for broadleaf
trees and high precipitation.
ANSWER: tropical rainforest
This biome is denoted "A-F" in Group A of the Koppen climate classification system. The bauxiterich oxisol soils are prevalent in these biomes. Organisms found primarily in this type of biome
include epiphytes and the cinchona plant, from which the malaria-treating substance, (*) quinine, is
extracted. The different areas in these biomes are stratified into A, B, and C layers, also known as the
emergent layer, the upper canopy, the understory, and the floor. These biomes are dominated by broadleaf
evergreen trees. For ten points, name these biomes which receive more than 100 inches of rain every year
and are typically found near the equator.
ANSWER: tropical rainforest (prompt on "forest" or "tropics")
The guanine exchange factor of this molecule is Sos, which is recruited by the SH2 protein Grb2
when activated by dimerized receptor tyrosine kinases. It activates the MAP Kinase Kinase Kinase
Raf, which phosphorylates MEK, which phosphorylates MAP kinase to allow dimerization and leads
to phosphorylation of transcription factors like Elk-1, which lead to transcription of cell proliferation
genes via Fos and Jun. Downstream from Src in focal adhesions, it is responsive to growth factors. For ten
points, name this GTPase protein whose mutation results in an important oncogene, whose activated GAP
form results in cancer.
ANSWER: Ras
A protein responsible for inactivating this protein is mutated in a disease in which patients have
Lisch nodules and/or more than large cafe au lait spots; besides being downregulated by NF1, a
group of proteins that help inactivate these proteins share an "arginine finger" which increases the
rate of nucleophilic attack by water. Mutations of G12 in the P-loop of this protein can cause PIN
lesions in a mouse model. Cdc25 and son of sevenless belong to a group of proteins responsible for
switching out the cofactor of this protein. The activation of this protein is controlled by (*) GAP and
GEF factors, which cause cleavage or exchange of its nucleotide cofactor. This protein, which activates the
MAPK cascade, has K, H, and N isoforms and is mutated in 96% of pancreatic cancers. For 10 points,
name this single-subunit G-protein and oncogene, which gets its name from its discovery in rat sarcomas.
ANSWER: Ras [or K-ras, H-ras, or N-ras]
The most popular laboratory strains of this organism are derived from the Wister type, and the Cre-Lox
recombinase system is often used to remove their genes. Capecci, Evans, and Smithes won the 2007 Nobel
for their work in developing a knockout procedure in these organisms, and extensive research on them has
been shown to increase the length of their telomeres over time. Griffith used strains of pneumoccus on this
animal in order to demonstrate the principle of transformation. For 10 points, name these common
laboratory animals that are more famously made to run in mazes searching for cheese.
ANSWER: lab rats or mice or mus musculus
One form of this process uses non-homologous end joining to generate B and T cell receptor diversity.
It's not sexual reproduction, but the worst form of Muller's ratchet occurs in species that do not undergo this
process. Entities that have undergone it are called "chimeric," like plasmids that take in foreign material. It
happens at a frequency correlated with map distance during prophase I as a result of crossing over. Meiosis
(my-OH-sis) involves, for 10 points, what mixing between different pieces of genetic information?
ANSWER: genetic recombination [or V(D)J recombination]
The amount of this color in the facial coloration of a mandrill is associated with its dominance.
Stickleback fish attack any object that has this color on their underside. Phytochromes
(FIE-toh-kromes), which control circadian rhythms in plants, are activated by light of this color.
Algae of this color have phycobilisomes (fie-koh-BILL-lih-sohms) and are in the division rhodophyta
(roh-doh-FIE-tah). A (*) queen of this color names a hypothesis of evolutionary biology. Photoreceptors
in the eye sense green, blue, and this color. For 10 points, name this color, also the color of human blood.
ANSWER: red
In isomorphic species of this phylum, resorcinol is used to distinguish between gametophyte and sporophyte
thalli. Some organisms in this phylum go through a "conchocelis" phase, which may produce embryonic
gametophytes. During the division of their thalli, pores called pit connections are formed in their septae.
Carrageenan, which is isolated from these organisms, is a popular emulsifier, and they are the oldest phylum
to have evolved chlorophyll C. An organism from this phylum, Porphyra, is extensively studied for its
desiccation tolerance and is eaten as nori. Its members get their distinctive color due to phycoerythrin. For
10 points, identify this phylum of marine organisms which produce tides of a namesake color.
ANSWER: red algae [or rhodophyta]
The colony-forming unit CFU-E is central to the differentiation of these cells. As these cells
differentiate, they switch from staining basophilic to staining acidophilic. A protein found in these cells is
switched by the transcription factor GATA1 from an infant to an adult form. The hormone EPO regulates
the production of these cells, which can be produced in an "extramedullary" manner in the spleen and liver.
These biconcave cells lack a nucleus. For 10 points, name these that can be "sickle" shaped in a type of
anemia, and carry oxygen using hemoglobin.
ANSWER: red blood cells [accept RBCs; or erythrocytes; or erythroid cells; or haematids]
Immature forms of these cells are called reticulocytes, and a surplus of these cells causes a disease called
polycythemia. Technically referred to as erythrocytes, these cells lack a nucleus and have the shape of
biconcave disks. Anemia is characterized by a deficiency of these cells, which consist mainly of the
iron-containing protein hemoglobin. For 10 points, name these cells that transport oxygen through the
body, in contrast to their white counterparts.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or RBCs; or erythrocytes before it is read]
Compounds on the surface of these entities include band 3, ankyrin, and various surface glycophorins.
Polycythemia occurs due to their overabundance, and reticulocytes are their immature form in the bone
marrow. These mammalian cells notably lack a nucleus and possess a biconcave shape, with their color
coming from the heme group of a compound they carry, abnormal versions of which lead to their sickling.
For 10 points identify these cells which carry hemoglobin and thus transfer oxygen in the body, also known
as erythrocytes.
ANSWER: red blood cells [accept erythrocytes until mentioned]
Codocytes are target-shaped varieties of these entities, and immature ones are named reticulocytes. These
structures usually lack nuclei and are biconcave, but mutate into a crescent-shape when afflicted with sicklecell anemia. Destroyed in the spleen, for 10 points, name these cellular components developed in the bone
marrow which transport hemoglobin and carry oxygen from the lungs to the tissue.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or erythrocytes; or erthryons; or haematids]
A structural protein discovered in these cells was named for the ghost-like outlines of these cells
it left behind, and these cells do not contain class one major histocompatibility complexes. Some
deficiencies in these cells can be traced to poor spectrin production. These non-liver cells are infected
by plasmodium in a disease commonly transmitted by female Anopheles [uh-NAH-fuh-leez] mosquitoes.
These cells, which develop from reticulocytes [reh-TIK-yoo-loh-"sites"], are destroyed in the spleen. A
glutamic acid-to-valine mutation can cause these non-nucleated cells to have a sickle shape. Name
these cells which contain hemoglobin and transport oxygen, giving color to a fluid found in the arteries
and veins.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or erythrocytes; accept RBCs; prompt on partial answers]
The transport protein AE1 makes up a quarter of the surface of these cells, which may contain nuclear
remnants called Howell-Jolly bodies. These cells develop in reticulocytes. The spleen sequesters these cells,
whose production is stimulated by EPO in bone marrow. Vertebrate examples of these cells lack a nucleus.
They are normally shaped like biconcave disks, but they are deformed in people with sickle-cell anemia.
For 10 points each, name these cells that carry hemoglobin and transport oxygen.
ANSWER: red blood cells/corpuscles [or erythrocytes; or RBCs; prompt on blood cells]
The RhAG transporter allows for gas exchange between the internal and external moieties of these
cells, and aging ones of these cells undergo senescence when their membranes become thin. The tibia
and the femur tend to lose the ability to synthesize them in people over twenty-five since they lack the
enzyme necessary to carry out erythropoiesis. These cells are often deformed as a result of a genetic
disease known as sickle cell anemia. For 10 points, name this type of cell which consists of plasma and
hemoglobin and is responsible for transporting oxygen throughout the body.
ANSWER: Red Blood Cells (accept erythrocytes before "erythropoiesis" is mentioned)
These cells take on a spiculated appearance in a-beta-lipo-proteinemia, being called
acanthocytes, while they take on a helmet shape in patients suffering from TTP. Parvovirus can
arrest the development of these cells at the pronormoblast stage. A parasite that infects these
cells uses the glycophorin C receptor. The immediate precursors of these cells are called
reticulocytes. One enzyme found in these cells converts H2O and CO2 to H2CO3. These cells
also contain a protein that has two alpha and two beta chains whose mutation causes these cells
to assume a curved shape. For 10 points, name these biconcave a-nucleated cells chock full of
hemoglobin, which are responsible for carrying oxygen through the bloodstream.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or erythrocytes]
One disease in which the precursors of these cells are multinucleated is caused by mutation in the
SEC23B gene. Another disease called "M6" in the FAB classification is caused by overproliferation
of their precursors. They take on unusual morphologies in poikilocytosis and dacrocytosis, the latter
of which is caused by myelofibrosis. They form stacks called rouleaux in response to inflammation,
and mutations in their cytoskeletal components cause elliptocytosis or (*) spherocytosis. These cells
develop from the differentiation of reticulocytes. Another disease of these cells causes splenic autoinfarction and is most commonly caused by a glutamic acid to valine mutation in the beta-chain of
hemoglobin; that disease causes these cells to lose their biconcave shape. For 10 points, name these cells
that take on a curved shape in sickle-cell anemia, which are responsible for carrying oxygen and giving
blood its color.
ANSWER: erythrocytes [or red blood cells; or RBCs; prompt on "blood cells"]
The formation of these cells is stimulated by the release of EPO hormone by the kidney. These cells
can be arranged in the rouleaux formation, in which they are stacked on top of one another. These
cells contain the enzyme carbonic anhydrase. They originated from reticulocytes that lost their
organelles. Also called (*) erythrocytes, these cells are found in lower amounts in anemia. These cells lack
a nucleus and their color comes from a molecule that contains an iron atom. For 10 points, name these
blood cells which contain hemoglobin and transport oxygen throughout the body.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or erythrocytes before it is mentioned]
The direct Coombs test looks for the presence of antibodies on these cells, and one disease associated with
these cells comes in aplastic and pernicious forms. One protein in these cells undergoes the Bohr shift in
response to carbon dioxide concentrations, and these cells develop from (*) normoblasts. In one disease,
these cells assume an abnormal shape due to valine replacing glutamic acid in a certain protein. These cells
can have Rh factors and A and B antibodies on their surface, and low counts of them are called anemias.
For 10 points, name these biconcave cells which lack nuclei, contain hemoglobin and carry oxygen
throughout the body.
ANSWER: red blood cells or erythrocytes
The cytoskeletons of these cells consist primarily of spectrin, which links to such transmembrane proteins
such as band 3 and glycophorin C. Folic acid deficiency leads to underproduction of these cells, young
examples of which are called reticulocytes. Since these cells lack nuclei and organelles, they cannot
reproduce, and they die out after around 120 days. Gas diffusion occurs rapidly across their membranes due
to the high surface area to volume ratio possessed by their biconcave disk shape. The body has a low
amount of these cells in anemia. For 10 points, name these cells which use hemoglobin to carry oxygen
around the circulatory system.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or erythrocytes]
Spectrin was discovered in these cells and was named because, when these cells are emptied of cytoplasm,
they're called "ghosts." 2,3-biphosphoglycerate is principally found in these cells. Evans syndrome affects
them and can be detected with a direct Coombs test. These cells stack in the rouleaux formation, and a
protein found in these cells exists in T and R conformations and is the classic model of enzyme
cooperativity. When immature, these cells are called reticulocytes. The only cells in mammals without
nuclei, these cells may express an antigen called the Rhesus factor. For 10 points, name these hemoglobincontaining cells that carry oxygen in the circulatory system.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or RBCs; or erythrocytes]
Thalassemia patients have a reduced quantity of these cells, which can be measured using the mean
corpuscular volume. The schizont phase of malaria is found within these cells. At the end of their lifespan,
which is about 120 days, these cells are relocated to the spleen and destroyed. The body condition when a
low number of these cells are present is anemia. These cells, which do not have nuclei, gain their color from
an iron-containing protein known as hemoglobin. For 10 points, name these cells in the bloodstream, which
carry oxygen throughout the body.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or erythrocytes]
An abnormal amount of DNA within these structures forms Howell-Jolly bodies. Chloride ions are
exchanged in the B and 3 surface proteins of these entities. These cells, which develop from
reticulocytes, can cause polycythemia when overabundant. The Bohr Shift describes the function of
these cells, the production of which is stimulated by (*) EPO and occurs in the liver in embryos. One
mutation affecting these cells results in a resistance to malaria. For 10 points, name these organelle-lacking,
biconcave cells that contain hemoglobin and carry oxygen.
ANSWER: Red Blood Cells [Prompt on RBCs and accept Erythrocytes]
Halperin studied these entities in sand rats, finding that they contain multiple "labile-bound" glucose
compartments. They are rapidly sequestered by liver histiocytes when decomposed in rats, and
Gardos channels lead to their dehydration. Proteins on their surfaces include (*) band 3 and the
adaptors for their characteristic actin-spectrin assembly, ankyrins, which contributes to these entities'
concave shapes. They are produced in myeloidic bone marrow of flat bones, such as the hip, and are ovoid
in most vertebrae, though round in humans. For 10 points, name this cell type containing the hemoglobin
pigment and which develops from erythroblasts.
ANSWER: erythrocytes [accept red blood cells until "blood"]
An important protein in these objects' membrane is glycophorin. Those of camels are oddly shaped.
Immature ones are called reticulocytes (reh-TICK-yoo-low-sites), and mature ones are called erythrocytes
(uh-RITH-row-sites). Diseases that are manifested in these cells include HDN, thalassemia
(thal-aa-SEE-mee-uh), and sickle cell anemia. In mammals, they do not have a nucleus, and they contain
large quantities of hemoglobin. For 10 points, name these cells that transport oxygen throughout the body.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or RBCs; accept _erythrocytes before it is read]
The Duffy antigen is expressed on the surface of these cells. The breakdown of these cells produces
bilirubin as a byproduct. The production of these cells is controlled by erythropoietin
(uh-rith-ro-POI-uh-tin), and they can express Rhesus (REE-suss) factor. These cells are affected by a
hereditary disease that confers partial resistance to (*) malaria and lack a nucleus. That disease causes
them to take on a sickle shape that can damage the spleen. For 10 points, identify these cells that carry
hemoglobin and deliver oxygen to tissues.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or RBCs; or erythrocytes; or erythroid cells]
Stacks of these cells are known as rouleuax, and they can be detected via the direct Coombs test. Their
surface antigenic response can be described by the Colton, Diego, and Duffy systems, and they are
characterized by high levels of both CD47 and Kidd glycoproteins. Containing spectrin and ankyrin in their
cytoskeleton and known for their lack of a nucleus, these cells are produced in bone marrow in a process
stimulated by erythropoietin. FTP, name these oxygen-carrying, hemoglobin-containing cells found in
arteries and veins.
ANSWER: red blood cells or erythrocytes
The proteins Band 3 and glycophorins are found on the surface of these cells, the latter of which make them
susceptible to plasmodium. In mammals, they do not contain mitochondria and generate energy via
fermentation. The old ones are filtered out by the spleen, and they contain about 65% of all iron contents in
the body in the form of hemes. A genetic mutation can cause the sickle shape in - for 10 points - what cells,
also called erythrocytes, whose hemoglobin gives them their distinctive color and the ability to carry
oxygen?
ANSWER: red blood cell(s) [accept erythrocytes before mentioned; accept haematids; prompt on RBC]
The direct Coombs test detects antibodies on the surface of these entities. They are deformed in
patients in whom a glutamic acid is replaced with a valine in a certain protein; the resulting disease
confers immunity to (*) malaria. Abnormally high levels of them cause polycythemia, and they are
destroyed and stored in the spleen. These cells are biconcave and have no nucleus, and their levels are
lowered in patients with anemia. For 10 points, these are what hemoglobin-containing cells that transport
oxygen to tissue, also called red blood cells.
ANSWER: erythrocytes [accept red blood cells before it is read]
A precursor stage to the formation of these cells is the creation of a normoblast, and they express the CD47
marker to protect themselves from phagocytosis. The Coombs test is used to detect antibodies on the
surface of these cells, and immature ones are known as reticulocytes. Excessive production of them is
known as polycythemia, and they form in the bone marrow and are destroyed in the spleen. These
biconcave cells lack nuclei, though they become distorted in people with sickle cell anemia. For 10 points,
identify these cells that deliver oxygen via the circulatory system.
ANSWER: Red Blood Cells [accept Erythrocytes]
An unusual condition in which these cells self-destruct is treated by the obscenely expensive antibody
eculizumab, is diagnosed by Ham's test, and is called PNH. Streptococcal species are classified by
their ability to break down these cells in culture. These cells fail to differentiate in GATA-1
knockouts, and mutations in band 4.1 causes these cells to appear elliptical. These cells are broken
down excessively in patients with glucose-6-phosphate deficiency. These cells hold their shape via
spectrin and ankyrin proteins, and about one-third of them are sequestered in the spleen at any given
time. They have a lifetime of about 120 days and a disease in which they are misshapen is caused by a
glutamic acid to valine mutation in the beta-chain of hemoglobin. For 10 points, name these biconcave cells
which carry oxygen and give blood its color.
ANSWER: Erythrocytes or Red Blood Cells
Fragments of nuclear chromatin in these entities are known as Howell-Jolly bodies, and their membranes
are a location of the Band 3 protein. Antibodies attached to their surface can be detected in the direct
Coombs test. Polycythemia [POL-ee-si-THEE-me-ah] is a condition in which there is a higher than normal
concentration of these cells, whose flexible shape is due to spectrin. These cells lack a nucleus in humans,
and their shape is affected in sickle-cell disease. For 10 points, name these disk-shaped cells that contain
hemoglobin and transport oxygen.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or RBCs; or erythrocytes]
These cells are deformed in drepanocytosis (druh-PAN-oh-SIGH-toe-sis), a condition for which there
exists a heterozygote (HET-uh-row-ZY-goat) advantage against malaria; that disease of these cells is better
known as sickle-cell disease. If these cells are too old to function, they are destroyed by the spleen. In
vertebrates, mature examples of these cells have no nucleus, while immature versions are called
erythroblasts (uh-RITH-row-blasts). For 10 points, identify these cells which carry oxygen in the blood.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or erythrocytes; or RBCs]
The transport protein AE1 makes up a quarter of the surface of these cells, which may contain nuclear
remnants called Howell-Jolly bodies. These cells develop in reticulocytes. The spleen sequesters these cells,
whose production is stimulated by EPO in bone marrow. Vertebrate examples of these cells lack a nucleus.
They are normally shaped like biconcave disks, but they are deformed in people with sickle-cell anemia.
For 10 points each, name these cells that carry hemoglobin and transport oxygen.
ANSWER: red blood cells/corpuscles [or erythrocytes; or RBCs; prompt on blood cells]
Their typical lifespan is only about 120 days, and they were first observed by Jan Swammerdam. Young
ones are known as reticulocytes.. Their functional molecule undergoes the Bohr effect and consists of [*]
porphyrin rings bound to central atoms of iron; in certain salamanders and fish, and in all mammals, they
lack a nucleus. In humans, they develop in bone marrow, and a decreased number of these or a decrease in
their ability is anemia. For 10 points, name thse cells, with a distinctive biconcave shape, that contain the
molecule hemoglobin and carry oxygen from the lungs to muscles.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or red blood corpuscles, or haematids, or erythroid cells, or erythrocytes]
The Kidd glycoproteins present on their surface act as urea transporters. Spectrin and ankyrin are found in
the cytoskeletal network of these cells and antibodies on their surface are detected by the direct Coombs
test. They express high levels of CD47, which prevents phagocytosis by macrophages in the spleen, and
kidneys release EPO which stimulate the production of these. Excess production of them results in
polycythemia, and their count is depressed in anemia. Produced in the bone marrow, they are biconcave and
lack nuclei. For 10 points, identify these cells that contain hemoglobin, and help transport oxygen to tissues.
ANSWER: red blood cells [or RBCs; or erythrocytes]
Membrane proteins in these entities called glycophorins have high levels of sialic acid residues, which
can lead to the formation of stacks of these entities called rouleaux. Abnormal deposits of DNA in
them are called Howell-Jolly bodies, and their high surface expression of CD47 protects them from
phagocytosis. They are overproduced in (*) polycythemia, while the substitution of valine for glutamic
acid leads to a notable mutation in their structure. Destroyed by the spleen and produced in the bone
marrow, they are biconcave and do not have nuclei. For 10 points, name these cells whose hemoglobin
molecules carry oxygen to tissue, often contrasted with the white cells of the immune system.
ANSWER: erythrocytes or red blood cells
This idea is based on the assumptions that linkage disequilibria must frequently oscillate, and it was
originally described it as a corollary to the law of constant extinction. Serial passage experiments support
this statement as they show attenuation of the pathogenic species infecting host cell lines. It was formulated
by Leigh Van Valen, and it suggests that advantages in one species gained by genetic variations are offset
by those gained by another species. It is frequently invoked to explain the evolution of sex. For 10 points,
identify this hypothesis which states that species must evolve continually to maintain their fitness, which
derives its name from a Lewis Carroll character.
ANSWER: Red Queen hypothesis
One of these processes is inhibited by shocking the tail of Aplysia californica and is called "gill
and siphon withdrawal." Warm water is used to test for the vestibulo-ocular one, whose absence
causes "doll's eyes". The Jendrassik maneuver increases the magnitude of another one of these
processes through the activation of the subliminal fringe. Conservation of oxygen while underwater
is known as the "diving" one. Infants display "primitive" ones, including an extensor plantar one
called the Babinski sign. These processes are governed by namesake (*) "arcs" consisting of neural
circuits that do not synapse in the brain. For 10 points, the "patellar" type of what involuntary muscle
contractions can be elicited by tapping a hammer on a patient's knee?
ANSWER: reflexes
The Vicar of Bray Hypothesis explains why populations that undergo one variety of this process
respond to environmental changes better than others, and Muller's Ratchet explains why populations
using another variety of this process build up deleterious mutations. John Maynard Smith's "cost of
males" is part of the puzzle as to why some organisms use one variety of this process rather than
another. One type of this process, exemplified in binary [*] fission, results in the creation of genetically
identical organisms, while its other variety involves two parents creating offspring. Either asexual or sexual,
for 10 points, name this process by which new organisms are created.
ANSWER: reproduction [accept sexual reproduction until "Ratchet"]
These animals do not produce very concentrated urine because their kidneys lack loops of Henle and
instead rely on the colon to reabsorb water. A suborder in this class of animals uses infrared sensitivity to
detect prey; those animals are in the Squamata group that includes the Gila monster. Their thin skin
consists of a horny epidermis, leaving them to be protected by armor-forming scutes. Herpetologists study
these animals, which use lungs and lay amniotic eggs. For 10 points, identify this cold-blooded class of
animals that includes turtles and snakes.
ANSWER: Reptilia [or reptiles]
Tuataras are a the only extant members of one order of this class. Squamata and testudines are the main
subdivisions of this group of animals which also includes the group sauria. Herpetology involves the study
of this class of animals which includes the caiman found in parts of South America. An extinct member of
this class of animals is the pterodactyl. For 10 points, name this class of cold blooded animals that includes
snakes and lizards.
ANSWER: reptiles or reptilia
Disturbances in this process cause horizontal displacements on a Davenport diagram. The rate of this
process is increased by the 5HT4 receptor BIMU8, which localized to the pre-Botzinger complex.
Tentorial herniation can cause the Biot type of it. A compensatory increase in the rate of this process
is accounted for by Winter's formula. The Kussmaul variety is caused by ketoacidosis. The vital
capacity is the total (*) volume that can be moved by this process, though it usually only moves one tidal
volume. This process, which is controlled by the pons, is dangerously depressed by opioid overdose, and it
is stopped during bouts of apnea. For 10 points, name this process that involves contraction of the
diaphragm, the exchange of O2 and CO2 through the lungs.
ANSWER: respiration [accept "breathing" or such equivalents]
On the cellular level, one version of this process forms a molecule of GTP and converts pyruvate into acetyl
CoA. Before that second half of this process, the three-carbon pyruvate is created via the breakdown of sixcarbon glucose in glycolysis. On the organism level, this process takes place in the form of an exchange of
carbon dioxide and oxygen in the sacs within the lungs, alveoli. FTP, name this biological process, which
takes place in the cell in a series of reactions including the citric acid, or Krebs, cycle and in the body in the
form of breathing.
ANSWER: Respiration [Accept word forms, Accept Krebs Cycle until "dioxide"]
One process of this type moves a glycine intermediate from the peroxisome to another organelle, and
occurs because the enzyme rubisco cannot distinguish between two possible substrates. In addition to the
"photo" form of this process, another type begins with a ten-step pathway breaking down glucose into
pyruvic acid. In anatomy, a type of this process involves a system including the trachea, bronchi, and lungs.
For 10 points, give this term that names oxygen-consuming, energy-generating processes and breathing.
ANSWER: respiration [or cellular respiration; or photoresipration before it is read]
The first one of these entities was isolated from the Haemophilus influenza in 1968, a compound that
recognizes the double-stranded sequence GTYRAC and cleaves after Y-3. These compounds are used
by bacteria and archaea as defense against viruses, and can also be used in a namesake (*) fragment
length polymorphism to digest the sample DNA, the pieces of which are later separated by gel
electrophoresis. HindII and EcoRI are examples of, for ten points, what class of proteins, used to cut DNA
at specific locations, which allows for DNA fingerprinting as well as the development of recombinant
DNA?
ANSWER: restriction enzymes (also accept restriction endonuclease or restriction nuclease; prompt on enzyme)
The first of these proteins to be discovered was isolated from Haemophilus influenzae, and, like many
of its class, that example is nonfunctional when its target is methylated. Only one of their three types
does not require ATP to function, and two of their types require AdoMet to function. Analysis by (*)
Southern blot may require a sample to be digested by these proteins, common examples of which are Xbal
and EcoRI. These proteins create either sticky or blunt ends when they cleave at certain sequences, which
are often palindromic. For 10 points, name this class of enzyme often used in experiments to cleave DNA at
specific sites.
ANSWER: restriction enzymes [or restriction endonucleases]
These proteins are antagonized by dam and dcm methylases, and the domain from one of these is
fused to a zinc finger to generate targeted gene therapy constructs. Artificial plasmids have a
polylinker site that is recognized by several different varieties of these proteins. They were originally
discovered by Nathans, Smith, and Arber, and evolved in order to protect from viruses and foreign
genomes. They are used to map polymorphisms in the (*) RFLP technique. They can produce either
blunt or sticky ends depending on whether they leave an overhang, and must always recognize palindromic
regions. Commonly used examples include HindIII ("hin-dee-three") and EcoRI ("eeco-r-one"). For 10
points, identify these enzymes that cleave DNA at specific sites.
ANSWER: restriction enzymes [or restriction endonucleases; prompt on partial answer]
Some types of these when placed in high glycerol concentration or high pH can exhibit atypical behavior
called star activity. They often require positive ions as cofactors, such as the magnesium ion required for
one derived from Haemophilus influenzae. The Type II kind is usually a homodimer, while the Type I
variety requires ATP and acts thousands of base pairs away from the recognition site. Some create "blunt"
ends, but only those that leave "sticky" ends can be used to insert genes into plasmid vectors. Commonly
used examples of these include BamHI ["Bam H One"] and EcoRI ["Eco R One"]. For 10 points, identify
these bacterial enzymes that cut DNA at specific sequences.
ANSWER: restriction enzymes [or restriction endonucleases]
These do not function well at high glycerol concentrations, which cause a loss of specificity, an effect
known as star activity. They do not work on methylated substrates, allowing them to inhibit bacteriophage
growth without harming the bacteria themselves. They can produce blunt ends, or if there is an overhang,
sticky ends. The first one to be discovered was HindIII, and other notable examples include TaqI and
EcoRI. They are used in genetic engineering to produce recombinant DNA, or to prepare DNA fragments
for use in gel electrophoresis. For 10 points, name this type of enzyme that cuts DNA at specific recognition
sequences.
ANSWER: restriction enzymes or endonucleases
Deviation from optimal pH or ionic strength results in star activity in this class of proteins. Dcm and Dam
methylation in bacteria introduces resistance to the activity of these proteins, which are used to analyze
RFLPs. Engineered constructs with multiple cloning sites can be acted on by many of these enzymes.
Examples of these enzymes common to digests are XbaI [x b a one] and BamHI [bam h one], and the action
of these enzymes results in the formation of either blunt or sticky ends. For 10 points, HindIII [hin d three]
and EcoRI [eeko r one] are what types of bacterial enzymes that are useful for cleaving DNA at specific
sites in biological experiments?
ANSWER: restriction enzymes [or restriction endonucleases]
A cancer of this tissue is the namesake of a tumor suppressor that binds to E2F. One of its
boundaries is the ora serrata, and has both inner and outer plexiform layers. It is home to bipolar
and
amacrine cells. Unlike surrounding tissue, it develops from the brain. Structures in it include the (*)
macula and fovea. This tissue is home to cones and rods. For 10 points, name this tissue of the eye that
converts light into neural impulses whose blood vessels can be scanned to help identify a person.
ANSWER: retina
The protein ABCA4 is found exclusively in this structure, which loses its function in Stargardt disease, and
"wreathlike" blood vessels in it can be used to diagnose Takayasu's syndrome. Muller glial cells can be
found in this melanopsin-containing structure, a pigment critical to circadian rhythms because it absorbs
blue light. For 10 points, name this inner layer of the eye which uses rods and cones to form and transmit
images from the lens to the optic nerve.
ANSWER: retina
Although it is not the cochlea, this structure has some neuronal cells linked by ribbon synapses.
Blood flow in this structure's capillaries can be measured using blue field entoptoscopy to test for
Scheerer's phenomenon. The inner and outer plexiform layers are part of this structure, which
contains a red dot in Tay-Sachs patients and is subdivided into the (*) fovea and macula. At the point
where the optic nerve exits this structure, a blind spot occurs. For 10 points, name this light-sensitive tissue
in the inner surface of the eye, which contains photoreceptors like rods and cones.
ANSWER: retina
Its inner layer becomes the ora serrata, and its posterior surface contains a physiological cup.
Anteriorly, it becomes the ciliary body, which lies close to the canals of Schlemm where the aqueous
drains. It contains a layer of calcium-spiking, process-lacking amacrine cells and a layer of
hyperpolarizing horizontal cells, as well as both hyper and depolarizing bipolar cells. Containing a
spot of macula lutea and lying in vitreous humor, it lies above the choroid and sclera and has a spot where
ganglion cells leave as the optic nerve. Rods are rich in the periphery, while cones inhabit the fovea centalis
of, For ten points, what layer of pigments and receptors in the eye?
ANSWER: retina (prompt on "eye" before "amacrine")
The activation of the relay molecule transducin in this structure results in the subsequent activation
of the nucleotide cGMP. The change in bodies of this structure results in the "bleaching" of
rhodopsin. Though not in the brain, this structure is the site of synapses to the (*) ganglion cells. The
integration of information in this structure is helped by horizontal and amacrine cells through lateral
inhibition. The central part of this structure is dubbed the fovea. This structure contains millions of small
photoreceptors called rods and cones. For ten points, name this innermost layer of the eye.
ANSWER: retina (prompt on "the eye," I guess)
This organ acquires fluffy-white necrotic patches when infected by CMV. Horizontal cells are
responsible for the phenomenon of center-surround inhibition in this organ. This organ contains a protein
which shuts off dark current by degrading cyclic GMP; that protein contains a vitamin A derivative as a
co-factor and is called rhodopsin. This organ contains the macula in the center. For 10 points, name this
organ which has rod and cone cells and is located in the back of the eye.
ANSWER: retina
In diabetic and hypertensive patients, this structure can develop characteristic dot and blothemorrhages from edema caused by excessive activation of polyol pathways. The "rubber band
theory" is a metaphor for describing how this structure is held in place. This structure's inner
nuclear layer contains interneurons like bipolar and (*) amacrine cells. Occlusion of the central artery
behind this structure leads to a visible cherry-red spot on its yellow inner area in Tay-Sachs disease.
Inadequate blood flow to this structure from the choroid leads to increased pressure outside. The central
region of this structure contains the fovea and the highest concentration of cones. For 10 points, name this
light-sensitive area that includes the macula, the inner lining of the eye.
ANSWER: the retina [accept fovea and macula before mention, prompt on eye]
A childhood tumor of this structure is caused by deletions in the RB protein and is the origin of
the two-hit hypothesis. This structure contains two plexiform and two nuclear layers, and its bipolar
cells transmit information to the ganglion (GANG-lee-on) cells. The fovea is located near the center
of this structure, many of whose cells express rhodopsin (roh-DOP-sin). This structure also contains
(*) rod and cone cells, the latter of which is sensitive to color. For 10 points, name this structure at the back
of the eye.
ANSWER: retina
Amacrine (AM-uh-krin) cells in this structure regulate nervous input to ganglion ("GANG"-lee-on) cells,
and this structure's namesake pigmentosa (PIG-men-TOE-suh) causes tunnel vision and night blindness.
This seven-layered structure has a sensitive fovea (FO-vee-uh) in its macular (MACK-you-lur) region. This
structure contains photoreceptor (FO-toe-ree-SEP-tur) cells like rods and cones, and it converts light to
nervous signals sent through the optic nerve. For 10 points, name this structure that lies along the back of
the eye.
ANSWER: retina
One protein that is located within these structures binds intracellularly to the Gt GPCR, which
causes hyperpolarization of the cell. The activity of that protein in these structures is attenuated by
arrestin when it has been activated for too long, and that protein in these structures has a molecule of
11-cis retinol, which is derived from Vitamin A. These structures house the (*) purple protein
rhodopsin. The ganglia of these structures are affected in Leber's Hereditary Neuropathy, and Tay-Sachs
disease causes the development of a "cherry red spot" on these structures. These structures contain
especially sensitive macula and fovea regions. For 10 points, name this layer which contains rod and cone
cells and is located at the back of the eye.
ANSWER: retina
A condition associated with muscular dystrophy, Coats' disease, affects this structure. One type of cell
in this structure utilizes cGMP to allow a steady flow of sodium ions. This structure utilizes bipolar cells in
its "indirect" pathway, while amacrine cells in it project to ganglion cells. One disease affecting this
structure is its namesake "pigmentosa." Its central portion is known as the macula. For 10 points, name this
layer of the eye that contains photoreceptor cells, such as rods and cones.
ANSWER: retina
A feedback loop in this structure is completed by the interplexiform cells, which synapse with
amacrine, bipolar, and horizontal cells. The bipolar cells transmit information to the ganglion cells,
except in the fovea centralis of this structure. Other specialized cells in this structure contain opsin
proteins, and the lack of a pigment in cells of this structure results in color blindness. For 10 points,
name this part of the eye that contains rods and cones.
ANSWER: retina
In most metazoans, Pax-6 is essential for the development of this structure, and disruption of Pax-6 in
humans leads to disorders of this structure such as WAGR syndrome and Gillespie syndrome. The major
signaling event in this structure is transduced by phospholipase C in invertebrates and phosphidiesterase in
vertebrates. The sublamina b of its Inner Plexiform Layer contains the on midget bipolar ganglion, and its
horizontal cells regulate the release of GABA to depolarize neighboring cells. The deposition of lipid,
sphingolipid, or oligosaccharide materials on this structure results in the presence of a cherry-red spot, a
diagnostic indicator of several diseases, including Tay-Sachs. For 10 points, name this structure of the eye
which contains the macula and the fovea, as well as photoreceptor cells known as rods and cones.
ANSWER: retina
The outer region of this structure is defined by the ora serrata. Nerves from this structure relay at the lateral
geniculate body, and it receives signals from layers of amacrine and bipolar cells. It is in contact with the
vitreous humor and is surrounded by the choroid. A yellow pigmented area on this organ, the macula, is
located near a specialized region known as the fovea. Sensory receptors embedded in it include opsin and a
derivative of beta-carotene. The optic nerve branches o from this tissue, and it is located behind the lens
and iris. For ten points, name the site of light sensing rods and cones in the eye.
ANSWER: retina (prompt on "eye" before mention)
Capillaries in front of this structure cause Scheerer's phenomenon. A manifestation of facio-scapulohumeral muscular dystrophy known as Coats' disease affects this structure. Zebrafish have been studied for
the regenerative properties in the Muller cells of this structure while its Amacrine cells operate in this
structure's inner plexiform layer. The suprachiasmatic nucleus receives signals from this structure which is
separated by the choroid coat from the sclera. Comprised of the macula lutea and fovea centralis, for 10
points, name this layer of nervous tissue covering the back two-thirds of the eye with cones and rods that
enable vision.
ANSWER: retina
Similarly to the cochlea, ribbon synapses are found in this organ's bipolar cells. This organ contains
Muller cells, which may explain this organ's "backward" function, and amacrine cells. At the center of this
organ is the fovea. Namesake ganglion cells exit this organ in an area responsible for the "blind spot." For
10 points, name this light-sensing organ containing rods and cones, which is found at the back of the eye.
ANSWER: retina [prompt on eye]
Information passing through this structure is regulated by horizontal and amacrine cells. A
cancer of this structure can be diagnosed by checking for leukocoria or strabismus. Tay-Sachs
disease can be diagnosed by a cherry-red spot on this structure. Xanthophylls can be found in the
fovea, the central portion of the yellow region of this structure known as the macula. This layer,
which connects to the (*) optic nerve, is filled with rods and cones, which are photoreceptors. For 10
points, name this layer of the inner eye where light is received.
ANSWER: retina [prompt on eye]
A compound named after this structure sees the conversion from cis to trans orientation at the
eleventh carbon, and ipRGCs are ganglion cells found in this structure that are sensitive to melanopsin,
which helps maintain circadian rhythms. The uvea lies between this entity and the sclera. A region on it
that lacks blood vessels is called the fovea centralis, and is also the central portion of the macula. For 10
points, identify this layer of the eye, which contains rods and cones that help transmit optical
information.
ANSWER: retina
This organ is affected by CORD and Nyctalopia, while injury to it results in the de-differentiation of Muller
cells. The presence of white blood cells in the capillaries of this organ leads to Sheerer's phenomenon, and
neutrophils are localized to its outer and inner plexiform layers. Amacrine cells populate its inner nuclear
layer, while bipolar cells are responsible for the center-surround inhibition that characterizes one group of
cells here. The choroid coat separates it from the sclera, while a small depression in its center is known as
the fovea. The site of cone and rod cells, for 10 points, name this organ enervated by the optic nerve and
located in the back of the eye.
ANSWER: Retina
One layer of this structure is bound to Bruch's membrane, and neurons in this structure can be generated by
Muller glia in birds. Communication in this structure is performed by the amacrine and horizontal cells. The
middle layer of this structure contains bipolar cells, and the inner layer contains ganglion cells. A
depression in the center of this structure is the macula, which surrounds the fovea. FTP name this innermost
layer of the eye that functions in phototransduction and contains the rods and cones.
ANSWER: retina
This structure's Muller glial cells can differentiate into multipotent progenitor cells when the cells
around them are damaged. This structure is connected to the ciliary body by the ora serrata. Lateral
inhibition in this structure is caused by horizontal and amacrine cells, which carry stimuli to multiple
bipolar and ganglion cells. The choroid layer separates it from the sclera, and the [*] foveal pit is
located at the center of the macula of this structure. It has a "blind spot" where it connects to the optic nerve
and contains photorecepting rod and cone cells. For 10 points, name this layer of tissue on the back of the
eye that collects optical signals to send to the brain.
ANSWER: retina
Haldan Keffer Hartline won a Nobel Prize for his research on the electrical responses of this object in
horseshoe crabs. This object contains Muller glia, which are mitotically active following damage to it. Coats
disease causes the separation of this object and a cherry-red spot is found on it in children with Tay-Sachs
disease. Horizontal and amacrine cells modulate communication between its cells, the inner layer of which
contains ganglion cells. Composed of neural tissue, this innermost layer of the eye has a depression in its
center called the macula. For 10 points, name this location of photoreceptors such as rods and cones.
ANSWER: retina
The drug Isentress ("eye"-SEN-tress) treats infection by these pathogens by targeting the enzyme integrase,
and X-SCID has been successfully corrected using one of these as a vector for gene therapy. Peyton Rous
discovered one of these pathogens responsible for malignant tumors in chickens, while Robert Gallo found
one linked to leukemia and later shared credit for discovering the most widespread one in humans. About
8% of the human genome is derived from these entities, and the drugs Videx and AZT work by inhibiting
their crucial enzyme, reverse transcriptase. Exemplified by HIV, name these infectious agents that violate
the central dogma of molecular biology by producing DNA from RNA.
ANSWER: retrovirus [prompt on RNA virus]
One of these proteins extracted from M-MLV has an error rate of around one in thirty thousand, and this
protein is encoded by long-terminal-repeat containing transposons. Efavirenz and nevirapine are members
of one class of inhibitors of this protein, which is also inhibited by a drug that causes chain termination,
called AZT. This protein is encoded by the pol protein of a certain lentivirus. For 10 points, name this
protein encoded by HIV, which allows the synthesis of DNA from RNA.
ANSWER: reverse transcriptase [or RT]
Alpha-boranophosphates are a novel class of compounds that inhibit this protein. This protein
commonly acquires mutations at T215, M41, and K65 during therapy. The version of this enzyme
encoded by M-MLV has an error rate around one in seventeen thousand, and other versions of this
protein have a domain that automatically degrades heteroduplexes. This enzyme, which is inhibited
by efavirenz and tenofivir, is used in the laboratory to create (*) cDNA libraries. LINE elements and
class I transposons with long-terminal repeats code for a version of this protein in order to replicate
themselves. Another compound which inhibits this enzyme is activated by thymidylate kinase and acts as a
chain-terminator; that compound is a nucleoside analog called AZT. For 10 points, name this enzyme
which creates DNA from RNA, used by retroviruses like HIV.
ANSWER: reverse transcriptase
The type of this enzyme obtained from the avian myeloblastosis (my-EE-lo-blass-TOE-sis) virus is less
desirable than the type obtained from the Moloney (muh-LOH-nee) murine (myoo-RHINE) leukemia virus.
This enzyme is used to synthesize and amplify complementary DNAs or cDNAs from edited RNAs in its
namesake polymerase (puh-LIM-er-aze) chain reaction technique. For 10 points, name this enzyme isolated
that is found in retroviruses like HIV and synthesizes DNA from an RNA template.
ANSWER: reverse transcriptase [prompt on RNA-dependent DNA polymerase]
A widely-used single polypeptide form of this enzyme is named for its involvement in Moloney
murine leukemia. This enzyme names a catalytic subunit of telomerase that adds nucleotides in
TTAGGG fashion to the end of telomeres. Along with integrase and protease, this enzyme is encoded
by the pol gene. The Northern blot has largely been replaced with either a one- or two-step variant of
(*) PCR involving this enzyme. This enzyme, which crucially acts as a ribonuclease H, has an unusually
high error rate of one every 2000-4000 nucleotides. AZT and related drugs inhibit the activity of this
enzyme, which produces complementary DNA from an RNA template. For 10 points, name this enzyme
that retroviruses like HIV use to replicate.
ANSWER: reverse transcriptase [or RT; or RNA-dependent DNA polymerase]
One variant phenotype of this group is known as the "weak D". One nomenclature for identifying it was
developed by Fisher and Race, which uses the letters c, d, and e to mark its alleles, while an older
nomenclature is named for Weiner. Phillip Levine connected this set of factors to a condition that is
currently prevented by the drug Rhogam, known as erythroblastosis fetalis or hemolytic disease of the
newborn, in which a mother produces antibodies to this factor. Originally discovered in a namesake species
of monkey, for 10 points, name this blood group that is usually notated by a plus or minus when noting
one's blood type.
ANSWER: Rh blood group or Rhesus factor or equivalents
This disease is part of a triad including splenomegaly and neutropenia as part of Felty's syndrome.
This disease is diagnosed by finding antibodies to citrullinated peptides. DMARDs are used to treat
this disease, and regimens often include enteracept and adalimumab, which are TNF-alpha
inhibitors. This disease's namesake (*) factor is an IgM antibody against human IgG, and it is
characterized by white blood cells creating a pannus by invading synovial tissue. This disease presents with
the boutonniere and swan-neck deformities, and is characterized by prolonged morning stiffness. For 10
points, name this debilitating autoimmune condition which causes inflammation in small joints.
ANSWER: Rheumatoid arthritis [or RA]
Georg Nagel isolated one of these proteins from Chlamydomonas which is linked to a nonspecific
cation channel. Deisseroth's group switched out the intracellular domain of one of these proteins with
an adrenergic receptor, creating OptoXR. Those proteins, known as the "channel-" type, are
commonly used in optogenetics, while the "bacterio" type is used as a proton pump. This protein,
when activated, decreases the concentration of cyclic GMP via the activation of transducin. Its cofactor
changes into an all-trans state upon activation of this protein; that cofactor originally adopts an 11-cis
confirmation and is known as retinal. For 10 points, name this transmembrane protein found in
photoreceptor cells, responsible for converting light energy to cellular signals.
ANSWER: Rhodopsin
This protein located within the punctata albescens has a prosthetic group that is converted from the
all-trans conformation to the 11-cis conformation by a namesake dehydrogenase and isomerase, prior
to the formation of a Shiff base with a lysine residue on one of its seven transmembrane helices. The
reverse of this process activates the G-protein transducin and occurs due to photoisomerization of a
Vitamin (*) A derivative. Release of its chromatophore occurs through photochemical bleaching and is
reversed through thermal processes such as dark adaptation. FTP, visual purple is another name for what
retinal protein located within rod cells that forms from retinol and the protein opsin?
ANSWER: rhodopsin [or opsin before mentioned; or visual purple before mentioned]
Elongation factors such as EF-Tu transport molecules to this location. GTP is hydrolyzed when
molecules move through this structure's A, P, and E sites. In eukaryotes, these structures are made up of
subunits that are 40S and 60S in size. The RNA portion of these structures is synthesized in the nucleolus.
Molecules including aminoacyl(uh-MEE-noh-EY-sil)-tRNA and mRNA are brought to this organelle to
start translation. For 10 points, name these organelles, the site of protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosomes
In eukaryotes, these recognize the Kozak consensus sequence, while in prokaryotes, they recognize the
Shine-Dalgarno sequence. They are composed of 30S and 50S subunits in prokaryotes, where the S is the
Svedberg unit, a measurement of sedimentation in centrifugation, and were first observed in the 1950s by
George Palade with an electron microscope. They are about forty percent protein and sixty percent nucleic
acid, and in eukaryotes they are assembled in the nucleolus. Found in either the cytosol or attached to the
rough endoplasmic reticulum are, FTP, these cellular organelles necessary for translation.
ANSWER: ribosomes
Lupus psychosis sufferers often have antibodies to this organelle. In neurons, this organelle is clustered
in Nissl bodies, and they are moved by binding of the signal recognition particle. They recognize the
Shine-Dalgarno sequence, and they contain A, P, and E sites. In eukaryotes, these organelles contain 40S
and 60S. They read mRNA from 5 prime to 3 prime For 10 points, name these protein synthesis organelles.
ANSWER: Ribosomes
The differences in this organelle between prokaryotes and eukaryotes allow antibiotics such as tetracycline
to target prokaryotic ones without damaging eukaryotic ones. It can be found in eukaryotic mitochondria
and chloroplasts, but its primary location is in the cytoplasm. Its A, P, and E sites bind to aminoacyl,
peptidyl, and free tRNAs, respectively, and it is composed of one large and one small subunit, which
disassociate after each use. Synthesized in the nucleolus and using mRNA as a template during the second
step of protein synthesis, this is, for 10 points, what organelle that can be free or attached to the
endoplasmic reticulum?
ANSWER: ribosome
In eukaryotes, the stalks in this organelle are formed by a heterodimer of P1 and P2 proteins that attach to
this organelle via a P0 protein. Neomycin blocks the function of this organelle by binding to its Helix 69
structure, which interacts with Helix 44 to form the bridge B2a. EF-Ts facilitates the function of these
organelles by removing GDP from EF-Tu, which then finds a new GTP and continues to escort molecules
into this body. Kozak sequences indicate to this organelle when to start its main function. Its large subunit
contains peptidyl transferase. This organelle's main enzyme forms peptide bonds between amino acids
brought to it by tRNA. For 10 points, name these organelles often located on the rough endoplasmic
reticulum that assemble proteins.
ANSWER: ribosomes
This organelle's namesake protein 19 is mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anemia, and the binding
between its L11 protein and Rel A is required for the stringent response in E. coli. This organelle is
targeted by aminoglycosides. Viral genomes often have namesake internal entry sites for this
organelle. The quality of a total RNA extraction can be assayed by looking at the ratio between two
components of this organelle, which has (*) 40S and 60S components in eukaryotes. In prokaryotes, this
organelle requires the Shine-Dalgarno sequence to bind to its substrate. This organelle contains A, P, and E
sites, which are used to align tRNA anticodons to mRNA codons during the process of translation. For 10
points, name this organelle which is synthesizes proteins.
ANSWER: ribosome
This organelle is affected by such drugs as erythromycin and tetracyclins, which is helped by the ShineDelgarno sequence to recognize certain molecules which bind to it. These organelles are also the site of the
wobble phenomenon. They contain three catalytic sites for the binding of tRNA molecules and the
formation of peptide bonds. Assembled in the nucleolus, they contain two unequally sized subunits and can
be bound either to endoplasmic reticulum or free in a cell's cytosol. For ten points, name these non
membrane-bound organelles which are the site of protein translation.
ANSWER: ribosomes
In prokaryotes, this organelle binds to the Shine-Dalgarno box, and its size is measured in Svedberg
units. This organelle begins its primary function in eukaryotes when it recognizes the Kozak
sequence. Mitochondria possess their own variety of this organelle, and at the P and A sites located
here, [*] aminoacyl-tRNA attaches. This organelle can be free or bound, and it is composed of a namesake
type of RNA and separated into large and small subunits. Formed in the nucleolus and attached to rough
endoplasmic reticulum, for 10 points, name this organelle, the site of RNA translation and protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosomes
In prokaryotes, one molecule found in this organelle contains the sarcin/ricin loop, while a different domain
of that molecule is the binding site for micrococcin and thiostrepton. Puromycin interferes with the major
reaction that takes place in this organelle. In eukaryotes, that major reaction begins with the binding of eIF2
to this organelle, while the next step involves the binding of EF1A and EF2 to this organelle. Those steps
are initiation and elongation. This organelle's major enzyme, peptidyl transferase, causes the transfer of
amino acids from tRNA anticodons to a nascent protein. For 10 points, name these organelles that serve as
the site of translation.
ANSWER: ribosomes
The structure of this organelle was described by Ada Yonath. This organelle is responsible for the
polymerization of microcins [MY-kroe-sins] and several other natural antibiotic polypeptides. George Emil
Palade discovered that these organelles are often bound to the rough endoplasmic reticulum. These
organelles have a namesake RNA. Name these organelles where protein molecules are assembled based on
codons from RNA.
ANSWER: ribosomes
This organelle's mechanism was characterized by Thomas Steitz, who won a Nobel for his work.
The signal recognition particle will move this organelle from the cytoplasm to the surface of a
membrane. In eukaryotes, these organelles require the Kozak consensus sequence for binding. This
organelle contains (*) A, P, and E sites, which serve as holding spaces for transfer RNA during
translation. For 10 points, name this organelle that is the site of protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosome
In 2001, Noller and coworkers published a paper detailing the full structure of these biological cell
components. Extensive research into the "structure and function" of these components won the 2009
Nobel Prize for Chemistry, and they are differentiated between their different types by their rate of
sedimentation in a centrifuge. This measure, called the (*) Svedberg unit which titles their two subunits.
In eukaryotes, these subunits are titled 60-S and 40-S and are composed of proteins and its namesake
nucleic acid. They are key to a biological process that decodes tRNA into amino acids, called translation.
For 10 points, identify these organelles composed partially of rRNA that manufacture proteins and are
either found free-floating in the cytoplasm or are located on the endoplasmic reticulum.
ANSWER: ribosomes
In prokaryotes, these organelles have a sedimentation coefficient of 70, while in eukaryotes it is 80.
These organelles are composed of two subunits of unequal size, which consist of proteins and RNA. The
rough endoplasmic reticulum is so called because it is covered with these. They decode messenger RNA to
produce a chain of amino acids, a process known as translation. For 10 points, name these organelles which
assemble proteins.
ANSWER: ribosomes
In prokaryotes, EF-Tu mediates these organelles' function, and in eukaryotes, its protein components are
synthesized and then imported into the nucleus, where they are assembled into the complete organelle.
Prokaryotes have Shine-Dalgarno sequences where this organelle attaches via one of its two subunits; these
organelles also have their own RNA. The end of a peptide shifts from the P- to the A-site of these
organelles to receive new amino acids from tRNAs that then leave from the E-site. These two-subunit
organelles can float freely or be attached to a membrane like the rough endoplasmic reticulum. For 10
points, name these organelles that carry out protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosomes
This organelle requires the EF-TU and EF-G proteins to function. Antibiotics such as aminoglycosides
(aa-meen-ohg-lie-KO-sidez) exploit the structural difference between its bacterial and eukaryotic versions.
It contains an RNA that catalyzes peptidyltransferase (PEP-tidd-ul-TRANS-fer-eyz) activity. In eukaryotes,
this organelle contains a 40S and 60S subunit, and t-RNA are responsible for bringing amino acids to it.
For 10 points, name this organelle, responsible for translating mRNA into protein.
ANSWER: ribosome
In bacteria, this organelle binds to the Shine-Delgarno sequence. The elongation factor EF-Tu brings
molecules to this organelle, which contains the A, P, and E sites. In eukaryotes, this organelle is composed
of a large 60S subunit and a small 40S subunit. These structures can be "free" in the cytosol or "bound" to
the surface of the rough endoplasmic reticulum. For 10 points, name these complexes made of RNA, the
organelles responsible for protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosomes
A mutation in one component of this structure results in Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond Syndrome, a
major cause of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in children. An important molecule that interacts
with this structure is mimicked by this structure's namesake "recycling factor." This structure
recognizes either the Kozak or (*) Shine-Dalgarno sequences. Different parts of this structure are named
for their rates of sedimentation, measured in Svedberg units. This organelle contains the A, P, and E binding
sites and is synthesized in the nucleolus. Found in the rough endoplasmic reticulum and cytoplasm, this
organelle starts at methionine and stops at a stop codon. For 10 points, name this organelle which interacts
with tRNA during translation.
ANSWER: ribosome
Viruses often use internal entry sites for this organelle, which begins its actions at the Kozak
consensus sequence in eukaryotes (YOO-kah-ree-oats) or the Shine-Dalgarno sequence in
prokaryotes (PRO-kah-ree-oats). This organelle's A, P, and E sites are holding spots for transfer
RNAs, which read off three part codons composed of mRNA. This organelle differentiates (*)
endoplasmic (en-doh-PLAHS-mick) reticulum (ree-TICK-yoo-lum) as either smooth or rough. For 10
points, identify this organelle which synthesizes peptide chains.
ANSWER: ribosome
These organelles contain a protein called trigger factor that aid their function, and they bind a namesake
recycling factor upon carrying out their function. The activity of these organelles can be muted by
chloramphenicol. The G-protein EF-G mimics the structure of molecules usually found in this organelle.
Those molecules, which are brought to this organelle by EF-Tu, are produced by the enzyme aaRS, and the
fact that these organelles can yield variable results is part of the wobble hypothesis. One of those molecules
bound to an initiator fMet makes its way into the P-site of this organelle and interacts with another molecule
in the A-site to generate a nascent peptide chain. For 10 points, name these organelles that function on
mRNA and stud rough ER, the sites of protein synthesis in the cell.
ANSWER: ribosomes
The precursor to these structures must first be modified by snoRNAs ["snow R-N-A's"], and those
precursors eventually make their way to the pars granulosa before their eventual export. Tetracycline
antibiotics work by inhibiting these structures, preventing the binding of a molecule guided by an
elongation factor. In prokaryotes these structures' subunits have sizes of 30 and 50 svedbergs, and
they contain A, P, and E sites. These organelles line the surface of the rough endoplasmic reticulum.
These organelles are where tRNAs are sent, and are composed of a combination of protein and their
namesake RNA. Name these organelles, the site of translation and thus protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosomes
In eukaryotic cells their structures are composed of 60S and 40S subunits while prokaryotic varieties are
composed of 30S and 50S subunits. Theses organelles contain a peptidyl site that binds peptidyl-tRNA and
an exit site from which the free tRNAs are released. In prokaryotes, the Shine-Dalgarno box makes up this
organelle's bonding site thus allowing the process it conducts to occur. These organelles are membrane free;
however, they can become membrane bound in eukaryotic cells when they become part of the rough
endoplasmic reticulum. FTP name these organelles that are responsible for the translation of mRNA to
proteins.
ANSWER: ribosomes
Weisberger et al noted that chloramphenicol inhibits the action of this structure in microbial cells,
though not mammalian ones, and the antibiotics edeine and pantamycin work by binding to this
structure. Its L11 stalk allows for the interaction with RF-1 that allows release from its substrates,
and the structure it forms with its substrates is stabilized by the interaction of its 16S arm with the
(*) Shine-Dalgarno sequence in prokaryotes. This entity's L1 stalk binds to its deacylated substrate in the Psite, encouraging the ratcheting that brings about translocation of tRNA to the E-site, and this organelle's
production occurs in the nucleolus. FTP, name this cellular organelle, which has two subunits and is
responsible for translation of mRNA into proteins.
ANSWER: ribosomes
A molecule that binds to this organelle contains a D loop and a T-psi-C-G loop; that molecule is ejected
from this organelle when the bond between EF1-alpha and GTP is broken. The activity of this organelle is
controlled by initiation factors. A molecule that adopts a cloverleaf conformation moves from this
organelle's A site to its P site in a process during which that molecule binds to another molecule with its
anticodon. This organelle is comprised of two subunits, and it binds to tRNA. The rough endoplasmic
reticulum is studded with these organelles. For 10 points, name this organelle which is the site of
translation, thus catalyzing protein formation.
ANSWER: ribosomes
Ramakrishnan, Yonath, and Steitz used X-ray crystallography to study this organelle. Bacteria often contain
the poly- form of these organelles, which can be separated by sucrose gradient centrifugation. Tetracycline
and aminoglycoside antibiotics work by inhibiting this organelle. The large subunit of this organelle, which
in Eukaryotes weights 60 svedberg units, contains A, P and E sites, which tRNA shuttles through during the
process of translation. For 10 points, name these organelles that are mostly comprised of their namesake
RNA, and which are responsible for synthesizing proteins.
ANSWER: ribosome
Puromycin interferes with the reaction that takes place in this structure, and the activity of these structures
can be stopped with chloramphenicol. This organelle begins its primary function when it recognizes ShineDalgarno sequence in Prokaryotes and the Kozac sequence for eukaryotes. These organelles are described
by Svedberg units and eukaryotes consist of 60S and 40S subunits. The enzyme peptidyl transferase causes
the transfer of amino acids from tRNA anticodons to the forming protein in these organelles. They are
manufactured in the nucleolus and are found in the rough endoplasmic reticulum. For 10 points name these
organelles responsible for protein synthesis.
ANSWER: Ribosomes
Chloramphenicol stalls the activity of this structure, while reversal of its primary function is enabled by
LepA. That function is carried out using the GTPase activity of EF-G. One of its main substrates is
assembled using the enzyme aaRS, and in prokaryotes, its 16S portion attaches to the Shine-Dalgarno
sequence. Designated 70S or 80S, this organelle transfers a nascent peptide from its P-site to its A-site
where aminoacyl-tRNA accepts the polymerizing protein chain. The tRNAs then exit from its E-site.
Coming in free and bound varieties, for 10 points, name this organelle sometimes found on rough ER that
contains two subunits and is the site of protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosome
Subunits of this structure are designated by their rates of sedimentation when centrifuged. This structure
binds to a sequence upstream from a prokaryotic (PRO-"care"-ee-OTT-ick) AUG (A-U-G) codon known as
the Shine-Dalgarno sequence. This structure contains A, P, and E sites. This structure's namesake type of
RNA is found in the nucleolus (nu-clee-OLE-us). This organelle is attached to the endoplasmic reticulum
(EN-doe-PLAZ-mick ruh-TICK-yu-lum) when its product is intended for secretion. For 10 points, name this
site of protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosome
These structures are distinguished through use of the Svedberg limit, and in eukaryotes consist of four
strands. One site important to these structures is the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, and locations on this
organelle include the P-, A-, and E-sites. Synthesis of this organelle is controlled by the nucleolus, and it
can be found in free and bound varieties. For 10 points, name this organelle, often found on the rough
endoplasmic reticulum, that plays a vital role in the creation of proteins.
ANSWER: ribosome
These organelles are described in terms of Svedberg units, which are computed through sedimentation.
They contain A and P sites, which are the sites of aminoacyl (uh-MEE-no-AY-sill) and peptidyl
(PEP-tid-ill) binding. They contain both a namesake kind of RNA and tRNA. They are manufactured in the
nucleolus and can be found attached to the rough endoplasmic reticulum. For 10 points, name these sites of
protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosomes
These objects respond to the Shine-Dalgarno or Kozak sequences, and one component of these structures is
manufactured in the nucleolus. Binding to the A site of these objects is facilitated by EF-Tu, and a shift
from the A site to the P site is catalyzed by EF-G. These objects, which in eukaryotes have a 60S and 40S
subunit, stud the rough endoplasmic reticulum, and are made of both RNA and protein. For 10 points, name
this cellular component, the site of protein synthesis.
ANSWER: ribosomes
One example of these molecules regulates the production of GlmS based on glucosamine-6-phosphate
presence in the cell. Another of these molecules has an activity-essential motif consisting of G5, G8, and
G12, as well as a Uturn that gives it its namesake shape. Examples of these molecules capable of catalyzing
in vivo Diels-Alder reactions were described by Seelig. Another type of them might allow for production of
HIV-resistant T-cells. They provide evidence for Gilbert's RNA world hypothesis, and these molecules are
capable of hydrolyzing their own phosphodiester bonds. For 10 points, give this term for RNA molecules
with enzyme-like catalytic activity, such as the "Hammerhead" type.
ANSWER: ribozymes [prompt on R/A before mentioned]
B6.61 is an example of one of these molecules created by selection experiments to improve on the
Round-18 one. Another type of these molecules has an undocked, intermediate, and docked form.
The CPEB3 gene has an associated one of these that resembles a construct from hepatitis d. One type
has invariant residues of C3, G5, G8, and G12 and a U-shaped turn with a namesake (*) shape. That
example is found in plant virons and is called hammerhead. Group 2 introns also are these. Many of them
can catalyze their own phosphodiester bonds and these molecules form the basis of the RNA world
hypothesis. They are responsible for linking amino acids in the ribosome. For 10 points, name these RNA
molecules that have catalytic abilities.
ANSWER: ribozyme [accept RNA enzyme before the end; accept RNA catalyst before the end; accept those things in either order; accept RNA Polymerase before CPEB3]
When previously released calcium ions are unable to return to the sarcoplasmic reticulum, this process
occurs. Interestingly, this process then makes sarcomeres more permeable to calcium ions, often resulting in
twitching. It is generally caused by a buildup of lactic acid and is continued by the fact that disrupted ATP
production prevents the release of myosin from actin filaments. Approximately 72 hours after it starts, it is
resolved by the action of proteolytic enzymes released into the system from lysosomes. FTP, name this
postmortem physiological process in which the muscles of an animal body become stiff.
ANSWER: Rigor Mortis
Crossdating these things is commonly done with a skeleton plot. Portions of these structures that
occur early in a season are typically lighter than portions later in a season, allowing for visual
identification of their boundaries. These things are the primary object of interest in the field of (*)
dendrochronology. Because the width of these things varies mostly as a result of precipitation, they can be
used to construct past precipitation records. For 10 points, identify these patterns visible in a cross-section
of a tree trunk.
ANSWER: tree growth rings
This molecule is the namesake of a system discovered by Fire and Mello in C. elegans that makes
use of an induced silencing complex and the enzyme Dicer. One type of this molecule possesses a
cloverleaf structure that contains a D-loop and acceptor stem. Primase is an enzyme that produces
this molecule, and all (*) primers are segments of this molecule. Unlike a similar molecule, it contains
the base uracil. For 10 points, name this usually single-stranded molecule that is complementary to the
DNA strand from which it is transcribed.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid]
The Dicer enzyme is used to create fragments of these molecules that control the activeness of genes in a
process known as these molecules' interference. Okizaki fragments are added onto short strands of these
molecules known as primers. Cloverleaf-shaped ones of these molecules carry an anticodon loop, while
operons control the production of messenger types of these molecules that are translated by ribosomes.
FTP, name these molecules with r-, t- and m- varieties, long strands of nucleotides that use uracil rather than
thymine as a base.
ANSWER: Ribonucleic Acid
One type of this molecule goes through A, P, and E sites before being degraded. The Dicer enzyme
creates small pieces of this molecule, and some types of this molecule can catalyze reactions and are
called ribozymes. A phenomenon called "wobble" affects a type of this molecule that takes a
cloverleaf shape and is attached to an amino acid. A guanine-tipped (*) 5' ("five prime") cap and a
poly-A tail are added to another type of this molecule, which is produced with both introns and exons
before being modified for translation into protein. For ten points, name this single-stranded molecule
coming in transfer and messenger varieties that is produced from DNA during transcription.
ANSWER: RNA or ribonucleic acid (accept messenger RNA, transfer RNA, or micro RNA)
The quality of a sample of this molecule is assessed using the RIN algorithm and Agilent's
Bioanalyzer. Lithium chloride is often used to precipitate this molecule out of ethanol solutions, and
its concentration is measured by taking 40 times its optical density at 260 nanometers. It can be
isolated in the aqueous phase if and only if acidic phenol-chloroform is used. Alwine, Kemp, and
Stark developed a method of visualizing this molecule that uses a formamide-containing transfer
buffer and a formaldehyde-containing agarose gel. This molecule can form pseudoknots, tetraloops,
and (*) stem loops or hairpins. This molecule is visualized in Northern Blots. This molecule's two-prime
hydroxyl group makes it both more reactive and more unstable than its counterpart. For 10 points, name this
often single-stranded nucleic acid that uses uracil instead of thymine.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid; accept more specific answers like mRNA or tRNA; do NOT accept "DNA"]
These molecules are sent to exosome complexes after they are degraded by non-stop decay. In
bacteria, one type of these molecules is usually polycistronic. Another type of this molecule contains
inosine and reacts with an enzyme to undergo amino-acylation. The RISC protein complex is activated by a
type of these molecules produced by the Dicer enzyme. According to the wobble hypothesis, a cloverleafshaped class of these molecules can bond with more flexibility than usual. A 5' cap and a poly-A tail are
added to one type of these molecules after their introns are spliced out. For 10 points, name this singlestranded molecule that is transcribed from DNA.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid; accept mRNA or messenger RNA; accept tRNA or transfer RNA; accept miRNA or microRNA; accept siRNA or short interfering RNA]
A pathway named for one type of this molecule creates a RISC complex and uses Argonaute and Dicer
enzymes. A namesake aminoacyl synthetase catalyzes the addition of other molecules onto one type of this
molecule, which can undergo a wobble effect, is cloverleaf-shaped, and contains anticodons. Another type
of this molecule is modified with a poly-A tail and has its introns removed by a spliceosome. This molecule
takes part in transcription and translation. For 10 points, name this uracil-containing nucleic acid that comes
in a "transfer" variety.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid; accept mRNA until "aminoacyl synthetase"; accept only RNA thereafter]
One variety of it is targeted by ricin and erythromycin, and is coded for by the most conserved genes
in the genome. Another type of it has a molecular shape with regions like the acceptor stem and D-arm.
One type of transposon uses it as an intermediate in the process of jumping, and in general, its
messenger type is created in transcription. Usually single-stranded, for 10 points, identify this major
genetic polymer, more unstable than DNA because of a self-cleaving additional hydroxyl group.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acids; do not accept "deoxyribonucleic acids" or "DNA"]
One process named after these molecules can be initiated by morpholinos and sees Dicer cleave the ds
type of these to form a RISC. Puromycin imitates one type of these molecules, which sometimes
contain pseudouridine or inosine. They can form snRNPs ["snurps"] with proteins, and ones that
catalyze reactions are called ribozymes. (*) Wobble base pairs can be found on one type of these
molecules, which is typically depicted as a clover leaf and contains an anticodon. Another type of these
molecules can be translated by ribosomes into proteins. For ten points, name this nucleic acid with
messenger and transfer types which contains uracil and is typically single-stranded, unlike DNA.
ANSWER: ribonucleic acid or RNA (accept RNA interference; prompt on nucleic acid but do not accept or prompt on "deoxyribonucleic acid" or "DNA" at any time)
Catalysts composed entirely of this substance include ones named GlmS and Hammerhead, while
another type of this substance catalyzes the peptidyltransferase reaction. One type of it bonds with itself to
form a cloverleaf shape; that type is responsible for delivering amino acids to ribosomes. Unlike a similar
compound, it has hydroxyl groups on its 2-prime carbons and uses uracil instead of thymine. For 10 points,
name this single-stranded nucleic acid which is synthesized from DNA.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid; do not accept or prompt on "DNA" or "deoxyribonucleic acid"]
One type of this molecule is shaped like a cloverleaf and carries anticodons. Another type of this molecule
is processed by adding a five prime cap and a poly-A tail. That type also contains introns that are removed
by spliceosomes (SPLICE-o-soams). Ribosomes are responsible for the translation of the M type of this
molecule, which is created during transcription. This molecule pairs adenine with uracil (YOUR-a-sill),
unlike a similar molecule whose backbone sugar contains one fewer oxygen. For 10 points, name this
nucleic acid that has transfer and messenger types.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid; accept transfer RNA or tRNA before "cap" is read]
One type of these molecules commonly contains inosine (IN-uh-seen) and pseudouridine
(SOO-doh-YOO-rih deen). With proteins, they make snRNPs ("snurps"), which are central to
removing introns in the process of splicing. These molecules lack a two prime hydroxyl group. They
also make up (*) retroviruses. A cloverleaf-shaped type of them contains an anticodon ("anti"-KOH-don)
and a 3' ("three prime") end for carrying amino acids to ribosomes during translation. The process of
transcription create the messenger type. For 10 points, name these nucleic acids similar to DNA.
ANSWER: RNAs [or ribonucleic acids; prompt on nucleic acids; accept tRNAs or transfer RNAs or tranfer ribonucleic acids until "messenger" is read]
Argonaute proteins bind to some of these molecules, including the Piwi-interacting type, in RISC. In
prokaryotes, Rho-independent termination of their synthesis is controlled by part of one of these molecules
called a riboswitch. With proteins, they comprise snRNPs ("snurps"), a component of spliceosomes. The
wobble effect describes the binding of this molecule's cloverleaf-shaped form to codons, and a five prime
cap and a poly-A tail are added onto one type of it after transcription. That "messenger" type of this can be
translated into proteins. Uracil is used in, for 10 points, this single-stranded nucleic acid.
ANSWER: ribonucleic acid
Interferon defense is sometimes activated by the "small hairpin" type of this substance, a variant that
is similar to the "small interfering" type which leads to a namesake "interference." This substance's
introns are cut by (*) spliceosomes, which are formed by snRNPs [pr. snirps]. This molecule follows a 5
prime to 3 prime direction and replaces the pyrimidine thymine with uracil. For 10 points, name this
substance that has ribosomal, messenger, and transfer types, and is a macromolecule contrasted with DNA.
ANSWER: RNA [or Ribonucleic acid]
This molecule can assume a complex structure known as a pseudoknot when two stem loops are
intertwined. One pathway involving this molecule sees it become incorporated into the RISC complex after
this molecule is cut by the Dicer enzyme. That pathway silences gene expression and is called this
molecule's namesake interference. Introns are removed from this molecule in a process called splicing,
which occurs inside the cell nucleus after transcription. For 10 points, name this molecule involved in
protein synthesis which has a "messenger" type, a single stranded nucleic acid contrasted with DNA.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid, accept DNA before "RISC"]
Walter Gilbert hypothesized that this molecule was the first major step to the evolution of life. One form of
this molecule consists of an acceptor stem and four stem-loops. Unlike a similar, stabler molecule, it has a
2' hydroxyl group. Sense and anti-sense versions of this molecule hybridize to this molecule in a process
called interference. It is in the "middle" of the central dogma. When this molecule can catalyze its own
splicing, it's called a ribozyme. Reverse transcriptase works on this molecule. One form of it is synthesized
by the nucleolus. It contains uracil, not thymine. For 10 points, name this genetic material which is usually
single-stranded, unlike DNA.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid; or mRNA; or messenger RNA; or tRNA or transfer RNA; or rRNA; or ribosomal RNA; or siRNA; or small intefering RNA; or various other types of RNA]
Their ds type is cleaved by the dicer enzyme and added to RISC, in a pathway named for one type of these
molecules. They combine with proteins to form snRNPs ["snurps"], five of which make up a spliceosome.
One type is bounded by a poly-A tail, while another type containing pseudo-uridine is cloverleaf-shaped.
Retroviruses and ribosomes are made of these molecules. One type is produced in transcription, and another
type performs translation. With messenger and transfer types, they contain uracil. For 10 points, name these
single-stranded nucleic acids similar to DNA.
ANSWER: RNAs or ribonucleic acids [accept RNA interference during first sentence]
This molecule's namesake interference was discovered by Andrew Fire and Craig Mello in their studies of
C. elegans. One type of this molecule has a structure that can be explained using the "cloverleaf" model
because it contains several loops. A 5-prime cap and poly A tail are added to another form of this molecule,
which can undergo splicing. Uracil is found instead of thymine in this molecule. For 10 points, name this
nucleic acid, which comes in transfer and messenger types, and has a different sugar base than DNA.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid]
The stability of one form of this molecule is enhanced by a poly-(A) tail. Introns are removed from
this molecule via spliceosomes [sply-see-oh-some]. This molecule is used by retroviruses as genetic
material and it is the template for reverse transcription. Varieties of this molecule include (*)
ribosomal, messenger, and transfer, but all consist of single strands and contain the base uracil instead of
thymine. For 10 points, name this nucleic acid that directly participates in the synthesis of proteins.
ANSWER: Ribonucleic Acid or RNA (accept Messenger RNA before "retroviruses" is read)
One process affecting this substance uses the Pasha and Drosha proteins, creates a complex called RISC,
and uses the Argonaute and Dicer enzymes for the cleavage and bypass pathways. That namesake
"interference" silences this substance which makes up the hammerhead enzyme. Its introns are removed by
splicing, two subunits of it exist in the ribosome, and it makes up a cloverleaf-shaped molecule with an
anticodon region. It always contains uracil rather than thymine in its nucleotides. For 10 points, name this
usually single-stranded molecule whose "messenger" form, from which proteins are synthesized, is
transcribed from and similar to DNA.
ANSWER: RNA [accept ribonucleic acid; accept messenger RNA or mRNA until "hammerhead" is read]
One type of these molecules commonly contains inosine (IN-uh-seen) and pseudouridine (SOO-doh-YOOrih deen). With proteins, they make snRNPs ("snurps"), which are central to removing introns in the process
of splicing. One type of this molecule possesses a cloverleaf structure that contains a D-loop and acceptor
stem. One type is produced in transcription, and another type performs translation. Those messenger and
transfer types contain uracil. For 10 points, name these single-stranded nucleic acids similar to DNA which
contain a backbone of ribose rather than deoxyribose.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acids; accept specific types of RNA : tRNA or mRNA]
The tm variety adds a tag to proteins in bacteria to target them for lysis. It is hypothesized to be the first
self-replicating molecule and when it catalyzes a reaction, it is called a ribozyme. Reverse transcription
PCR uses this and during translation, clover shaped ones carry amino acids to ribosomes. Unlike its
counterpart, it uses uracil and comes in ribosomal, transfer, and messenger forms. For 10 points each, this is
what molecule which is transcribed from DNA.
ANSWER: ribonucleic acid (accept specific types of RNA on early buzz)
Drosha, Pasha, and Dicer are components of a pathway resulting in the formation of the "micro" variety
of these molecules. One type of these molecules adds a poly-A tail after splicing separates the
non-functional introns from the exons. Another of these molecules is shaped like a cloverleaf and interacts
with the P and A sites. One type reads an anticodon that is complementary to the codon of the other, which
is made via transcription. For 10 points, name these nucleic acids that contain uracils, come in "transfer"
and "messenger" types, and use ribose as a sugar.
ANSWER: RNA [or ribonucleic acid; accept tRNA and transfer RNA before mentioned; accept mRNA and messenger RNA before mentioned]
ADAR enzymes, which de-aminate adenosines to inosines, suppress the activity of many enzymes involved
in this process. Although scientists increased expression of chalcone synthase, this process caused a
decrease of pigmentation in petunias. One intermediate in this process is a 70 base-pair long stem-loop
region, which is produced by a complex of DGCR8 to Drosha. That intermediate is cleaved into a structure
with a passenger strand and a guide strand, the latter of which is selected by Argonaute to form the Risc
complex. The 2006 Nobel Prize was given to Fire and Mello for studying this process in the worm C.
elegans. For 10 points, name this process in which Dicer and small pieces of the namesake nucleic acid
regulate gene expression by preventing transcription.
ANSWER: RNA interference or RNAi [prompt on "interference"]
The Drosophila X virus is thought to trigger this pathway as a means of innate immunity. This pathway is
responsible for guiding H3K9 methylation in the centromeric regions of S. Cerevisiae. Disruption of Pbodies leads to blunting of this pathway, which was elucidated by the discovery of the lin-4 gene. The Flavr
Savr tomato takes advantage of this pathway, which relies on exportin-5 to transport the products of Drosha
cleavage to the cytoplasm. Argonaute selects the guide strand to load into the RISC complex, which then
can target complementary mRNAs fordegredation in this pathway. Craig Mello and Andrew Fire won the
Nobel Prize for elucidating this pathway. For 10 points, name this mechanism which uses anti-sense RNA
to silence a gene.
ANSWER: RNA interference [accept innate immunity before mention]
This pathway is responsible for triggering Swi6-catalyzed methylation of H3K9 in heterochromatic regions,
and proteins in this pathway often contain a piwi domain or a PAZ domain. this pathway requires Exportin5, and 2-O-methyl substrates were used to ascertain the order of loading in the main complex in this
pathway. Drosha and Pasha are responsible for processing stem loops for triggering this pathway, while
R2D2 binds to the passenger strand in the RISC complex, which is the main effector of this pathway. Either
resulting in translational repression or cleavage of the substrate, it was originally evolved as a defense
against viruses. For 10 points, name this pathway in which mRNA is targeted by anti-sense RNA, leading to
knockdown of gene expression.
ANSWER: RNA interference
Morpholinos, synthetic uncharged nucleic acids, can be used to initiate this process, and RDE-4 and
R2D2 are two proteins that form complexes with an endoribonuclease central to this process. This
process is often initiated using delivery by feeding in which E. Coli with the desired payload are
simply consumed by the target organism. The Argonaute component of the (*) RISC gains
endonuclease activity corresponding to a guide strand; that guide stand is a short nucleotide segments
cleaved by the Dicer enzyme that allows endonuclease activity to be targeted at matching sequences of
mRNA. Fire and Mello discovered, FTP what pathway of post transcriptional gene silencing, best observed
in C. Elegans, which involves both ds and si versions of its namesake molecule.
ANSWER: RNAi or RNA interference
Saccharomyces cerivisiae notably lacks the pathway for this process, and Makarovna et al suggest that
CRISPR are a prokaryotic analogue to it. One complex involved in this process, which was initially
discovered by Rich Jorgensen in petunias, contains argonaute proteins, and that complex's formation is
catalyzed by an endonuclease with a two-base overhang on its three prime site. That complex, known as
RISC, is catalyzed by Dicer. First discovered in C. elegans by Mello and Fire, this is, FTP, which process,
previously known as quelling, in which gene expression is inhibited by cleaving the associated messenger
RNA?
ANSWER: RNA interference
Schwarz, Tomari, and Zamori demonstrated that the primary enzyme in the final stage of this process was
not Tudor-SN and suggested that magnesium was a cofactor. This process may be prevented by an editing
operation that forms inosine. Kulkami In one organism, this method was used in a 1998 study to interfere
with GFP and produce "lumpy-dumpy larvae" as well as "strong twitchers." One phase of this process sees
the binding of the guide strand in the RISC to argonaute; earlier, those twenty-to-twenty-five base pair long
sequences were cleaved from longer sequences by Dicer. First discovered in C. elegans by Fire and Mello,
for 10 points, name this process of gene silencing that uses siRNAs.
ANSWER: RNA interference [or RNAi; or post-transcriptional gene silencing]
Invitrogen's BLOCK-iT algorithm is used to design high-throughput screens using this process. One
protein used in this process was named for Arabidopsis mutants whose leaves looked like octopi. SID1 encodes a channel necessary for this process in C. elegans, which uses this process to regulate lin-14
via lin-4 during development. The aforementioned protein, Argonaute, makes up the catalytic
subunit of (*) the RISC complex, which uses the small interfering molecules generated by DICER. This
process results in either inhibition of translation or degradation of the target messenger, leading to gene
knockdown. For 10 points, name this process whereby single-stranded RNA is silenced thanks to the
recognition of double-stranded RNA with the same sequence.
ANSWER: RNA Interference [or RNAi]
This pathway can be used to reduce the amount of the toxic terpenoid gossypol in cotton seeds
without doing so in the rest of the plant. The original research on this concept was performed using
the unc-22 and unc-54 genes, important to muscle contraction. One result of this pathway sees
cleavage by Argonaute. This process begins when a certain type of double-stranded nucleic acid is cleaved
by the Dicer enzyme and incorporated into the RISC. A diet of transformed bacteria induces this process in
C. elegans, where it was discovered by Andrew Fire and Craig Mello. For 10 points, name this cellular
mechanism which stops the transcription of a gene.
ANSWER: RNA interference
It regulates the expression of cis-Nat genes in Arabidopsis, and its failure is the cause of the FMR1
mutation in fragile X syndrome. Drosha and Pasha are proteins that disrupt exportin-mediated transport
involved in this process, which leaves behind subcomponents that bind to foreign molecules and targets
them for the RDE-1 nuclease. Dicer cuts out the stem and loop structure of the double strand precursor to
create a single strand template used by the RISC complex to repress translation or destroy messenger
templates. Earning a Nobel prize for Andrew Fire and Craig Mello, FTP name this naturally occurring gene
silencing process also used by biologists to inhibit gene expression, often using micro RNA or siRNA.
ANSWER: RNA interference
One form of it includes an omega subunit that helps in its assembly and may provide a chaperone effect for
its binding beta prime subunit. The cofactor greA can increase its cleavage ability. In prokaryotes, it can
bind to the Pribnow box, and the cessation of its activity is often associated with rho factor, after being
initiated with the binding of sigma factor to make the holoenzyme. In eukaryotes, type two binds to factors
recruited by a protein that binds the minor groove in the TATA box. For 10 points, name this enzyme
responsible for transcription that makes a copy of its namesake substance from a DNA template.
ANSWER: RNA polymerase
Some subunits of this protein are called the bridge, the rudder, and the trigger loop.
Alpha-aminitin inhibits this protein. The heptapeptide repeats on this enzyme's carboxy-terminal
domain are phosphorylated to enhance its processivity. In bacteria, this enzyme's sigma factor
recognizes the -35 and -10 sites. Roger Kornberg won a Nobel Prize for crystallizing this protein. In
prokaryotes, the action of this enzyme is halted by stem-loops or by rho factor. This enzyme binds to
the (*) TATA box in eukaryotic promoters, as part of initiation. It synthesizes both exons and introns,
though its product must be capped and spliced before translation. For 10 points, name this enzyme vital for
transcription, which synthesizes RNA from DNA.
ANSWER: RNA polymerase [or RNA Pol; or RNA polymerase II or any other number; or ribonucleic acid instead of RNA; or RNAP; do not accept "DNA polymerase"]
This protein is dislodged from its substrate by a complex containing Rat1p in the torpedo model, and
its beta-subunit interacts with the nusA protein. The product of the BRCA1 gene interacts with this
protein via the NELF complex. Alpha-amantinin is a specific inhibitor of this protein, which also
binds to the ELP3 acetyltransferase. This protein contains a C-terminal domain that is
phosphorylated on Ser5 and Ser2. This protein, which was crystallized by Roger Kornberg, is
recruited by the TFIID- and TFIIH-containing (*) pre-initiation complex, and its function requires the
binding of a sigma factor. This protein is commonly recruited to TATA boxes of promoter regions, where it
synthesizes a message from one strand of the genome. For 10 points, name this protein which catalyzes
transcription.
ANSWER: RNA polymerase II or RNAP II [prompt on partial answer, accept the answer with no number but do not accept other numbers]
The rate of this process increases when enhancer-binding proteins bind to enhancers. This process
begins with the binding of TBD to the TATA box. It begins at a unit of nucleotides called a "promoter."
Introns are removed after this process in a step called splicing. In this process, an adenine (AH-duh-neen)
molecule in the template strand is matched with a uracil rather than a thymine (THIGH-meen) by RNA
polymerase (poh-LIH-mer-ase). For 10 points, name this process, which creates a messenger RNA
molecule from a DNA template.
ANSWER: RNA transcription
Support for this idea is given by Michael Yarus' Direct-templating model, and as a test of this
hypothesis was the creation of the 218-unit long Spiegelmann's monster and other autocatalytic sets.
Hollinger's creation of the R18 molecule lends more credence to this hypothesis, which some attempt
to use to explain homochirality by positing a selective non-enzymatic aminoacylation step.
Alternatives to this theory include the iron-sulfur or metabolism first models and panspermia. This
idea was posited in a paper by Walter Gilbert and supported by Crick and Orgel, and is supported by the
existence of self-catalyzing introns and other ribozymes. For 10 points, name this hypothesis which posits
that life began based on self-replicating molecules of a particular type of nucleic acid that is not DNA.
ANSWER: RNA World Hypothesis
The vinculin binding site of talin is a C-terminal helical bundle named for its taking of this shape.
Hirano bodies in Alzheimer's disease take this shape. Acute promyelocytic leukemia shows inclusions
of this shape named for Auer. This is the name and shape taken by the central helix-rich domain of
an intermediate filament that forms (*) coiled-coil dimers. One organism that takes this shape secretes
the lethal factor and edema factor, while another one is responsible for the self-limiting diarrhea caused by
eating unclean reheated rice. A cell named for this shape has a peak sensitivity at 498 nanometers and is
concentrated in the periphery of the retina. For 10 points, name this shape, which is taken by Bacillus
bacteria and cells in the eye that sense low levels of light and complement cone cells.
ANSWER: rod [accept cylindrical; accept filamentous before the word "intermediate"]
One type of this structure develops improperly in Alf mutants. These structures are formed from the lower
layer of the heart-shaped embryo. Aquatic species possess a namesake "pocket" located at the ends of these
structures, without which these structures would grow randomly. These structures are vulnerable to high
metal concentrations and cannot uptake phosphate ions, disadvantages mitigated by their mutualistic
association with fungi in mycorrizhae. The site of adenine-type cytokinin synthesis, they develop when the
ratio of auxins to cytokinins is greater than one. "Stilts" are sometimes formed by the adventitious types of
these structures, whose tuberous forms yield the potato and other foodstuffs. For 10 points, name these plant
structures typically located in the soil.
ANSWER: roots [to prevent problems, accept specialized forms of roots as answers throughout the question]
Low phosphorus or iron causes the proteoid type of this structure, which forms clusters. The radicle
is the embryonic form of this structure, and this structure's caps contain the growing tips. One type
of this structure is the (*) "tap" variety, and nitrogen fixation occurs in its nodules. Edible types of this
structure include beets and carrots. For 10 points, name this structure that takes in water and nutrients and
keeps plants fixed to the ground.
ANSWER: roots
The outside of these structures is covered by mucigel. These structures are normally divided into
zones of maturation, elongation, and division, as well as a "cap". These structures contain a
quiescent center of low mitotic activity surrounded by an apical meristem that produces cells in two
directions. Their embryonic form is the radicle. A diffusion barrier in them is the Casparian strip. Their
three common divisions are tap, fibrous, and adventitious. If the level of cytokinin is less than the level of
auxin, these structures are formed. Fungi form symbiotic relationships with these structures in mycorrhizae,
and rhizobia, which fix nitrogen, form nodules on them. For 10 points, name these plant parts that grow
underground.
ANSWER: roots [or root apical meristem; or RAM]
The LAX3 gene promotes the formation of these structures and the observation of groups of three pericycle
cells has led to the hypothesis that three is the minimum number of cells for initiating primordia of them.
These structures contain columella cells which contain amyloplasts and secrete mucigel. One theory on the
Late Devonian Extinction involves a major increase in the biomass of these structures, which form before
the plumule. A type of these is pneumatophores, which form to obtain oxygen. Adenine-type cytokinins are
produced in the meristem of this organ, and mycorrhizae is the symbiosis of fungus and this organ.
Contrasted with shoots, for 10 points, name these below-ground portions of plants that absorb water and
nutrients.
ANSWER: roots
Parasitic organisms contain the haustorial form of this structure while those not originating from the
largest of them are known as adventitious. The radicle is the earliest one of these structures to
emerge. At the tip of them is a cap protecting a region rich in apical meristems. The rhizosphere
describes the area surrounding this structure, which forms a symbiotic relationship with a fungus called a
mycorrhiza. The fibrous type is found in monocots while the tap variety extends straight downwards. For 10
points, name this plant organ that extends into the soil to collect nutrients and water.
ANSWER: root (accept "hyphae" before adventitious)
One specialized type of these structures contains lenticels, which allow air to enter at pneumathodes
(NOO-muh-thodez). Monocots typically have adventitious ones. The tips of these structures contain
the (*) apical meristem, and the cortex of mature ones contains a Casparian Strip. The main one of these
structures is known as the "tap." Nodules in these structures are the site of nitrogen fixation. For 10 points,
name these structures that are primarily responsible for absorbing water and nutrients from the soil and
anchoring a plant to the ground.
ANSWER: roots
This structure contains the columella cells that differentiate into the mucigel-producing peripheral
cells. The Zone of Cell Division in this structure contains the apical meristem, and water and nutrients
enter through its Casparian Strip. The primary one is known as the "radicle" and matures into the "tap."
For 10 points, name this structure that anchors a plant to the ground and absorbs water and nutrients.
ANSWER: roots
This phylum is unique in that its members do not exhibit growth or repair after embryonic development is
complete. Characteristics of this phylum include chitin-containing trophi, which they use to grind up their
food and which are contained in a pharyngeal organ called a mastax. One class in this phylum can survive
extreme desiccation by leaving itself in a cysted state, known as cryptobiosis; that class is Bdelloidea. The
largest class in this phylum is the Monogononta. This pseudocoelomate phylum gets its name from their
crown of cilia that draws a vortex of water into their mouth. For 10 points, name this phylum of animals
which has a name meaning "wheel bearer" in Latin.
ANSWER: Rotifera
This molecule consists of only two large chains in photosynthetic bacteria, but it usually consists of eight
large chains and eight small chains. Like chlorophyll, its active site is arranged around a magnesium ion,
and it is turned on during the day by the addition of a carbon dioxide molecule. Because it associates with
too much oxygen in hot weather, this protein is surrounded by carbon dioxide in C4 plants. This very
abundant enzyme attaches carbon dioxide to sugar, playing an important role in carbon fixation. Name this
enzyme used in the Calvin Cycle.
ANSWER: RuBisCo
The ion that allows this compound to perform its primary function binds to a lysine in a pH-dependent
fashion, forming a carbamate. The concentration of magnesium-two-plus cations is increased by light where
this compound operates. Light also helps its namesake activase promote the binding of its substrate to
carbamated active sites, and the release of a compound that, when bound, prevents trypsin-catalyzed
breakdown and blocks active sites, CA1P. This enzyme catalyzes a reaction whose primary products are a
highly unstable 6-carbon molecule in the presence of carbon dioxide, and phosphoglycolate and 3phosphoglycerate in the presence of oxygen. The most abundant protein on Earth, this is, for 10 points,
what enzyme that is responsible for fixing carbon dioxide to ribulose in the first stage of the Calvin cycle?
ANSWER: Rubisco [or ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase oxygenase]
This molecule includes eight alpha-beta barrels, which are the main domains of its L polypeptide chains,
and eight S chains. A magnesium ion binds to this molecule to activate it after a lysine residue is
carbamylated, a process aided by its namesake activase. In the presence of oxygen, this molecule's main
function produces phosphoglycolate and 3-phosphoglycerate, also called PGA, though it usually produces
two PGA molecules. For 10 points, name this enzyme central to carbon fixation in the Calvin cycle and
named for the reactions it catalyzes involving ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate.
ANSWER: RuBisCO [accept Ribulose-1,5-Bisphosphate Carboxylase/Oxygenase]
This enzyme's activase has two isoforms, the larger of which permits regulation by light or by ADP to
ATP ratio, as found for one organism via its incubation with thioredoxin-f. Its inactive form can be
carbamylated on a lysine residue, then inhibited. This enzyme produces phosphoglycolate, beginning
an undesirable sequence of reactions that is hedged against by CAM and that is called photorespiration,
owing to the similarity in bond length between diatomic oxygen and its normal substrate, which is
transformed into an unstable six-carbon intermediate that splits to give two molecules of PGA. For 10
points, name this enzyme, which catalyzes the first step of the Calvin cycle.
ANSWER: rubisco [or ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase oxygenase]
This enzyme requires a protein from the AAA+ family for activation, and in bacteria exists as a multimer
with 16 long chains and 8 short chains. It is allosterically regulated by CA1P and free phosphate groups.
This enzyme requires magnesium to form an activated carbamate, and in some organisms this enzyme is
sequestered in bundle sheath cells, with PEP carboxylase being used in mesophyll cells to transfer products
to it. This enzyme transfers a single carbon to ribulose bisphosphate, but can react with oxygen in a side
reaction called photorespiration. For 10 points, name this most abundant protein on earth, which catalyzes
carbon fixation in the first step of the Calvin cycle.
ANSWER: RuBisCO or Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase oxygenase
In some organisms, the N-terminal lysine-14 of this protein is modified by a namesake bifunctional
alpha- and epsilon-methyltransferase. One protein required for this protein's assembly is regulated
by thioredoxin-F. Two versions of it are coded by R. azotoformans' cbbL genes, and the active form
of this protein contains 8 large subunits and 8 small subunits arranged in a ring. C-A-1-P is an
inhibitor of this enzyme, which requires a namesake AAA+ activase to form a (*) carbamate at its
active site. This protein has components encoded by both nuclear and plastid genomes, and it is isolated in
bundle-sheath cells to prevent it from producing phosphoglycolate in photorespiration. This enzyme
catalyzes the formation of 3-phosphoglycerate in the first step of carbon fixation. For 10 points, name this
most abundant protein on earth, which catalyzes a key step in plant photosynthesis.
ANSWER: RuBisCO [or Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase oxygenase or Ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase]
This enzyme requires a protein from the AAA+ family for activation, and in bacteria exists as a multimer
with 16 long chains and 8 short chains. It is allosterically regulated by CA1P and free phosphate groups.
This enzyme requires magnesium to form an activated carbamate, and in some organisms this enzyme is
sequestered in bundle sheath cells, with PEP carboxylase being used in mesophyll cells to transfer products
to it. This enzyme transfers a single carbon to ribulose bisphosphate, but can react with oxygen in a side
reaction called photorespiration. For 10 points, name this most abundant protein on earth, which catalyzes
carbon fixation in the first step of the Calvin cycle.
ANSWER: RuBisCO or Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase oxygenase
This enzyme is degraded by the actions of victorin and the DNA-binding aspartic acid peptidase CND41,
but is forced into a proteolysis-resistant state by the binding of its inhibitor CA1P. It is usually localized to
to pyrenoids, and a lysine residue on it is carbamated by its namesake activase, which allows the positioning
of a critical magnesium molecule. Phosphoglycolate is a side product of this enzyme, whose slow speed
and penchant for leading to photorespiration is counteracted by PEP carboxylase in some organisms. FTP,
name this enzyme, the most abundant protein on earth, that catalyzes a major step in the Calvin cycle by
attaching a carbon dioxide molecule to Ribulose bisphosphate.
ANSWER: Rubisco or Ribulose-1,5-Bisphosphate Carboxylase/Oxygenase
A reaction catalyzed by this enzyme forms an endoperoxide that spontaneously hydrates, is
cleaved into 2-phosphoglycolate, and eventually forms serine. This enzyme is regulated by
CA1P, a transition state analog synthesized by its namesake activase. This enzyme is only active
at high pHs and requires a magnesium cation cofactor to coordinate an intermediate carbamate. It
has an extremely low turnover number of 3 inverse-seconds. 3-phosphoglycerate is a product of
one of its reactions. This enzyme, which is present in mesophyll but not bundle-sheath cells in
C4 plants, can catalyze photorespiration at low carbon dioxide levels. It makes up the majority of
protein leaves. For 10 points, name this most abundant protein on Earth, which is vital for the
Calvin Cycle.
ANSWER: RuBisCo [or ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase]
Its namesake index of viability looks at incorporation of deoxy-bromo-uridine, which can only be done
during this phase. It requires the kinase cdk2, which helps initiate this phase by binding to cyclin A, and
because the central event of this phase does not occur flawlessly, the Hayflick limit controls how many
times it can happen. It features the action of enzymes like topoisomerase, helicase, and polymerase, which
leads to the formation of sister chromatids and twice the quantity of a cell's DNA. For 10 points, identify
this part of interphase following G1, during which DNA replication occurs.
ANSWER: S phase [accept synthesis phase]
Mutations in the adenine synthesis pathway of this organism can result in production of a red
pigment, and mutations in its mitochondrial genes are known as "petite" mutations. This organism
is used in a technique in which two vectors encode different domains of a transcription factor linked
to "bait" and "prey" domains. That method of screening for protein interactions is this organism's
"two-hybrid" screen. Parental and non-parental ditypes can be found when analyzing this
organism's (*) tetrads. This organism has two mating types, a and alpha, but can also undergo asexual
reproduction. This organism is useful for its ability to convert sugars to carbon dioxide and ethanol. For 10
points, name this unicellular fungus commonly known as baker's yeast.
ANSWER: Saccharomyces cerevisiae [or baker's yeast until it is read; prompt on "Saccharomyces"]
Hartwell used this organism to screen for cdc regulators of the cell cycle, and positive and negative
selection in this organism often exploits the genes URA3 and LYS2. Temperature-sensitive mutants are
often created when using them for screens, and these organisms produce elongations called shmoos during
mating. These organisms are used in an assay that uses a split Gal4 protein to screen for protein-protein
interactions, called the two-hybrid assay, and they can switch mating types via the HML and HMR loci.
They reproduce when an a type fuses with an alpha types, forming a diploid cell which can then bud. FTP,
name this basic eukaryotic model organism, commonly called bakers' yeast.
ANSWER: Saccharomyces cerevisiae or baker's yeast before mention
Krogan and Weisserman developed a hypomorph library of these organisms, for which a library with
all 6000 reading frames deleted is available. The sec proteins, which regulate vesicular transport, were
originally discovered in it. Growing them on histidine-lacking media ensures that only those with a bait
vector binding to a fish vector survive in a "two-hybrid" system named for them. Haploid cells in these
organisms have mating type a or alpha. Hartwell and Nurse won a Nobel for their discovery of CDC genes
in these organisms. A eukaryotic "artificial chromosome" can be produced using genes from these
organisms. This model organism was the first eukaryote to have its genome sequenced. For 10 points, name
this fungal model organism also known as baker's yeast.
ANSWER: Saccharomyces cerevisiae [accept baker's yeast before it is read; prompt on yeast before it is read; prompt on fungi]
Like C. elegans, it lacks NF-kappaB transcription factors. Important genes in this organism include URA3,
which is used as a marker, and ADE2, mutants of which can be stained red. The petite mutation of these
microorganisms was studied by Golding, Grossman, and Mumur. It can mate via a projection called the
shmoo, whose formation is mediated by the "a" and "alpha" alleles of the MAT locus. Louis Pasteur proved
that a process associated with them was caused by living organisms rather than a chemical reaction. The
first eukaryote to have its genome completely sequenced was, FTP, what type of microorganism that plays
an essential role in the fermentation of alcoholic beverages?
ANSWER: Saccharomyces cerevisiae or yeast
The compound opiorphin found in this substance in humans has been shown to suppress as much pain as
morphine. Polytene chromosomes were discovered in fruit fly cells that normally produce this substance.
An inability to produce this substance is characteristic of xerostomia, which can be caused by Sjogren's
syndrome. The most important enzyme in this substance cleaves alpha 1,4-glycosidic linkages. Sialogogues
increase the secretion rate of this substance, which is vital for the formation of a bolus. It is secreted from
the parotid gland. For 10 points, name this substance which contains amylase to break down carbohydrates,
a liquid found in your mouth.
ANSWER: saliva [prompt on "spit"]
In the Gila monster, this substance contains exendin-4, from which the diabetes drug exenatide was derived.
The parotid glands secrete this substance which, when secreted, contains inactive lipases that are bile-saltindependent. Many mammals remove the amniotic sac from newborn infants via the vigorous application of
this substance. The sublingual glands also secrete it, and it contains an enzyme that hydrolyzes starch,
alpha-amylase. This liquid was involuntarily produced by dogs in Pavlov's conditioning experiments. For
10 points, name this substance that begins the process of digestion, a watery liquid secreted in the mouth.
ANSWER: saliva [prompt on "spit" or other colloquialisms]
This substance is secreted through a duct that crosses the buccinators muscle and also through a
duct that opens near the frenulum. Mumps inflames one set of glands that produce this substance, the
parotid glands; the other glands that produce this substance are the submandibular and sublingual
glands. It contains a namesake amylase that breaks down polysaccharides. For 10 points, name this fluid
that keeps the mouth moist.
ANSWER: saliva [prompt on similar, colloquial terms like spit]
This organ is the major site of epidermal growth factor production, and its enlargement is diagnostic for
Sjogren's syndrome. A specialized type of this organ named for von Ebner assists in the hydrolysis of
lipids, and though it is not the kidney, the Wharton's and Stenson's ducts leading from it can become
blocked with stones. Theophilus Painter was the first to note the ease of extracting chromosomes from the
large cells of this gland in the fruit fly, and swelling of these glands is the classic symptom of mumps.
Including the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual, name these glands that secrete a mixture of water,
mucus, and amylase (AAM-ih-"lace") enzyme into the mouth to begin digestion.
ANSWER: salivary glands
This man aroused controversy for his work with Thomas Francis, which involved infecting people with
influenza nasally. The Cutter Institute was contracted to manufacture one of his creations. One of this man's
inventions was contaminated by SV40, and another was partly funded by the March of Dimes Foundation
and eventually replaced by an attenuated formulation taken orally. For 10 points, name this scientist who
discovered the polio vaccine.
ANSWER: Jonas Salk
One subtype of the most common species in this microbial genus produces a protein to stabilize tight
junctions between intestinal cells. That protein, AvrA, is secreted through the Type III secretory system of
that species in this genus, and dampens inflammation to allow that pathogen of this genus to avoid breaking
through the epithelium until its numbers can challenge the host immune system. That secretory system,
encoded by this genus's namesake "pathogenicity island-1," enables species in this genus to inject virulence
effectors into eukaryotic host cells. Some bacteria in this genus cause typhoid fever. For 10 points, name
this Gram-negative bacterial genus which includes species enterica, whose serovar typhi is a common cause
of food poisoning in poultry.
ANSWER: Salmonella
Members of this genus are often grown on bismuth sulfite agar, and are tested for in the TSI slant test,
which detects their hydrogen sulfide waste products. These rod-shaped Gram-negative bacteria are related
to genus Shigella, and they can infect the lamina propria, causing gastroenteritis. These bacteria cause
typhoid fever, and can be killed by heating for 10 minutes at 75 degrees Celsius. For 10 points, name this
genus of bacteria responsible for food poisoning, found in raw meat and poultry.
ANSWER: Salmonella bacteria
One early method developed by this man and Alan Coulson uses radiolabeling of small fragments
and is called the Plus and Minus method. Another method developed by this man uses
fluorodinitrobenzene to create dinitrophenyl amino-acid derivatives, but was eventually replaced by
the Edman degradation. An instrument based on a method named for him uses the BigDye reagent,
and output a peak chromatogram trace after a capillary electrophoresis step. An institution named for
him near Cambridge made the single biggest contribution to the Human Genome Project, using a method
developed by him. That method uses labeled dideoxy teriminator nucleotides to sequence DNA. For 10
points, name this British geneticist and two-time Nobelist in Chemistry, a pioneer of DNA sequencing.
ANSWER: Frederick Sanger
A group led by Robert Holley beat this man in the race to sequencing a tRNA molecule, and his doctoral
thesis explained the mechanism behind lysine metabolism in animals. He used his namesake reagent,
FDNB, to help create a fingerprint sequence of a molecule he grew attached to after Charles Chibnall
inspired him to study it. He proved that proteins have a definite chemical composition by determining the
amino acid sequence of insulin. This man is still the only person to receive two Nobel Prizes in Chemistry.
Name this man who discovered the dideoxy method of sequencing DNA
ANSWER: Frederick Sanger
This man and Kjeld Marcker co-discovered formylmethionine tRNA's role in starting protein
synthesis. A method named for this scientist uses fluorescently-labelled (+) dideoxynucleotides,
lacking a 3-prime hydroxyl group, to cause chain-termination. This chemist won a Nobel Prize for
realizing that the fifty-one amino acids that make up (*) insulin completely determine its overall
structure. He won another Nobel Prize for outlining a method of DNA sequencing. For 10 points, name this
biochemist who died in 2013.
ANSWER: Frederick Sanger
The smaller subunits in these structures have a structural protein known as nebulin and are bound by the
protein CapZ. These bodies' namesake reticula release a chemical that forces exposure of cross binding
sites on a protein bound to tropomyosin dimmers; that chemical is calcium and that protein is actin. These
structures' centers are in a region named for the German for bright, the H-zone, and are known as M-lines.
Titin binds the thick filaments comprising theses structures to the I-band Z-lines that they lie between.
Appearing as the striation in cardiac and voluntary muscles, for 10 points, name this basic unit of the
muscular myofibril.
ANSWER: sarcomeres
One protein in these structures has Ig domains which unfold one by one. Along with titin, one component of
these protein complexes is bound by troponin and nebulin, while the other is comprised of coiled-coils and
two head domains. They contain lighter H-bands and darker Z-discs and M-lines, which contribute to their
characteristic coloration pattern. Containing thin and thick filaments made of actin and myosin, a bunch of
them together make a myofibril. For 10 points, name this basic functional unit of striated muscle.
ANSWER: sarcomeres [prompt on striated (cardiac or skeletal) muscle cells; accept myofibrils before mentioned]
Sodium-mediated antiport membrane proteins in these structures can be passively inhibited through the use
of digitalis extracts which block sodium-potassium ATPases. They are mechanically coupled to plasma
membrane dihydropyridine receptors. Though not found in neurons, they possess ryanodine receptors which
can be activated when phospholipase C cleaves PIP2 into DAG and the signaling molecule inositol
trisphosphate. Depending on the cell type, extensions of these structures form dyads or triads with adjacent
T-tubules and they contain the protein calsequestrin. For 10 points, name these structures found within
muscle cells which store intercellular calcium and are a modified form of an organelle that is continuous
with the nuclear envelope and comes in a rough form.
ANSWER: sarcoplasmic reticulum [or SR; prompt on endoplasmic reticulum or ER]
One protein found in this organelle binds to junctin and triadin on the luminal side, and is inhibited
by thapsigargin. A pump found in this organelle is inhibited by phospholamban, which in turn is
inhibited by beta-adrenergic stimulation. Dantrolene is used to treat a condition linked to a
mutation of a protein located here; that condition is the anesthesia-induced malignant
hyperthermia, which is caused by mutations in the ryanodine receptor. This organelle is mechanically
coupled to the dihydropyridine receptor in (*) T-tubules, and this organelle contains large quantities of
calsequestrin. For 10 points, name this specialized organelle found in muscle tissue, a variant of the
endoplasmic reticulum that is responsible for storing calcium.
ANSWER: sarcoplasmic reticulum [or SR; prompt on endoplasmic reticulum or ER]
This process occurs in the tunica albuginea around the corpora cavernosa in Peyronie's disease.
Myofibroblasts contribute to this process when they fail to disappear from granulation tissue via apoptosis.
In this process, proteins are oriented parallel to each other rather than being oriented perpendicular to each
other in the proper "basket-weave" manner. This process can produce both "hypertrophic" products and
keloids. It's not inflammation, but the muscle of the heart undergoes this process after a myocardial
infarction, and the tissues of the liver undergo this process in patients with cirrhosis. For 10 points, name
this process in which excess connective tissue accumulates in response to events like injuries to the skin.
ANSWER: scarring [or fibrosis; prompt on "wound healing"]
CT scans have linked this disease to enlarged Sylvian fissure. This disease has been historically treated with
chlorpromazine, although clozapine has been used more recently to treat suicidal behaviors. Incoherent
speech and illogical thoughts characterize its disorganized, or hebephrenic, type. Other types include one
marked by posturing and stupor and another defined by delusion and auditory hallucinations. Coming in
catatonic and paranoid varieties, for ten points, name this psychological disorder whose name means "split
mind".
ANSWER: schizophrenia
This condition may result from a deletion in the COMT gene, which normally inactivates catecholamines.
The mesolimbic pathway of affected individuals exhibits increased dopamine activity. Its name was coined
by Eugen Bleuler to replace Kraepelin's earlier term, "dementia praecox." One type is characterized by flat
affect and disorganized thoughts, another by waxy flexibility or stupor, and a third type by hallucinations
and delusions. For 10 points, name this psychiatric disorder with catatonic and paranoid types, whose name
means "split mind."
ANSWER: schizophrenia
Some of its symptoms were faked in the Rosenhan experiment so subjects could get admitted to hospitals.
Schneider's first-rank symptoms distinguish it from other disorders and include thought diffusion and
insertion, while other symptoms may include reduced ventrical and hippocampal size. The disorganized
type of this disease is characterized by erratic or childlike behavior. Medications for it may cause tardive
dyskinesia because they block dopamine receptors, though clozapine is considered safer than other
antipsychotics. For 10 points, name this psychiatric disorder, which has a paranoid variety characterized by
delusions and auditory hallucinations.
ANSWER: schizophrenia
One drug used to treat this condition is Clozapine, which is combined with estradiol in treatments for
postmenopausal women with this condition. One type of this disease is the hebephrenic type, and the
catatonic type of this disease leads to sufferers becoming nearly immobile. Sufferers of this disorder
frequently hallucinate and have delusions of grandeur. For 10 points, name this mental disease which can
come in a "paranoid" type and whose sufferers will often talk out loud to themselves.
ANSWER: schizophrenia
The name of this disease was coined by Eugene Bleuler, while Kurt Schneider listed what he considered
unique symptoms of this disease. Symptoms of this disease can be experienced by individuals taking
levodopa for Parkinson's disease. That is because this disease's positive symptoms may be caused by
systems in the mesolimbic pathway for dopamine. Symptoms of this disease include at least six months of
disorganized speech, blunted affect, and alogia with at least one month of symptoms, and its varieties
include catatonic and paranoid. For 10 points, name this disease often confused with multiple personality
disorder.
ANSWER: Schizophrenia
Those that associate with C-fibers can come together to form Remak bundles, which act barriers. They are
the cause of Schmidt-Lanterman incisures, which are channels containing cytoplasm and components that
in turn contain E-cadherin and catenins. Also, they can secrete eurotrophic factors, cytokines, and the
extracellular matrix so that the regrowth can occur of an injured cell on which they localize Par-3 before
spiraling in a unidirectional manner to complete their most noted task. Like oligodendrocytes in the central
nervous system, for 10 points, name these glial cells that enable salutatory conduction by insulating axons in
the peripheral nervous system with myelin.
ANSWER: Schwann cells
Krox-20 is required for these cells to function. Tumors composed of these cells exhibit Antoni A and
Antoni B patterns. These cells are responsible for forming a Remak bundle. These are the primary cells that
express the proteins P0 and PMP22; mutations in the genes that encode those proteins can cause CharcotMarie-Tooth disease. The differentiation of these cells is controlled by endothelin and neuregulin-1.
Following Wallerian degeneration, these cells can dedifferentiate. These cells are associated with only one
internodal segment. These cells are derived from the neural crest. Although found in a different part of the
body, these cells serve in the same role as oligodendrocytes. For 10 points, name these neuroglial cells that
myelinate the nerves of the peripheral nervous system.
ANSWER: Schwann cells [or neurolemmocytes]
An auto-immune response against these cells is the most common cause of Guillain-Barre [ghee-yahn barray] syndrome, and the spaces between layers formed by them are called Schmidt-Lanterman incisures.
These cells, which can be modified to form the tissue in a Pacinian corpuscle, perform a similar function as
oligodendrocytes and are also known as neurolemmocytes or neurilemma cells. These differentiated cells
are used in transplants to repair spinal cord injuries and naturally maintain structures necessary in the repair
of motor neurons. Name these glial [GLEE-ul] cells of the peripheral nervous system which surround axons
and build the myelin sheath, named after a German physiologist.
ANSWER: Schwann cells [accept neurolemmocyte, neurilemma cells, or glial cells until each is mentioned; prompt on neurons or nerve cells before "Pacinian"]
Externally, this structure contains an irregular ridge known as the raphe, and its appearance is primarily
determined by the actions of the dartos and cremaster muscles. The gubernaculum attaches the
developmental predecessor of this structure to nearby organs; the failure of those organs to traverse the
inguinal canals and reside in this structure is known as cryptorchidism. When the dartos and cremaster
muscles contract, this structure becomes smaller and more wrinkled to ensure the correct temperature for
gamete formation. For 10 points, identify this supporting structure of the male reproductive system, a sac
that contains the testes.
ANSWER: scrotum
Two of the six men who voluntarily contracted this disease at the Iowa State Penitentiary in the 1960's
escaped. Its mechanism was elucidated in guinea pigs because they are one of the few animals other than
humans who can get it. James Lind's experiments on treating it led to a citrus-high diet on sailing
expeditions. For 10 points, what disease is caused by a lack of Vitamin C?
ANSWER: scurvy
Some of these structures, such as those belonging to organisms in desert environments, undergo a
namesake "hibernation," which is not to be confused with a related phenomenon in which they require light
or heat to break out of their dormancy. These structures sometimes contain radicles and hypocotyls, and in
many cases possess a namesake hard "coat." Usually dispersed by water, wind, and animals who consume
them, these plant structures contain either one or two cotyledons. For 10 points, identify this
embryo-containing plant structure found in certain fruits.
ANSWER: seeds
Some types of these biological objects have elaiosomes (EH-lie-oh-zomes), which allow them to
undergo myrmecochory (MYRRH-meh-cok-oar-ee) through ants. The radicle is the first part to emerge
from this object, which contain a triploid tissue called endosperm. The outer wall of these objects is
sometimes called a testa, while cotyledons forms within them. Birds, insects, and wind help disperse these
items, which are an embryo surrounded by nutrients and a coat. For 10 points, name this result of
fertilization in flowering plants, which can be sown to grow a new plant.
ANSWER: seeds
Along with gap genes, which set the boundaries of these things, and pair-rule genes, genes named for
and controlling the polarity of these things help define the Drosophila embryo. In leeches, these things each
receive a set number of cells from five lineages of teleoblast cells. A phylum defined by having these things
includes the classes Polychaeta (pah-lee-KITE-uh) and Oligochaeta (ah-lee-goh-KITE-uh) and has two
parapodia and the same set of organs in each of them. For 10 points, name these repeating units of an
organism's anatomy, which annelids possess.
ANSWER: segments
One type of this symptom that can be treated with ethosuximide is classified as the absence type. Another
type of this event, which usually occurs in young children with high fevers, is the febrile type. Sometimes
treated with carbamazepine or tegretol, these can also be classified as myoclonic or as tonicclonic. These
occur when there is a breakdown in communications between neurons. Name these episodes often
involving convulsions that are experienced by people with epilepsy.
ANSWER: seizures (prompt on "convulsions")
A mutation which promotes this process prevents the removal of the farnesyl group from a certain
protein and is a point mutation in position 1824 of the LMNA gene. Although not carcinogenesis or
apoptosis, this process is also promoted by mutations in the ERCC6 and ERCC8 genes, which leads
to Cockayne syndrome. The Gompertz-Makeham law predicts the likelihood of the most notable
result of this process, which normally increases exponentially. Some scientists believe that the (*)
hydra does not undergo this process at all. The cellular form of this process is a result of the Hayflick limit.
Other animals that exhibit a general lack of symptoms of this process include lobsters, clams and tortoises.
For 10 points, what is this process, which is accelerated in patients with progeria?
ANSWER: senescence [accept aging; accept other obvious equivalents; be generous and accept telomere shortening; prompt on progeria early]
When "pellucidum" is appended to this word, it describes a brain structure that runs from the corpus
callosum to the fornix. A defect of another structure with this name allows blood to pass from the left to
right atrium. Another structure with this name can potentially deviate enough to cause abnormal breathing.
For 10 points, give this term that comes from the Latin for "wall," which describes the divider between the
two nostrils of the nose.
ANSWER: septum
The HeliScope technology performs this activity using single molecule samples, and the Phred program
assigns quality scores to the ouput of this process. Examples of this activity which rely on the SOLiD
technology include one in which the release of a PPi group causes luciferase to oxidize luciferin and release
light. Sanger's chain termination method is a "wet" method of performing it, while an early method of
performing this activity with large samples was the "shotgun method" which relied on cloning of random
portions of the chromosome. For 10 points, identify this activity which resulted in the mapping of J. Craig
Venter and James Watson's genomes.
ANSWER: sequencing DNA [or equivalents; accept sequencing the genome until "genome"]
One member of a class of molecules named for this residue has a neutrophil form that breaks down
the outer coat of Gram-negative bacteria. The transport of another member of that class named for
this residue is deficient in cystic fibrosis, leading to myconium ileus; those members are elastase and
trypsin. This residue donates a proton to a histidine residue, which accepts a hydrogen bond from aspartic
acid, allowing its hydroxyl group to act as a nucleophile in the "catalytic triad" characteristic of a family of
proteases named for this residue. For 10 points, name this amino acid with a hydroxy-methyl sidechain.
ANSWER: serine [or serine protease]
Mutations like rs25532 and I425V have been discovered on the polymorphic gene region which encodes for
the transporter of this substance, SLC6A4. Infection by Entamoeba histolytica has been linked with toxic
levels of it, and ondensetron is used as an antagonist to it following chemotherapy. Cardiac fibrosis has
been linked to excessive amounts of this substance, which is released from the raphe nuclei in the brain.
Within the blood, it is mainly stored in platelets, and DDC is used to synthesize it from 5-HTP, which is
itself synthesized from tryptophan. FTP, name this monoamine neurotransmitter, thought to affect mood and
sleep, whose reuptake is inhibited by drugs like Prozac and Zoloft.
ANSWER: serotonin or 5-hydroxytryptamine
One class of antagonists of this compound's receptor is used to treat the nausea associated with
chemotherapy, and carcinoid syndrome occurs when tumors secrete this compound excessively. In
the hepatic portal vein, platelets commonly sequester this compound. This compound's production is
dependent on TPH1 in the pineal gland and TPH2 in the Raphe nuclei. LSD agonizes this
compound's 2A receptor, and this compound is most abundantly produced in the enterochromaffin
cells of the GI tract. It breaks down into 5-HIAA in the liver via monoamine oxidases, and this
neurotransmitter's effects can be enhanced by Celexa and Zoloft, which block this compounds reuptake.
Synthesized from tryptophan and also known as 5-HT, for 10 points, name this neurotransmitter whose
levels are lowered in depression and anxiety disorders.
ANSWER: Serotonin or 5-HT or 5-Hydroxytryptamine
LSD, ecstasy, and other hallucinogens work by blocking transporters of this molecule. It is also known as
5-hydroxytryptophan (five hi-DROX-ee-TRIP-tow-fan). This molecule stimulates motility of the
gastrointestinal tract. Although ninety percent of the amount of this substance in the body is in the enteric
nervous system, irregularities in its function can lead to obsessive-compulsive disorder. Its reuptake is
selectively inhibited to relieve depression. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter thought to affect mood.
ANSWER: serotonin
This compound is the final product in a process that involves cytochrome P450 used by plant seeds to
remove ammonia; ammonia also causes an additional increase of this compound's level in the body in
an effect inhibited by valine. An excessive release of this compound into the bloodstream is the main
cause of cardiac fibrosis. This compound is stored by enterochromaffin or Kulchitsky cells, where it
is released during digestion. In the body, the enzyme (*) monoamine oxidase converts this compound
into 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. The synthesis of this compound uses the enzymes TPH and amino acid
decarboxylase in a process that begins with tryptophan. This compound is targeted by drugs like Asentra,
Zoloc, and Prozac. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter whose levels are elevated by a class of
antidepressants known as SSRIs.
ANSWER: serotonin [or 5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT]
Compounds like odensetron, which act as antagonists to this compound, are often administered to prevent
chemotherapy induced nausea, and this compound is metabolized into 5-HIAA. It is not a catecholamine,
but iproniazid and other monoamine oxidase inhibitors increase the concentration of this compound, and
fluoxetine acts by regulating levels of this compound. This compound is primarily secreted by raphe nuclei,
and the synthesis of this indole compound is carried out by a tryptophan hydroxylase. For 10 points, name
this neurotransmitter whose levels are regulated by Prozac and Zoloft, which inhibit its reuptake.
ANSWER: serotonin [accept 5HT or 5-Hydroxytryptamine]
In plants, production of this chemical via P450 mono-oxygenase helps eliminate poisonous ammonia. The
enzyme catalyzing this compound's production depends on biopterin and is found in large abundances in
Raphe neurons. Myo-inositol in consumed foods serves to modulate activity of this neurotransmitter. In the
body, about 80% of this neurotransmitter in the body is synthesized by the gut's enterochromaffin cells.
Both MAOI and TCA therapies parallel a current method of treating depression by increasing extracellular
levels of this tryptophan derivative also known as 5-HT. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter
regulating mood and appetite whose reuptake is selectively inhibited by anti-depressants like Prozac and
other SSRIs.
ANSWER: serotonin [or 5-hydroxytryptamine; or 5-HT before mentioned]
This compound is metabolized to 5-HIAA, and tumors that secrete lots of this substance cause
carcinoid syndrome. Raphe nuclei produce this molecule in the brain, and it is also produced in the
enterochromaffin cells of the small intestine. Also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine, it is derived from
tryptophan by TPH and DCC. Celexa, Zoloft, Prozac and other antidepressants inhibit the reuptake of this
molecule. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter that regulates mood and appetite.
ANSWER: serotonin [accept 5-HT or 5-hydroxytryptamine before mentioned]
Local concentrations of this molecule can be controlled using Tianeptine. This molecule is moved by the
SLC6A4 transporter. Much of the body's reserve of this molecule is stored in enterochromaffin cells lining
the digestive and respiratory tracts and it is also found in the raphe nucleus. This molecule is broken down
by monoamine oxidase A, converting it to 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. Formally, this neurotransmitter is 5hydroxytryptophan. This molecule is believed to play a key role in aggressive behaviors and mood. For 10
points, name this neurotransmitter whose reuptake is inhibited by anti-depression medications like SSRIs.
ANSWER: serotonin
The receptors of this compound interact with the drugs sumatriptan [soo-mah-TRIP-tahn] and zolmitriptan.
Carcinoid tumors release this compound, which is metabolized into 5-hydroxy-indole-acetic acid. This
compound is structurally similar to tryptamine with a hydroxyl group at the five position. This compound is
synthesized by neurons in the raphe [REY-fee] nuclei, but 90% of it is located in entero-chromaffin cells.
For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter whose re-uptake is selectively inhibited by Zoloft, Prozac, and
other anti-depressants known as SSRIs.
ANSWER: serotonin [accept 5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT before mentioned]
This substance activates its 5-HT receptors, and tyrosine (TY-ro-seen) is the metabolic precursor of this
substance. It is released in the Raphe (RAW-fay) nuclei. Overdoses of this neurotransmitter (NUR-oh"TRANS"-mitt-ur) can lead to high heart rate and muscle twitching, and this neurotransmitter's levels have
been shown to increase with exercise. This substance's "reuptake inhibitors" include Zoloft and Prozac. For
10 points, name this neurotransmitter, low levels of which can cause depression.
ANSWER: serotonin
This compound has been shown to regulate the transglutaminase-dependent activation and depletion of
RhoA, and this compound is produced in the medulla, pons, and midbrain by the raphe nuclei, though the
majority of this compound in humans is produced by the enterochromaffin cells of the gastrointestinal tract.
This neurotransmitter activates seven families of 5-HT receptors, and its reuptake is inhibited by
antidepressants. Derived from tryptophan, For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter which regulates
appetite and mood.
ANSWER: Serotonin [accept 5-Hydroxytryptamine; accept 5-HT before mentioned]
Elevated levels of 5-HIAA, the main metabolite of this compound, are used to test for carcinoid
tumors of enterochromaffin cells in the small intestine. Fluoxetine works by inhibiting the reuptake
of this neurotransmitter, which is released in the raphe nuclei. This neurotransmitter, which is also
known as 5-HT, is mimicked in structure by LSD and ecstasy, and is derived from tryptophan.
Prozac selectively (*) inhibits the reuptake of this compound. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter
involved in mood modulation, low levels of which can lead to depression.
ANSWER: serotonin [or 5-hydroxytryptamine; or 5-HT until it is read]
This chemical is metabolized into HIAA, and receptor antagonists for this compound include mirtazipine
and risperidone. It is collected in blood platelets and enterochromaffin cells of the GI tract, but the main
source of it in the brain is the Raphe nucleus. This neurotransmitter is a precursor to melatonin and is
synthesized from tryptophan by TPH and DCC. One class of drugs targets the monoamine oxidase that
breaks down this neurotransmitter, which is also known as 5-HT. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter,
which modulates sleep and mood and whose reuptake is inhibited by one popular class of antidepressants.
ANSWER: serotonin
Certain cells in the stomach are responsible for secreting neurotensin and this substance, and when it is
in the bloodstream, it is typically stored in platelets. Along with niacin and melatonin, tryptophan
synthesizes this substance, the presence of which notably contributes to feelings of contentment. For ten
points, name this neurotransmitter whose reuptake is commonly inhibited by antidepressants.
ANSWER: serotonin or 5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT
Too much of this substance in the bloodstream is the main factor behind cardiac fibrosis and pulmonary
hypertension. In plants, this substance is the end result of a process that removes poisonous ammonia by
first combining it with tryptophan. This compound, often found in Raphe nuclei, is mostly produced by the
enterochromaffin cells of the gut. In the liver, monoamine oxidases metabolize this compound into 5-HIAA.
This tryptophan derivative is also known as 5-HT and is inhibited by SSRIs like Prozac and Zoloft. For 10
points, name this neurotransmitter that regulates mood, appetite, and sleep and can cause depression at low
levels.
ANSWER: Serotonin
Psilocybin, the active compound in hallucinogenic mushrooms, works by binding to the receptors of this
compound. This compound is released by carcinoid tumors, and in the brain it is primarily secreted by the
raphe nucleus. Also known as 5-hydroxy-tryptamine, this neurotransmitter is created from tryptophan. A
common class of antidepressants selectively inhibits the reuptake of this neurotransmitter. For 10 points,
name this monoamine neurotransmitter important in controlling sleep and mood.
ANSWER: serotonin [or 5-hydroxytryptamine until it is read; or 5-HT until "5-hydroxytryptamine" is read]
An unusual type of these entities is holandric, which probably is responsible for some infertility. A
genetically dominant example, which leads to severe kidney disease and poor hearing, is Alport syndrome.
Another example, existing when a person does not create the protein dystrophin [DIS-truh-fin], is known as
Duchenne [doo-shen] muscular dystrophy. One type of experiment on these was the reciprocal cross, which
was used to study the occurrence of white eyes in fruit flies and can be explained using Punnett squares. A
very common example is red-green color blindness. Name these characteristics which are passed on
differently by fathers and mothers, usually because they are located on the X chromosome.
ANSWER: sex-linked trait or disorder [accept similar answers including sex and a form of the word link; prompt on genetic or chromosomal or similar answers]
In apicomplexans, this process involves the transformation of merozoites into gamonts, while in fungi, it
includes a stage in which mycelia fuse: plasmogamy. While most protists do not engage in this process,
some Euglena and Amoeba do. Another variation of this process leads to vivipary. In humans, it is most
effective just before the beginning of the luteal phase, and it is often employed recreationally by bonobos.
Birds' execution of this process is called a cloacal kiss, and most organisms pair off for it. Name this
process that results in genetically diverse offspring.
ANSWER: sexual reproduction [prompt on reproduction; accept mating or other equivalents]
Plasmogamy and karyogamy are important components of this process in fungi. While most animals
undergo this process, bdelloids have evolved to exclusively undergo parthenogenesis instead. Muller's
ratchet and the Red Queen hypothesis explain the advantages of this process, which is facilitated by (*)
pheromones in animals and involves pollination in plants. This type of reproduction results in a greater
variety of genetic diversity, and it features fertilization and the production of gametes during meiosis. For
10 points, name this type of reproduction used by humans, which is contrasted with asexual reproduction.
ANSWER: Sexual reproduction (Accept sex or clear equivalents such as mating; prompt on reproduction or variants thereof before it is mentioned)
Scott Sakaluk studied the chase-away form of this process, whose runaway form was proposed by
Fisher, and confirmed by Kirkpatrick and Lande, when high genetic covariance was present.
Bateman's principle states that it is dependent on gamete investment. Bowerbirds build elaborate
structures in this process, which is prevalent in (*) polygynous (pall-IDGE-in-iss) societies. Male-male
competition and female choice are the two main forms of this process. For 10 points, name this process in
which organisms compete for and choose mates, which can be thought of as a special case of natural
selection.
ANSWER: sexual selection [prompt on natural selection]
Like rays, although unlike skates, these marine organisms exhibit ovoviviparity. These organisms use
ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields of living organisms. The skin of these organisms
is composed of dermal denticles, which feel like sandpaper when rubbed the wrong way. These organisms
are in the class Chondrichthyes, which means they have a cartilaginous skeleton. For 10 points, identify
these organisms whose well-known species include the tiger and great white.
ANSWER: sharks
In their digestive tract, these animals possess a ridge to increase their intestines' surface area, known as the
spiral valve. This group of organisms have canals filled with glycoprotein-based gel that detect
electromagnetic fields, called the ampullae of Lorenzini. Unlike most fish, these animals must swim
constantly to avoid sinking, because they lack a swim bladder. They are found in the orderSelachii, and
comprise the Elasmobranchs along with rays and skates. Name this type of cartilaginous fish noted for their
tough, scaly skin, types of which include tiger, hammerhead, and great white.
ANSWER: sharks [accept Selachimorpha or Selachimorphs before "Selachii"; accept more specific answers; prompt on Chondrichthyes; prompt on Elasmobranchs before mentioned]
These organisms are closely related to the extinct Cladoselache. Like similar organisms, they have
Ampullae of Lorenzini. The egg cases of some species of them are called Mermaid's purses. Some species
undergo parthenogenesis, and the basking type is a filter feeder. A well known member of the lamniform
branch is the mako, while other species include the dogfish and tiger. For 10 points, name this type fish
which come in hammerhead and great white varieties.
ANSWER: sharks
This animal, which is not flat like the rest of its class, has a coiled ileum in its small intestine to provide a
greater surface area for increased absorption of food called the spiral valve. This animal also has a series of
jelly-filled canals that function as electroreceptors in water called the Ampullae of Lorenzini. Lacking a
swim bladder and noted for regenerating their teeth, they must always swim to keep afloat. Related to
skates and rays, for 10 points, name this animal typified by the species cookiecutter, tiger, and great white,
a cartilaginous fish.
ANSWER: sharks
These animals contain hexagonal plates of calcium salts for support in their mouth; those plates are
called tesserae. These animals contain electroreceptor organs called the Ampullae of Lorenzini,
allowing them to have the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. They use a large liver filled
with an oil that contains squalene to keep afloat, since they do not have a (*) swim bladder. They lay
eggs covered with a leathery case called a mermaid's purse. These animals have a keen sense of smell, and
replace over 30,000 teeth during their lifetime. For 10 points, name these cartilaginous fish that come in
tiger, hammerhead, and great white varieties.
ANSWER: Sharks [or Selachimorpha; accept specific types of sharks]
This animal has Leydig's organ, and the four compartments of its heart are arranged in an s shape. One
type of this animal has a cephalofoil that enhances the sensitivity of their ampullae of Lorenzini, which
allow them to detect electrical signals in seawater. Most species of this animal exhibit ovoviviparity, and
they breathe through ram ventilation. Their skin is composed of dermal denticles, and one extinct species of
this animal was called the Megalodon. For 10 points, name these cartilaginous fish, types of which include
the hammerhead and great white.
ANSWER: sharks
The Polypay and Targhee varieties of these creatures were bred in a research station named for them
near Dubois, Idaho. A group of six thousand of these animals were killed by leaked VX gas at Dugway
proving ground. The JSRV retrovirus killed another one of these animals born at the Roslin institute. Louis
Pasteur tested his anthrax inoculation procedure on these animals. Wilmut and Campbell used somatic cell
nuclear transfer to create one of these animals, which was the first mammal to be cloned. For ten points,
name these animals which include Dolly.
ANSWER: sheep
Ulcers dot the top of this structure when an organism is affected with SCUD. Dysecdysis refers to an
inability to properly maintain this body part. Various species, such as the Indian Star and the Redeared slider, can have this body part deformed in a process called pyramiding. This entity is the
primary defense mechanism of species in suborders (*) Pleurodira and Chelidae. Layers of keratin that
are called marginal, pleurals, and vertebrals comprise the scutes that make up this body part. The ventral
portion of this structure, the plastron, is joined by a bridge to its top portion, which is known as a carapace.
For 10 points, name this hard, defensive structure that forms the outside part of a turtle.
ANSWER: turtle shells or tortoise shells or terrapin shells [accept carapace before mention]
Infant dactylitis, or swelling of one or more digits, is an early sign of this disease. Prophylactic
penicillin and hydroxyurea are used to treat it, and people with this disease often suffer splenic
infarction and subsequently have the spleen removed. A point mutation that leads to this disease
causes a sixth-residue (*) glutamine to change to a valine. Possessing one allele with this disease's
causative mutation confers resistance to malaria. The aggregation of the beta-globin chains of hemoglobin
blocks blood vessels and leads to this disease's namesake "crises." For 10 points, name this disease most
common in people of African descent that causes blood cells to form a namesake abnormal curved shape.
ANSWER: sickle cell anemia
This disease is sometimes called ogbanjes, which literally means "Children that come and go", but
received its more common name from Verne Mason. Though this disease lowers life expectancy to the
mid-40s, the use of hydroxyurea can alleviate many of the problems, and this disease also (*) confers
resistance to malaria. Primarily affecting Africans is, for ten points, what genetically inherited disease which
causes red blood cells to be in the namesake shape?
ANSWER: Sickle Cell Anemia (Accept SCD, Sickle Cell Disease, SCA, or Drepanocytosis; prompt on partial answer)
Sodium metabisulfite is added to the tissue sample to diagnose this disease, which is caused by a
single substitution of valine for glutamic acid. Hydroxyurea [hi-DROK-see-yoo-ree-uh] can treat this
disease by inducing production of the fetal form of hemoglobin, which if left untreated can cause the
spleen to simultaneously enlarge and deteriorate. Heterozygote advantage may explain the prevalence
of this disease in malaria-stricken regions like sub-Saharan Africa. Often triggered by low oxygen
concentration, name this hereditary disease in which small blood vessels may be blocked by the
characteristic crescent-shaped red blood cells.
ANSWER: sickle-cell anemia [or sickle-cell disease]
Vaso-occlusive crises in people with this condition can cause priapism in males, along with jaundice,
paleness, fatigue, and organ damage. It comes from the pleiotropic effects of a point mutation substituting a
glutamic acid for valine at position 6, causing the abnormal HbS form of hemoglobin and resulting in
blockage of arteries and veins. In addition, its presence counteracts Plasmodium and the resulting effects of
malaria. Found mainly in sub-Saharan Africans and their descendants, For 10 points, identify this condition
which commonly causes anemia, the presence of which is marked by bent blood cells.
ANSWER: Sickle-cell anemia
People with this disease are susceptible to salmonella osteomyelitis, and it is often treated with
hydroxyurea. One effect of this disease is the eventual infarction and destruction of the spleen.
Heterozygotes for this disease have increased resistance to malaria, which is why it is prevalent in African
Americas. This disease is caused by a glutamic acid to valine mutation in the beta-chain of hemoglobin. For
10 points, name this genetic disease in which red blood cells take on a curved shape.
ANSWER: Sickle-cell anemia
One particular complication of this disease results from parvovirus B19 infection of bone marrow,
which causes aplasia, and patients with this disease often have osteomyelitis caused by Salmonella. Patients
with this disease have an increased risk of overwhelming sepsis from encapsulated organisms because they
often auto-splenectomize, and this disease is diagnosed by gel electrophoresis of the affected protein. Acute
chest crises and vaso-occlusive crises are painful manifestations of this disease, which is caused by a
glutamic acid to valine mutation in the beta chain of a certain protein. It is believed to confer a
heterozygote advantage against malaria. For 10 points, name this disease common in African Americans
which causes red blood cells to assume a crescent-like shape.
ANSWER: sickle-cell anemia
This disease can be treated with hydroxyurea, which slows production of affected cells. This disease is
caused by a substitution of valine for glutamic acid, and spleen and liver enlargement can occur due to
reduced blood flow. It is an example of heterozygote advantage since those with one copy of the affected
gene are less likely to contract malaria. For 10 points, name this autosomal recessive disorder in which a
defective hemoglobin gene causes abnormally shaped red blood cells.
ANSWER: sickle-cell anemia [or sickle-cell disease; do not accept or prompt on "anemia" by itself]
The antifungal drug clotrimazole may be used to treat this non-fungal disorder because it inhibits activation
of the Gardos channel, preventing dehydration. Priapism is a very common symptom of this disease.
Autosplenectomy, where the spleen shrinks and eventually disappears, occurs in children with this disorder.
It often leads to painful vaso-occlusion crises. Sodium metabisulfite is used to diagnose this disease, and
hydroxyurea treats its symptoms. Linus Pauling coined the term "molecular disease" to describe this
disorder, which is caused by the point mutation of glutamic acid to valine. Heterozygotes for its genetic
mutation are resistant to malaria. For 10 points, name this disorder common in people with African heritage
which causes red blood cells to deform.
ANSWER: sickle cell anemia [or sickle cell disease; or SCA; or SCD]
The drug decitadine is currently being tested as medicine for this condition. The first approved drug
for the treatment of this condition was hydroxyurea, which has increased the median survival for
sufferers of this condition to approximately 45 years. Persons afflicted with this condition have a higher
survival rate in malaria-infested zones, although this condition often leads to small blood vessels
becoming clogged, which results in vaso-occlusive crises. For 10 points, name this form of anemia that is
characterized by crescent-shaped red blood cells.
ANSWER: sickle-cell anemia [or sickle-cell disease]
Structures involved in processing this sense include the lateral geniculate nucleus and the superior
colliculus. The main organ of this sense contains amacrine cells, which synapse with bipolar and
ganglion cells. This sense is carried via cranial nerve II, and receptors for this sense contain opsins like
iodopsin and rhodopsin. Lasix surgery corrects one problem with this sense, as can contact lenses or
glasses. For 10 points, name this sense whose receptors are rods and cones.
ANSWER: sight [or clear knowledge equivalents like vision or seeing]
A major idea of this work is the concept of bioaccumulation, in which fat-soluble molecules
concentrate in living tissue as it moves up the food chain. Its opening chapter, "A Fable For
Tomorrow", described the devastation wrought by a certain "white granular powder" which was
responsible for (*) eggshell thinning and was eventually banned in 1972. For 10 points, name this book
which focused on the dangers of the pesticide DDT and founded the environmentalist movement, written
by Rachel Carson.
ANSWER: Silent Spring
The first chapter of this book is entitled "A Fable for Tomorrow" and tells of a harmonious town suddenly
hit with a "strange blight." A parody of this book is "The Desolate Year," which imagined a world where
insects ran amok. That parody of this work was produced by the Monsanto Corporation, which, along with
other companies, objected to this book's criticism of the pesticide DDT. For 10 points, name this landmark
environmentalist book, written by Rachel Carson.
ANSWER: Silent Spring
After it was published, this book was attacked by the pamphlet "The Desolate Year." This book argues
that "the 'control of nature' is a phrase conceived in arrogance, born of the Neanderthal age of biology and
philosophy" in its final chapter, "The Other Road." Its third chapter criticizes the makers of "elixirs of
death," and its first chapter, "A Fable for Tomorrow," describes an idyllic town attacked by a "strange
blight," resulting in the destruction of birds. Upon being published in 1962, this book touched off a storm
of criticism from companies like Cyanamid and Monsanto. For 10 points, name this book which argued
that DDT and other pesticides destroy the ecosystem, written by Rachel Carson.
ANSWER: Silent Spring
This work refers to the death of robins due to a program to stop the spread of Dutch Elm disease as
"chains of devastation." The opening chapter of this work describes "a strange blight" that crept
over "a town in the heart of America" causing everything to change, and is titled "A Fable for
Tomorrow." The American Council on Science and Health has challenged this work's claim that
eggshell thinning was a result of the application of a certain pesticide. For 10 points, identify this 1962 work
which led to the banning of DDT in the United States, written by Rachel Carson.
ANSWER: Silent Spring
Rocks of this period from Bohemia were divided into eight stages by Joachim Barrande, and at the
end of this period, populations of conodonts decreased during the Lau event. The sea level dropped
worldwide during another minor extinction of this period, the Mulde event. Brachiopods and bryozoa
were particularly devastated by the extinction event that closed the preceding period, the third largest ever.
During this period, the first vascular land plants developed. It was marked by the appearance of coral reefs,
leeches, and the first land animals. For 10 points, name this geological time period bracketed by the
Ordovician and the Devonian.
ANSWER: Silurian period
There is still dispute over the discovery of a Baragwanathia fossil that allegedly lived during this period, as
it would indicate the presence of lycophytes during it. Its latter portion saw a temporary reduction in
conodonts as part of the Lau event, which occurred before its Pridoli epoch. Baltica's collision with
Laurentia resulted in the beginning of the Iapetus Ocean's closure during its Ludlow Epoch, and this period
saw the emergence of the first coral reefs. Other developments include the evolution of the first freshwater
fish as well as the proliferation of bony and jawless fish coinciding with its significant glacial melt. Also
seeing the development of Cooksonia, the first vascular land plants, for 10 points, name this period during
the Paleozoic era, in between the Ordovician and Devonian periods.
ANSWER: Silurian Period (prompt on "Paleozoic Era" before mentioned)
Problems with this structure, which are grouped together as SSS, can create bradycardia and tachycardia,
and these problems can be provoked by high potassium levels. Its effects are visible on an EKG as the P
wave. Located above the right atrium, it causes contractions which push blood into the right ventricle and
from there, to the lungs when stimulated by the autonomic nervous system, although its pacemaker potential
overrides those of the Purkinje fibers and a similar structure because it beats faster, with an intrinsic rate of
70-80 beats/min. For 10 points, name this structure of the heart that causes it to beat, the origin of the
cardiac action potential.
ANSWER: Sinoatrial node [accept SA node, or sinus node]
Inflammatory conditions of this tissue are associated with anti-Jo1 and anti-SRP antibodies. Another
condition in this tissue is caused by mutations in TPM3 and shows nemaline bodies. Coenzyme Q is
used to prevent a horrific side effect of statins in which this tissue degrades. CPK is commonly
elevated in conditions affecting it. This tissue lacks glucose-6-phosphatase, which is why the (*)
glycogen they store cannot be transferred. In the Cori cycle, this organ receives glucose from the liver. This
tissue atrophies upon denervation, and another disease of this tissue is caused by mutations in dystrophin.
This tissue, which receives signals via nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, contains myofibrils, which can be
subdivided further into repeating units called sarcomeres. For 10 points, name this type of tissue which is
responsible for voluntary movement.
ANSWER: skeletal muscle [prompt on partial answer, prompt on "striated muscle" since cardiac muscle is also striated]
This structure is affected by a mutation in ABCA12 that causes harlequin-type ichthyosis. This organ
includes Meissner and Pacinian corpuscles. It's not the pancreas, but one part of it includes Merkel cells
and Langerhans cells. The pilomotor reflex affects this organ, which contains the sebaceous glands. Divided
into three main layers, this organ is composed largely of collagen and keratin, and is affected by psoriasis
and eczema. The largest organ of the body, it comprises the first line of defense against pathogens. For 10
points, name this organ whose top layer is the epidermis.
ANSWER: skin [prompt on epidermis until "three main layers" is read]
Some cells in this organ are "Merkel" cells, while projections on it are called rete (REET) ridges.
Affected by Grover's disease, this organ has one part subdivided into the stratum granulosum
(GRAN-you-low-sum) and the stratum spinosum. It contains various mechanoreceptors. Major cell types in
this organ include keratinocytes (care-UH-tin-OH-cytes). For 10 points, name this largest organ of the
human body, which serves as a major physical barrier and is divied into the dermis and epidermis.
ANSWER: skin [or dermis; or epidermis until it is read]
One layer of this organ is divided into sublayers called germinativum, or basale, spinosum, granulosum,
lucidum, and corneum. Another layer contains the apocrine glands and is connected to the former layer by
the basement membrane. This organ contains a plurality of the adipose cells in the body and removes its
dead cells through the process of keratinization. Analogous to reptilian scales, this organ present in
sufficient density is known as "fur." For 10 points, identify this organ that consists of the epidermis and
dermis, the largest organ in the human body.
ANSWER: skin
Birbeck granules are found in cells in this organ. Pacinian corpuscles are localized to this organ, which, in
infants, produces vernix caseosa. Merkel cell carcinoma and Langerhans cell histiocytosis affect this organ.
Though not the kidneys, it is subdivided into sections named for Malpighi. An acid mantle surrounds it. The
stratum corneum consists of cornified cells in this organ, which in humans is the site of desquamation. This
organ houses sebaceous glands in humans. Keratinocytes constitute most of the epithelial tissue on the outer
section of this organ. For 10 points, name this large organ serving as defense against pathogens, consisting
of the dermis and epidermis.
ANSWER: the skin
Cancer of this organ can be treated with vismodegib, which is sold as Erivedge. Most patients with Gorlin
syndrome develop cancer of this organ, which can be removed in surgeries described by the acronym
CCPDMA. The progress of cancer in this organ can be measured by the Clark level and Breslow's depth.
This organ is the target of the surgical procedure EDC, which stands for "electrodessication and curettage."
Lentigo maligna is a variety of one of this organ's cancers. This organ can develop the usually non-lethal
basal cell carcinoma, and the deadliest cancer of this organ occurs in cells that produce a namesake dark
pigment. For 10 points, name this primary organ affected by melanoma.
ANSWER: skin
This organ is home to the eccrine and apocrine glands, and the arrecter pili are vestigial muscles found in
this organ. Meissner's Corpuscules are found in the papillae that form between the boundary of two parts of
this organ. Sebaceous glands are found in the bottom layer of this organ, and are often found in conjunction
with hair follicles. Infection of this organ by bacteria of the genus Staphylococcus often leads to impetigo in
young children. This organ contains melanocytes, which determine its color, and conditions that affect this
organ include psoriasis. For 10 points, name this largest organ, which serves as the body's first line of
defense and whose top layer is the epidermis.
ANSWER: skin
This organ secretes an acidic film called the acid mantle, and it possesses immune cells named after
Langerhans. Some secretory structures in this organ come in apocrine and eccrine varieties, and it contains
mechanoreceptors such as Pacinian corpuscles and Meissner's corpuscles. This organ secretes a lubricant
from its sebaceous glands, and it contains fat stores in its subcutaneous layer. A layer of keratin is produced
by the epidermis, the topmost layer in this organ, which also contains hair follicles. For 10 points, name this
largest organ of the human body that serves as the first line of defense against pathogens and forms the
body's outer covering.
ANSWER: skin [prompt on "epidermis" before "apocrine" is read]
Basilar fractures of this structure often display Battle's sign. The calvarium is the top part of this object,
which in infants displays gaps called fontanelles. This structure's coronal, lambdoid and sagittal sutures are
responsible for holding together its parietal, occipital, and temporal bones. The hole in this structure's base
is the foramen magnum, which is where the spine enters it. For 10 points, name this bone that protects the
brain.
ANSWER: skull [prompt on head]
In amniotes, this structure may be classified as anapsida, synapsida, euryapsida, or diapsida, and tension
created by the six early portions of this structure can rupture of the great vein of Galen. It includes the
ethmoid, the zygomatic arch, and an opening called the foramen magnum. Its coronal suture appears after a
fontanelle was ossified during infancy, joining the frontal and parietal bones, and its softness in human
infants allows for rapid growth and safety while exiting the birth canal. For 10 points, name this structure
that contains the maxilla and mandible and encases the brain.
ANSWER: skull [accept cranium or crania before "mandible"]
This bone undergoes LeFort fractures, and its not the heart but it contains two foramen ovale, as well as
the foramen lacerum and rotundum. The cribriform plate is found here. It is formed by both
intramembranous and endochondral ossification. The ethmoid, frontal, occipital, parietal, sphenoid and
temporal bones form most of this structure, and its components are bonded by suture joints. For 10 points,
name the structure composed of the mandible and the cranium that houses your brain.
ANSWER: skull [prompt on cranium]
This process is aided by the VLPO neurons, which send signals to the locus coeruleus from the
hypothalamus, and by the accumulation of adenosine. Orexin inhibits this process, which leads to delta
activity on an EEG in its "slow-wave" subtype. Signals from the pineal gland release melatonin before this
process during the circadian rhythms. For 10 points, name this biological process which has four stages
other than the REM stage, in which dreaming occurs.
ANSWER: sleeping [or rest]
K-complexes appear during the second stage of this state, whose fifth stage manifests in tonic and
phasic categories. Its first stage is marked by the disappearance of alpha waves and the appearance of
theta waves, while its later stages are categorized by long, slow delta waves. This state's fifth and final
stage is characterized by increased neuron activity and rapid eye movements, as well as vivid dreams.
For 10 points, name this state, prevented by insomnia.
ANSWER: sleep
A prolonged form of this process is preceded by the elevation of the respiratory quotient above one, which
results from increased carbohydrate burning. Aquatic mammals often undergo it in only one cerebral
hemisphere. One phenomenon which occurs during this process may come from the synthesis of chaotic
signals originating in the pons. One prion disease inhibiting this process is fatal and familial, and prevents
its progression beyond the theta-wave-heavy stage 1. Melatonin, which is suppressed by blue light,
promotes this process, which is part of the circadian rhythm. For 10 points, name this state whose REM
substage includes dreaming.
ANSWER: sleep [accept word forms; accept torpor; accept hibernation or word forms; accept unihemispherical slow-wave sleep; prompt on "circadian rhythms" after "Melatonin" is read and before "circadian rhythm" is read; prompt "dreaming;" prompt "REM" until "theta-wave" is read]
Some scholars believe this bodily process was once "segmented" between "first" and "second" stages.
A CPAP machine is used to treat apnea during this process, and muscle paralysis often occurs during
the (*) REM form of this process. Circadian rhythm regulates the cycle of this process, a lack of which is
called insomnia. For 10 points, name this process which is recommended to last eight to 10 hours.
ANSWER: sleep
This behavior is initiated by secretion of GABA from the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus, and bruxism is the
most common disorder occurring during it. Disorders of it include cataplexy, which is this process's
inappropriate activation. Its onset is signaled by melatonin secretion. Its last stage is activated by
acetylcholine and inhibited by serotonin, and that stage is preceded by stages of theta activity and delta
activity. That last stage, associated with learning of complex tasks, is REM. For 10 points, name this state
of unconsciousness of which adolescents need approximately eight hours, during which it is possible to
have dreams.
ANSWER: sleep
Surgical treatments for this disorder include the removal of some soft tissue with UPPP, a pillar palatal
implant, and the correction of facial abnormalities such as a deviated septum. This disorder is diagnosed by
a combination of an electro-oculogram, electromyogram, and similar tests collectively known as a
polysomnogram. Its most successful treatment is continuous positive airway pressure, and when this
disorder is not caused by a brain disorder it is classified as obstructive. Name this disorder consisting of
interrupted breathing.
ANSWER: sleep apnea
In 2007, Nakagaki discovered that one of these organisms possesses a primitive form of memory in
that it is able to slow its growth rate after exposure to periodic temperature fluctuations. Another
species in this group survives high zinc concentrations by synthesizing fuligorubin A, a yellowcolored pigment. The aforementioned examples of these, Physarum polycephalum and Fuliga septica,
possess a highly branched macroscopic stage of life known as a (*) plasmodium. The other broad type
of these, exemplified by Dictyostelium discoideum, can initiate a cAMP signal that triggers formation of
slug-like masses and is consequently known as cellular. For 10 points, identify this broad polyphyletic
group of colonial amoeboid organisms that are named for their reproduction through spores like fungi.
ANSWER: slime molds [or myxomycota or myxomycetes or myxamoeba; accept myxomycota; prompt on fungi or protista/protists or eukarya or eukaryotes or amoebozoa or amoebae; prompt on myxogastria or physaridae or psyarum polycephalum before "fluigorubin A"]
One section of this organ is connected to the diaphragm by the ligament of Treitz, and the failure of
this organ's omphalomesenteric duct to close after birth causes Meckel's diverticulitis. Brunner's
glands secrete alkaline fluid into it. This organ contains clumps of lymphoid tissue called (*) Peyer's
patches, and the liver and pancreas drain into it through the sphincter of Oddi. Enzymes are secreted in its
crypts of Lieberkuhn, and mucosal secretions facilitate peristalsis in this organ, whose surface area is
increased by fingerlike projections called villi. For 10 points, name this organ of the digestive system, the
site of nutrient absorption.
ANSWER: small intestine [prompt on intestine; prompt on jejunum, ileum, or duodenum]
One section of this organ contains a mass of lymphoid (LIM-foid) tissue called Peyer's (PAY-erz)
Patches. Another section of this organ receives a material from the pylorus known as chyme. Like the
esophagus, this organ uses a contractile motion known as peristalsis (PAIR-ee-STALL-sis). This organ
receives the enzymes trypsin (TRIP-sin), lipase (LYE-"pace"), and amylase (AMM-ill-ase), which break
down proteins, lipids, and starches, respectively. For 10 points, name this organ divided into the jejunum,
ileum, and duodenum, whose main function is to digest food before it passes into the large intestine.
ANSWER: small intestine [accept ileum before "chyme" is read]
B lymphocytes dominate in the germinal centers of the follicles of Peyer's patches, which are found
in one portion of this region. Meissner's plexus dominates the enteric nervous system in this area,
while Brunner glands are located above the sphincter of Oddi, which controls the rate of secretions into
this organ's first and shortest portion. The other two sections, the jejunum and ileum, have vastly
increased surface area due to the presence of villi. For 10 points, name this coiled digestive organ that
contains the duodenum and is much longer than its "large" neighbor.
ANSWER: small intestine
This organ is surrounded by lymphatic capillaries known as lacteals. I cells in the mucosal epithelium of
this organ secrete the hormone cholecystokinin. The autoimmune celiac disease drastically changes the
morphology of this organ, the site of sodium bicarbonate and vitamin B12 absorption. This organ's surface
area is greatly expanded by villi. This organ consists of three main segments: the ileum, the jejunum, and
the duodenum. For 10 points, name this digestive organ that follows the stomach and precedes a "large"
variant in the GI tract.
ANSWER: small intestine [prompt on intestine; do NOT accept large intestine]
The mucous membrane of this organ is organized into transverse folds called plicae circulares. Pockets
of lymphoid tissue called Peyer's patches are found in the last section of this organ. Tiny projections from
that mucous membrane located in this organ are called villi. This organ is divided into the duodenum,
jejunum and ileum. For 10 points, name this organ connected to the stomach that is the main site of nutrient
absorption.
ANSWER: small intestine
A Meckel's diverticulum is a small congenital bulge found on this organ, and Giardiasis is caused when the
Giardia protozoan coats the inner lining of this organ. Cortisol can inhibit the loss of sodium in this organ,
which is the most posterior organ controlled by the vagus nerve. One part of this organ contains lymphoid
tissue known as Peyer's Patches. Another part of this organ contains Meissner's plexus and Brunner's
glands and receives secretions from the liver and pancreas via the Sphincter of Oddi. Like the esophagus,
this organ transports food via peristalsis. Containing the ileum, jejunum, and duodenum, for 10 points, name
this organ between the stomach and the colon.
ANSWER: the small intestine [prompt on duodenum or jejunum before "Peyer's"; prompt on ileum before "Oddi"; prompt on intestine]
EATL is a type of T-cell lymphoma that affects this organ. Two cell types in this organ release the
incretins GLP-1 and GIP . This organ's crypts are hyperplastic in patients who have antibodies to
tissue transglutaminase. This organ's S cells secrete a hormone that increases the levels of
bicarbonate in this organ's lumen; that hormone is secretin. This organ contains aggregates of (*)
lymphoid tissues known as Peyer's patches, and this organ's I cells secrete cholecystokinin in response to
chyme. This organ is affected by celiac's disease, which blunts its villi. This organ contains the ileum,
jejunum, and duodenum. For 10 points, name this section of the GI tract that connects the stomach with the
colon.
ANSWER: small intestine
One condition resulting from defects in this organ is Meckel's diverticulitis. This organ features the
Crypts of Lieberkuhn and Brunner's glands, and contains lymphoid tissue known as Peyer's Patches. It
begins at the Sphincter of Oddi and is made up of the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. This organ's
microvilli help it absorb nutrients from the food that passes through it. For 10 points, name this organ that
receives food from the stomach, which has a "large" counterpart.
ANSWER: small intestine
This structure is targeted by the drug orlistat, which carries out its function by inhibiting the secretion of
certain enzymes that cleave triglycerides at the 1 and 3 positions. Crypts of Lieberkuhn separate
microscopic outcroppings in this structure, and each of those outcroppings contain a central lacteal
lymphatic vessel. Brunner's glands are localized to the submucosa layer in this organ, and B-lymphocytes
are abundant in Peyer's patches found in this organ. The aforementioned outcroppings in this organ are
called villi, and the pyloric sphinctor separates the organ directly above it from this organ's duodenum. For
10 points, name this organ found between the stomach and large intestine.
ANSWER: small intestine [prompt on intestine]
One section of this organ is affected by tropical sprue. Ascaris lumbricoides infects this organ, and in
infants, a remnant of the omphalomesenteric duct can cause a Meckel's diverticulum of this organ. M cells
cover aggregates of lymphoid tissue found in this organ called Peyer's patches. The mesentery suspends this
organ from the abdominal cavity. Brunner's glands secrete the alkaline mucus solution that coats the inside
of this organ, and those glands are found above the Sphincter of Oddi. In order to stimulate pancreatic
production of bile, this organ produces CCK. Celiac disease damages the villi used for nutrient absorption
in this organ. Name this organ that contains the duodenum, the ileum, and jejunum.
ANSWER: small intestine
The most common congenital abnormality of this organ is Meckel's diverticulum, and its secretory cells are
located in the crypts of Lieberkuhn. The distal part of this organ contains lymphoid tissue known as Peyer's
patches. The flow of bile and pancreatic juice into the first part of this organ is regulated by the sphincter of
Oddi. This organ, which is affected by celiac disease, is divided into the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum,
and is the primary site of nutrient absorption. For 10 points, name this organ whose diameter is less than the
large intestine.
ANSWER: small intestine
The submucosa of one part of this organ contains Brunner glands, which have a protective function. Its first
part secretes secretin, which stimulates the release of sodium bicarbonate from the pancreas, and
enterogastrone, which inhibits digestion when the entering chyme is acid-rich. That first part, the
duodenum, also secretes cholecystokinin, which stimulates the release of bile from the gallbladder and
digestive enzymes from the pancreas. The brush border of this organ's epithelial layer increases its surface
area with microvilli and villi. FTP, name this long tube in the alimentary canal located between the stomach
and the colon.
ANSWER: small intestines
This organ is the site of lymphoid tissue called Peyer's Patches as well as some glands that
produce an alkaline secretion named for Brunner. This organ begins with the Sphincter of Oddi,
which regulates the flow of the liver's bile. Its walls are lined with enterocytes, whose (*) microvilli
absorb nutrients from food. It consists of the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. For 10 points, name this
organ of the digestive system that takes food from the stomach and moves it to a large organ of a similar
name.
ANSWER: small intestine [prompt on ileum before Brunner]
The crypts of Lieberkuhn in this organ contain Paneth cells, which fight infection. The presence of
lymph nodes known as Peyer's patches distinguishes one section of it. The sphincter of Oddi controls
the flow of secretions like bile and amylase from the liver and pancreas to this organ in a manner
mediated by (*) cholecystokinin. Like the esophagus, it undergoes smooth-muscle contractions called
peristalsis. The name "brush border" refers to the surface of its epithelium, which is covered in microvilli to
increase nutrient absorption. For 10 points, name this organ that contains the ileum and duodenum and
through which food passes after exiting the stomach.
ANSWER: small intestine [prompt on intestine]
An autoimmune disease that affects this organ is called celiac (SEE-lee-ak) disease, and a Meckel's
(MECK-ulz) diverticulum can occur here at birth. This organ is where Vitamin B12 is absorbed. Food is
allowed into this organ, whose first segment absorbs iron, by the pyloric sphincter. For 10 points, name this
organ lined by villi, whose three segments are the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
ANSWER: small intestine
Brunner's glands are found within one part of this organ. Cholecystokinin (koh-leh-sis-toh-KIE-nin) is
a hormone that allows enzymes from the pancreas to enter this organ, in which tapeworms attach to a
human host. Nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream here at small protrusions called villi. It is divided
into the duodenum (doo-AH-deh-num), jejunum (JOO-jeh-num), and ileum (EE-lee-um). For 10 points,
name this organ of the digestive system, which lies between the stomach and the large intestine.
ANSWER: small intestine [prompt on intestine]
One defect associated with this organ is the typically-asymptomatic Meckel's diverticulum. This organ's
epithelium secretes important enzymes such as nucleosidases, and it contains Peyer's patches. Affected by
Crohn's disease, other important lymphatic features in this organ include lacteals, which aid in fat
absorption. This organ increases its surface area through its brush borders, which contain microvilli. It
includes the longer (*) ileum, while its duodenum receives digestive enzymes made in the pancreas.
Playing a crucial role in absorption of nutrients, for ten points, name this organ which receives chyme from
the stomach.
ANSWER: Small Intestine
One disorder for this organ occurs because of gliadin, and some parts of it contain Peyer's Patches. This
organ is affected by celiac disease, and it protects itself from chyme with its Brunner's Glands. It begins
near
the Sphincter of Oddi, and its surface area is increased by hairlike structures called villi. It is divided into a
duodenum, jenjunum, and ileum. For 10 points, name this part of the digestive system that is actually longer
than its large counterpart.
ANSWER: small intestine
The Valves of Kirkring and Solitary Glands are found in this organ, as are the "Central Lacteal" portions of
lymphatic vessels. Alpha-defensins secreted by the Paneth cells in this organ help defend the stem cells
found within it, and Goblet cells make up the crypts of Lieberkuhn here. Protective alkaline substances are
secreted by Brunner's glands in this organ, while other tissues found in this organ include Peyer's Patches.
Bile and pancreatic juices from the ampulla of Vater enter this structure through the Sphincter of Oddi, and
finger-like projections in this organ are called villi. For 10 points, name this organ containing the
duodenum, jejunum, and ileum, found between the stomach and the large intestine.
ANSWER: small intestine
Glands found in this organ include the crypts of Lieberkuhn (LEE-burr-koon) and Brunner's glands, and
clumps of lymphoid tissue found in this organ include Peyer's patches. This organ's walls are lined with
enterocytes (en-TEH-roh-sites), which support microvilli absorption of food. This organ is divided into the
duodenum (doo-AH-deh-num), jejunum (jeh-JOO-num), and ileum (EE-lee-um), which is connected to the
colon by the cecum (SEE-kum). For 10 points, identify this digestive organ which absorbs nutrients and is
connected to the stomach.
ANSWER: small intestines [do not accept "large intestine"; prompt on intestines]
In addition to eye infections in AIDS patients, the drug Cidofovir is sometimes used to treat cases of
this disease. Currently, this disease is vaccinated against with the vaccinia virus. Ordinary, modified,
flat, and hemorrhagic are types of the variola major form of this disease, which is generally more
severe than its (*) variola minor form. This disease forms rashes which subsequently develop into fluidfilled pustules that eventually scab over. In 1796, Edward Jenner developed a way to vaccinate people
against this disease by using the cowpox virus. For ten points, name this viral skin disease eradicated in the
1970s.
ANSWER: smallpox (accept variola before mentioned)
Alastrim, a less potent form of this disease, was likely the last known case outside a laboratory, having
infected Maow Maalin of Somalia in 1977. Its name probably follows from the historical view of its
similarity to syphilis, and a similar condition today can be distinguished by the presence of varied stages
from flat macules to raised papules and finally to vesicles and pustules. FTP, name this variola virus whose
bovine form was employed in eighteenth century vaccinations by Edward Jenner.
ANSWER: Smallpox Accept Variola Major Prompt on Variola until mentioned
Over the years, researchers such as Roenigk and Wallack have attempted to use this medical tool to treat
melanoma. This medical tool's namesake protein 39 is a RNA 2'-O-methyltransferase. The main component
of this medical tool is the source of the topoisomerase used in topocloning. One modified version of this
tool used to treat other diseases is called Ankara. A recent example of this tool is ACAM2000. One of the
largest uses of this tool was derived from a New York City Board of Health line. After using this
medication, a blister will form that will eventually become a scab and then a scar. One of the most
successful examples of this was Dryvax. One of the first examples of this tool in the West was invented by
Edward Jenner using cowpox. For 10 points, name this prophylactic for a now eradicated disease.
ANSWER: smallpox vaccine [prompt on partial answer; or Vaccinia]
Along with hypogonadism and sexual dysfunction, an impairment of this ability is present in patients
with Kallman's syndrome. Its signals are transmitted to mitral and tufted cells after passing into
non-kidney structures called glomeruli. An epithelium necessary for this sense contains brush cells that are
enervated by the trigeminal nerve. The fascicles of the nerve that carries this sense move through the
cribriform plate. The GPCRs responsible for this sense were cloned by Axel and Buck. This sense is carried
by cranial nerve I, and an inability to use this sense is called anosmia. For 10 points, name this sense whose
receptors are found in the nose.
ANSWER: olfaction [or smell; accept reasonable equivalents]
These animals can climb or escape tight spaces with the inefficient "concertina" movement. Some of
these animals have pits between their eye and nostril that allow them to see the infrared radiation from
prey. These organisms collect air particles on their tongue, which then hits Jacobson's Organ to allow them
to smell. Their mobile jaw bones allow them to swallow prey larger than their heads. For 10 points, name
these insidious reptiles that include pit vipers and cobras.
ANSWER: snakes [or serpents; or specific types, such as vipers; or cobras; or pythons; etc.; prompt on reptiles]
In C4 plants, this element stimulates the regeneration of phosphoenolpyruvate, while the batrachotoxins
raise the cell membrane's permeability to this element. The retention of this element is elevated in Conn's
syndrome. In the proximal tubule of the kidneys, the active transport of this element drives the reuptake of
water from blood filtrate. A transmembrane ATPase transports three ions of this element out of the cell for
every two of another element to maintain a neuron's resting potential. That ion pump exchanges this
element's ions with potassium. For 10 points, name this alkali metal whose positive ion is commonly
ingested in table salt, with chemical symbol Na.
ANSWER: sodium
A namesake transporter that links glucose to this substance is found in the luminal membrane of intestinal
epithelial cells. The cardiac glycoside ouabain [wah-BAH-in] causes the intracellular concentration of this
ion to increase. TTX, or tetrodotoxin [teh-troh-duh-TOK-sin], prevents action potentials by blocking the
voltage-gated channels of this ion. Aldosterone acts on the renal distule tubule and collecting duct to
increase reabsorption of this ion. A transmembrane ATPase pumps three ions of it out of the cell and two
ions of potassium into the cell. The food additive MSG contains one ion of it. For 10 points, name this ion
found with chloride in salt.
ANSWER: sodium [or Na+]
Recent experiments have shown that this mechanism can relay extracellular ouabain binding signaling into
compartments of the cell through the regulation of tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins like EGFR; in
general, its serves as a signal-transducing receptor for cardiotonic steroids. Cardiac glycosides are widely
used to increase the strength of contraction of the heart because it inhibits this process by raising the
intracellular calcium concentration. cAMP downregulates this process, in which the dephosphorylation of
ATP causes the exchange of three intracellular ions for two extracellular ones. Jens Skou discovered, FTP,
which enzyme in the cell membrane that deals with the active transport of two group 1 elements?
ANSWER: sodium-potassium pump [accept any equivalents with Na+ for sodium and K+ for potassium; prompt on partial name or Na+/K+-ATPase or NAKA]
A mutation in a gene that heavily expresses this protein in astrocytes is the cause of the second
subtype of familial hemiplegic migraine. Most members of the FXYD protein family regulate the
activity of this protein. Jens Christian Skou won the 1997 Nobel in Chemistry for his discovery of this
protein. In a treatment of heart failure, its action is blocked with the plant toxins digitalis and
ouabain, indirectly causing the buildup of (*) calcium, resulting in an increase in heart contraction force.
One-fifth of a cell's energy expenditure goes to this protein, which restores a neuron's resting potential.
This protein releases three ions out of the cell and brings two in. For 10 points, name this protein which
exchanges two namesake cations via an active transport mechanism.
ANSWER: sodium-potassium pump [or Na/K pump; or Na+/K+ ATPase; or sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase; or sodium-potassium antiporter]
GLUT2 is coupled to this protein in the intestinal lumen. Phosphorylation of an aspartate in this
protein's E1 configuration greatly increases its binding affinity. Ouabain and digitalis competitively
inhibit this protein; accordingly, it is targeted by cardiac glycosides to treat congestive heart failure.
Jens Skou won the 1997 Nobel for characterizing this P-class enzyme. A ratio of (*) 2/3 is added to the
Nernst equation to determine the potential created by this protein, which is about negative 60 millivolts in
the resting state. This antiporter hydrolyzes ATP, causing a conformational shift that releases three ions
into the cytosol. For 10 points, name this protein that transports alkali metal cations into and out of the cell
through active transport.
ANSWER: sodium/potassium pump [or sodium/potassium ATPase; or sodium/potassium transporter; or K+ and Na+ instead of sodium and potassium]
This protein's secretion by RGC cells is responsible for retinal patterning, and the You/Scube2
protein in D. Rerio is responsible for controlling its extracellular distribution. This protein is
inhibited by cyclopamine and robotnikin, and its C-terminal domain functions as an intein by
cleaving itself and transferring a cholesterol, while its N-terminal portion is palmitoylated. This
protein is expressed in the Zone of Polarizing Activity of developing limb buds, and its expression in the
notochord triggers its expression in the floor plate of the neural tube. Mutations in it lead to type 3
holoprosencephaly, and it activates the GLI class of transcription factors by depressing SMO via binding to
the PTCH receptor. For 10 points, name this morphogen, somewhat inappropriately named for a SEGA
video game character.
ANSWER: Sonic Hedgehog Homolog or SHH
This protein is the first in a pathway that activates the Gli class of zinc finger transcription factors. It is
autocatalytically cleaved by a C-terminal intene, and has palmitate added to its N-terminus so it can tether
strongly to the floor plate, explaining Wolpert's French flag model for its mechanism of action. Acting with
bone morphogenetic proteins rostrally, it differentiates floor plate cells and motor cells. Its mutation results
in holoprosencephaly and it affects dopaminergic development. Released by the Spemann Organizer and the
notochord and binding to the Patched receptor, FTP, name this morphogen protein acting ventral to the
neural tube named for a video game character.
ANSWER: sonic hedgehog homolog (Accept shh, prompt on partial)
A cis-acting regulator of this gene is found in an intron of LMBR1 and is mutated in preaxial
polydactyly. Its pathway is often overactive in medulloblastomas, where it requires Bmi1 to drive
proliferation. This protein is secreted by the zone of polarizing activity during limb formation, and
mutations in it cause a condition in which the brain fails to divide into hemispheres, known as
holoprosencephaly. In drosophila, this protein's binding to its receptors protects (*) cubitus
interruptus from being cleaved, while in vertebrates it results in the activation of Gli transcription factors
and oxysterol being removed from the Smoothened protein. It binds to the receptor Patched, and it is
secreted by the notochord to specify the floor plate in the neural tube. For 10 points, name this important
morphogen, which is named for a video game character.
ANSWER: Sonic Hedgehog Homolog [accept shh]
Dobzhansky and Muller proposed a chromosomal mechanism for this process, and Haldane's rule implies
that hybridization cannot be the cause of this. Many plants undergo this process by becoming polyploid, and
that particular phenomenon can be explained by the Wallace effect. Multiple occurrences of this process
can happen during adaptive radiation. Geographic isolation and reproductive isolation can both lead to this
process, though they lead to the allopatric and sympatric forms, respectively. Name this evolutionary
process which results in two or more distinct groups of organisms which cannot interbreed.
ANSWER: speciation [accept specific types of speciation]
Many angiosperms arose as a result of a polyploidy-based type of this process. Niles Eldredge and
Stephen Jay Gould proposed that this process happens over brief time periods in punctuated equilibrium.
The most common form of this process occurs when a group of organisms becomes geographically isolated
and undergoes genetic divergence compared to a parent population; that is its allopatric type. For 10 points,
identify this term for the process by which new species arise.
ANSWER: speciation [or obvious equivalents, such as the creation of new species, until "new species arise" is read; prompt on anagenesis; prompt on cladogenesis; prompton genetic drift; prompt on natural selection; prompt on evolution]
Two genes separated by this phenomenon are called orthologous. One theory of this phenomenon
proposes that it occurs in bursts. That theory, proposed by Gould and Eldridge, is known as punctuated
equilibrium. A genetic polymorphism may cause its sympatric variety, while geographic separation causes
its allopatric type. It occurs when members of a new taxonomic group develop until they can only mate
within the group. For 10 points, name this process, the creation of a new taxonomic group below genus.
ANSWER: speciation [prompt on "evolution" or "natural selection"]
One common form of this process is often driven by failed meiosis and self-fertilization. Gould
theorized that it principally takes place in sudden spurts in his theory of punctuated equilibrium. It is
reinforced by the Wallace effect, which allows the sympatric form to proceed, while geographic
isolation results in the allopatric form. For 10 points, identify this process through which a population
of organisms becomes unable to interbreed, having formed separate taxa at a level one lower than
genus.
ANSWER: speciation [prompt on species]
The theory of punctuated equilibrium requires one form of this process to be less common than another; the
latter form of this process was postulated by Ernst Mayr and is sometimes considered a subtype of the
former. That form of this process occurs when a subgroup colonizes an area on the borders of the
population's viable range, resulting in substantial genetic drift, and is called peripatric. The vicariant form of
one type of this process occurs when a geologic event separates an extant population into two roughly equal
groups; that type is called allopatric. For 10 points, name this process wherein two populations begin to
reproduce separately, eventually isolating and forming new examples of a taxonomic classification more
specific than genus.
ANSWER: speciation [accept allopatric speciation before mentioned; prompt on evolution]
A specific form of this process is graphically represented as "dumbbell shaped" and is alternatively called
vicariant. In a 1977 paper, Jared Diamond discussed the "inter-archipelagial" and "continental" method of
this process, the latter of which is only applicable to birds. Two ways in which this process can occur are
ploidy changes, and hybridization, and it can also occur due to adaptive radiation. The rate of the
occurrence of this process is often disrupted in punctuated equilibrium, and it exists in peripatric, sympatric,
and allopatric varieties. For 10 points, name this biological process which makes a group of organisms
unable to interbreed with another.
ANSWER: speciation
Ernst Mayr (MY-err) developed the modern definition of this process in a 1942 work.
Cladogenesis is one type of this process. One form of this process results in endemic organisms
caused by habitat islands. Polyploidy and hybridization are instant forms of this process. This
process is complete when two populations come in contact and have no gene flow due to reproductive
(*) isolation. This process can be sympatric, allopatric, or parapatric. For 10 points, name this evolutionary
process that creates a new group of organisms.
ANSWER: speciation [accept formation of new species or phrases with similar meaning until the giveaway is read]
Diane Dodd studied this process by feeding one population fruit flies only starch and others only maltose.
The North American apple maggot's switch from hawthorne is an example of this process, which can also
be the result of ploidy changes or hybridization. Adaptive radiation can result in the rapid occurrence of this
process, which can occur as a result of differing flowering times or geographic isolation. This process
comes in sympatric and allopatric types. For 10 points, name this process by which new species emerge.
ANSWER: speciation [accept answers involving creation or formation of new species before "For 10 points"]
Theodore Dobzhansky determined that this a specific variation of this process occurred in fruit flies
over time due to gene transposition, and feeding variations within the species Rhagoletis pomonella
occurred as a result of this process. Perhaps the most famous example of this process, however, can
be seen in the observation of the "founder effect" on birds on the Galapagos Islands, which describes the
"allopatric" type of this process. For 10 points, identify this term for the creation of new types of living
things that can create fertile offspring naturally.
ANSWER: speciation [accept any of the different types of speciation if the word "speciation" is included]
This process can occur in angiosperms through polyploidy during hybridization, and one consequence of it
is cladogenesis. Eldredge and Gould theorized that it occurs in periodic bursts following periods of stasis.
Changes in niches can cause the sympatric form of this process, which also exists in a peripatric type and
was theorized to occur via "punctuated equilibrium." The founder effect and geographic isolation caused
the Galapagos finches to undergo the allopatric type of this process. For 10 points, name this process which
occurs when two populations of organisms become unable to interbreed, creating new forms of a certain
taxon.
ANSWER: Speciation
One type of this phenomenon is subject to Haldane's rule and ceases via the Wallace effect. In addition to
that hybrid type, one type of this phenomenon can be explained by disruptive selection, and this
phenomenon can also occur when a population moves into an adjacent or non-adjacent niche or when a
geographical barrier completely splits and separates a population. Occurring in peripatric, parapatric,
sympatric, and allopatric varieties, For 10 points, name this process in which reproductive isolation
produces a new group of organisms at the lowest taxonomic rank.
ANSWER: Speciation [accept Hybridization before "hybrid"]
An underlying mechanism for one type of this process is modeled by the Bateson-Dobzhansky-Muller
model. The most important model organism for this process is the three-spined stickleback. That
mechanism is increased by "reinforcement", or the Wallace effect. Ernst Mayr proposed another
type of this process after mapping the ranges of birds in New Guinea. Gould and Eldredge built on
Mayr's theory when proposing that this process occurred during short periods in punctuated equilibrium.
The two most common examples of this process result from reduction in gene flow or geographic isolation
and are sympatric and allopatric. For 10 points, identify this process by which new species arise.
ANSWER: speciation [or obvious equivalents, such as the creation of new species, until "new species arise" is read; prompt on anagenesis; prompt on cladogenesis; prompt on genetic incompatibility; prompt on reproductive isolation; prompt on hybridization; prompt on gene flow; prompt on natural selection; prompt on evolution]
Exterior features within these entities are described by Allen's, Bergmann's, and Gloger's rules. "Ring" ones
form a genetic difference gradient, which often wraps in a ring around some geographical feature, such as
with gulls in the Arctic. One theory about them involves the use of cladograms to determine evolutionary
relationships, the phylogenetic concept, while another theory uses Ernst Mayr's definition, the ability and
propensity for organisms to produce fertile offspring, the biological concept. FTP, name this unit of
taxonomic classification which can be created allopatrically or sympatrically.
ANSWER: Species
This modern definition of these groups was proposed by Ernst Mayr, who advocated the use of a
"biological concept" of it. A "keystone" group of this type, such as Pisaster, is an indicator of the effect of
pollution. Theodosius Dobzhansky (dobe-ZAN-ski) gave a genetic explanation for the creation of these
divisions, focusing on how they are created by reproductive isolation. The process by which these groups
form can be allopatric, sympatric, or peripatric. For 10 points, binomial nomenclature consists of genus
along with what other taxonomic rank?
ANSWER: species
These groups are often called "phylotypes" when referring to parthenogenic organisms. New ones may be
formed through processes encouraged by the Wallace effect; those processes may be peripatric or allopatric.
Offspring of organisms in two different ones are typically infertile hybrids, since organisms within one of
the groups generally can breed only with teach other. For 10 points, give this term paired in binary
nomenclature with the genus, whose "Origin" is the subject of a book by Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: species
Robert T. Paine defined one type of this entity as one whose impact on its ecosystem is
disproportionately large relative to its abundance, their keystone type. r-selected ones are replaced
by K-selected ones through ecological succession. One type occurs when they are distributed in a
circular pattern geographically and is the ring type. (*) Peripatric, sympatric and allopatric are all types
of a process that gives rise to new ones. Organisms belonging to the same one are known as conspecific. For
10 points, name this class of animals that is capable of interbreeding and producing fertile offspring, the
smallest unit of taxonomic rank.
ANSWER: species
One method of creating these entities is parapatric, which requires a large land area to reduce effective gene
flow. Other methods of creating these entities are distinguished by whether there is geographical separation
into allopatric and sympatric types. This term is biologically defined as a group of organisms that can
naturally produce viable offspring, and examples in Homo include erectus, habilis, and sapiens. Identify
this taxonomic rank immediately below genus.
ANSWER: species (or speciation)
One type of these groups, which was theorized by Robert Paine, is defined by a large environmental impact
for its body mass. One way in which new ones are generated was theorized by Ernst Mayr in a book about
"Systematics" and the origin of these groups, which Dobzhansky defined genetically. They are created in
peripatric, allopatric, and sympatric processes. In the Linnean scheme, this term makes up the second half of
binomial nomenclature, after the genus. For 10 points, name this lowest-level biological taxon, the "Origin"
of which was investigated by Darwin.
ANSWER: species [or word forms like speciation]
Baker and Bellis developed the kamikaze theory of these cells, which have increased potassium levels
during capacitation. During their development, protamines replace histones. These cells are created in the
seminiferous [sem-uh-NIF-er-uhs] tubules, and they mature in the epididymis [ep-ih-DID-uh-mis]. An
organelle in these haploid cells that is involved in the penetration of the zona pellucida is the acrosome.
These cells have at least one flagellum, and they are found in semen. For 10 points, name these male
reproductive cells that fuse with an egg to form a zygote.
ANSWER: sperm cells [or spermatozoon; or spermatozoa; or spermatids]
Hyaluronidase and other digestive enzymes in the acrosomes of these objects are activated upon binding
to the glycoprotein ZP3. When one of these objects crosses the zona pellucida, it prevents all others from
doing so. Interaction with one of these objects causes the oocyte to undergo a second meiotic division,
which is followed by the zygote stage. These cells are combined with fluid from the prostate gland after
being produced in the testes. For 10 points, name these cells that attach to egg cells during fertilization.
ANSWER: sperm cells
These cells have outer dense fiber proteins used in structural elements. Histone variants used by these
cells include hils1. Sertoli cells play an important role in the development of these cells which are created
in the seminiferous tubules. The acrosomes of these cells break down an associated cell's zona pellucida.
Their movement is enabled by flagella. These haploid cells develop and are stored in the testes. For 10
points, name these male gametes that fertilize eggs.
ANSWER: sperm cells [or spermatozoa; or spermatozoan]
These cells contain the surface protein Izumo, which binds to CD9, and their genomes are bound
to protamines. One specialized organelle in these cells contains hyaluronidase and is derived from the
Golgi apparatus. These cells contain the acrosome, as well as a ring of mitochondria around their
midpiece and centrioles behind their posterior neck. During development four of them are connected
to each other by cytoplasmic (*) bridges. Sertoli cells are responsible for nursing these cells, which after
synthesis travel to the epididymis. They are created by meiosis in the testes, and after all divisions are
complete they grow a long flagellum. For 10 points, name this male gamete cell which combines with an
egg to form a zygote.
ANSWER: spermatozoon [or spermatozoa; or spermatids; or sperm cells]
The DAZ gene in humans encodes an RNA-binding protein essential to this process. The fuzzy onions gene
in Drosophila leads to the formation of the Nebenkern during it, and in its final steps, nuclear histones are
replaced by protamines. In C. elegans, FEM proteins and fog genes act on PGCs to activate it, and in
humans it is thought to be initiated by BMP8. In sea urchins, large amounts of bindin are synthesized and
localized between a flattened nucleus and the acrosome during it. Sertoli cells play a key role in this process
as they support and nourish its end products until they are fully mature, while Leydig cells maintain this
process by secreting testosterone. For ten points, name this process that results in the generation of male
gametes.
ANSWER: spermatogenesis
Brown-Sequard syndrome results from a hemisection of this structure. The inferior end of this structure
contains the conus medullaris, whose projections are known as the cauda equina. It contains dorsal and
ventral horns, as well as columns known as tracts. Like a related structure, it is divided into cervical,
thoracic, lumbar, and sacral sections. CSF is removed from this structure in a namesake "tap." For 10
points, name this part of the central nervous system that communicates between the brain and the peripheral
nervous system.
ANSWER: spinal cord
Tracks within this structure are known as funiculi, and the tract of Lissauer is found at the end of this
structure's dorsal horn. Its floor plate secretes the glycoprotein Sonic hedgehog, and its dorsal horn
contains Golgi type I motor neurons. This structure contains the only synapse in many reflex arcs, such
as the knee jerk reflex. For 10 points, name this portion of the central nervous system that is contiguous
with the medulla oblongata and surrounded by the vertebral column.
ANSWER: spinal cord
This structure's medial section is known as the fasciculus grascillis, and one of its posterior projections
contains the Substantia gelatinosa. Renshaw cells interconnect various cells in this structure, which
develops in the embryo via the action of Sonic hedgehog on the basal plate. The dorsal root ganglia are
located adjacent to this structure, whose ventral horn contains motor neuron afferents and whose injury can
lead to tetraplegia or paraplegia. For 10 points, name this collection of nerves which make up the CNS with
the brain and which are surrounded by vertebra, originating from the embryonic notochord.
ANSWER: spinal cord [do not accept or prompt on "spine"]
In muscle cells it plays a role in kinesthesia and receives fusimotor nerve fibers. A form of cancer therapy
uses vinca alkaloids to destroy this structure and it forms through localization by the protein NuMA and
subsequent polymerization of astral microtubules. In most plants it is nucleated on the nuclear envelope
while in most animals it is nucleated by the centrosomes. In a cell it begins to assemble in prometaphase, is
completed in metaphase, and binds to chromosomes at the kinetochore. Once the chromatids are aligned,
anaphase begins and they pull apart the chromatids so the cell cleavage can occur. For 10 points, name this
apparatus that separates the chromosomes into two sets of daughter chromosomes during cell division.
ANSWER: Spindle apparatus
The length of this structure is affected by Kar3p and Cin8p mutations, and this structure forms via a
bi-orientation mechanism. The formation of this structure requires Survivin activation of the Aurora
A kinase. CENP-E- Bub1, and Mad2 are among the proteins involved in this structure's namesake
assembly checkpoint. This structure, whose formation is inhibited by vinca alkaloids, requires the
protein NuMA to form, which is why its formation is coupled to the degradation of the (*) nuclear
membrane. One side of this structures' fibers attaches to kinetochores, while the other side attaches to
gamma-ring complexes on the centrosome. For 10 points, name this structure which contains an array of
microtubules, which are responsible for moving chromosomes apart during mitosis
ANSWER: mitotic spindle [or spindle apparatus; accept microtubules before mention]
Kehr's sign in the left shoulder is most often caused by this organ, which is enlarged in patients with Banti's
syndrome. The cords of Billroth are found between this organ's venous sinuses and parts of this ductless
organ include the marginal zone, the B cell corona, and the PALS, or periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths, where
T cells are prominent. Occasionally known to wander, this organ located behind the stomach is mostly
composed of red pulp and is site of red blood cell disposal. For 10 points, name this organ "full of mystery"
that filters blood and sometimes gets ruptured.
ANSWER: spleen
This organ contains the Cords of Billroth, which are found between its sinusoid vessels. Though it is
not the kidney, this organ contains follicles called Malpighian Corpuscles, which contain germinal centers
responsible for the production of lymphocytes. Sequestered by sickle-cell anemia, it is made up of red and
white pulp. For 10 points, name this lymphoid organ responsible for storing and destroying red blood cells.
ANSWER: spleen
Damage to this organ is indicated by Kehr's sign, which involves pain in the left shoulder. Reduced function
of this organ is characterized by Howell-Jolly bodies. The arterioles of this organ are surrounded by cuffs of
lymphocytes known as periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths. This organ is enlarged in patients with
mononucleosis. In this organ, the marginal zone separates white pulp from red pulp. This organ is located in
the left upper quadrant of the abdomen, and its function is to destroy worn-out red blood cells. For 10
points, name this organ that can rupture.
ANSWER: spleen
This organ produces the tetrapeptide threonine-lysine-proline-arginine, known as tuftsin, and one
part of it expresses a receptor with "collagenous structure" called MARCO. This structure is
enlarged in Banti's syndrome. Sheaths around blood vessels in this structure are known as PALS.
Unlike most of the gut, this organ forms from mesenchymal tissue, and this organ contains the cords of
Billroth. This organ's marginal zone separates its red and white pulp; the former contains around half of the
body's monocytes, and the later makes antibodies. Enlarged in mono, for 10 points, name this organ that
filters the blood and lymph.
ANSWER: spleen
Substances produced by this organ include properdin and tuftsin. This organ also produces
bilirubin which it sends to the liver. One part of this organ is composed of T-lymphocyte rich
periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths and between the (*) sinusoids of this organ can be found the Cords of
Billroth. It is divided into red pulp and white pulp. For 10 points, name this organ which disposes of old red
blood cells and holds some blood in reserve.
ANSWER: spleen
Banti's syndrome results in the enlargement of this organ, and this organ is either absent or multiplied in
heterotaxy. One section of this organ, which lies between the sinusoids is rich in monocytes is the Cords of
Billroth. In some conditions, this organ produces opsonins, and PALS are found in the Malphigian
corpuscles of this organ. It consists of red blood vessels surrounded by B lymphocytes and lies below the
diaphragm on the left side of the body. Containing both red and white pulp, for 10 points, name this organ,
the largest lymph node in the body, which destroys old red blood cells.
ANSWER: spleen
Similar to the thymus, this organ only contains efferent lymphatic vessels. Unlike many other abdominal
organs, it comes from mesenchymal (meh-sen-KIE-mull) tissue. This organ recycles iron and holds a
reserve of blood in the event of hemorrhagic shock. In processing hemoglobin, this organ turns the
substance into amino acids and bilirubin (BIH-lih-roo-bin), that latter of which is removed in the liver. For
10 points, name the organ whose red pulp and white pulp areas filter red blood cells and act as a large
lymph node.
ANSWER: spleen
This organ contains tissues called the Cords of Billroth and PALS. Blood is transported in it by the
trabecular arteries and veins. Its marginal zone is found at the border of its two major tissue types. Like the
lymph nodes, this organ contains germinal centers. It is divided into white and red pulp. This organ plays
an important role in the immune system as well as removing old red blood cells. For 10 points, name this
organ in the lymphatic system found to the left of the stomach.
ANSWER: spleen
Removal of this organ from 740 World War II veterans saw twice the incidence of cardiovascular disease,
perhaps because it releases monocytes during stresses on the heart. This organ is either absent or multiply
expressed in patients with Ivemark Syndrome. It is surrounded by protective fibroelastic and serous coats.
Like the kidney, this organ possesses Malphigian corpuscles, which are lymphocyte-containing follicles
within one type of tissue in it. This organ is under the left side of the diaphragm, and becomes sequestered
when trying to clear sickled cells. The marginal zone separates this organ's white and red pulp. For 10
points, name this lymphoid organ in which red blood cells are destroyed.
ANSWER: the spleen
The cords of Billroth are near its sinusoid vessels and it also contains the linear hilum. Gaucher's disease
can affect this organ, which contains the Malphigian corpuscles and is connected to the lienal artery by the
reticulum. Composed of red and white pulp, its functions include the creation of red blood cells before birth
and lymphocyte production throughout life. For 10 points, identify this organ located to the left of the
stomach and below the diaphragm, which also destroys red blood cells.
ANSWER: spleen
Though it is not the kidneys, the tissue surrounding arteries in this organ is called a Malpighian
(mal-PEE-gee-uhn) body. One type of tissue in this organ is made up of Cords of Billroth. Along with the
liver and bone marrow, the body stores ferritin (FAIR-it-in) bound iron in this organ. The two main types of
tissue in this organ meet at the "marginal zone." Along with the thymus, this part of the lymphatic system is
the only organ that contains efferent lymphatic vessels. This organ is made up of red pulp and white pulp.
For 10 points, name this organ that removes old red blood cells from the blood.
ANSWER: spleen
A deadly avian adenovirus causes the "marble" disease that affects this organ, and,it is completely absent in
Ivemark syndrome. Deletions in 7q31-32 give rise to a lymphoma of its marginal zone, and it contains the
cords of Billroth between its sinusoid vessels. It is surrounded by a fibroelastic and serous coats. This organ
contains Malphigian corpuscles that contain germinal centers for lymphocyte production. Its marginal zone
separates its red pulp and white pulp, and it can become enlarged as a result of diseases like Gaucher's and
Epstein-Barr. Notably sequestered in sickle-cell anemia, for 10 points, identify this organ of the lymphatic
system in which erythrocytes are both destroyed and stored.
ANSWER: spleen
This organ produces a tetrapeptide, which bonds to macrophage receptors, and is known as tuftsin. The
sinusoids of one portion of this organ contain blood and a reserve of monocytes which can be utilized in the
case of hemorrhagic shock. The other major portion of this organ contains Malphigian corpsules and
synthesizes antibodies. Located in the abdominal region and consisting of red and white pulp, for 10 points,
name this organ part of the lymphatic system that helps to filter and clean the blood.
ANSWER: spleen
This process is aided by serine argenine rich proteins, such as SC35, that bind to ESE sequences. The role
of U2 auxiliary factor in it is to recognize a polypyrimidine tract and help BBP bind to the branch site. In
Drosophila, Sxl is a repressor of this event that regulates sex determination. Inhibited by hnRNP1, the
alternative type of it results in isoforms. Achieved by two trans-esterification reactions resulting in a lariatshaped object, this event is carried out by a complex consisting of snRNPs [snurps]. For 10 points, identify
this post-transcriptional modification in which introns are removed.
ANSWER: splicing
The usual form of this procedure takes the form of two transesterifications: the first transesterification has a
branch-point two-prime hydroxyl making a nucleophilic back-attack to form a so-called lariat intermediate
that is then liberated by a the second transesterification. That so-called canonical pathway for this process
makes use of the accessory enzymes SF1 and 2 and BBP, which work in complement with the major
catalyst, a protein-RNA complex comprised of five snRNPs and named for this process. Sections to
undergo this process are marked by a three-prime AG and five-prime GU. For 10 points, name this genetic
process whereby a transcript RNA is prepared for translation by the removal of introns.
ANSWER: splicing
In whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing data, the TopHat algorithm can be used to find instances
of this process. Removal of one site for this process is responsible for diminished production of
functional SMA protein in spinal muscular atrophy, and some mutations can activate cryptic sites for
this process. This process consists of a series of two transesterifications, and relies on binding of the
U1 through U6 components of a certain complex to the branch point and polypyrimidine tract. Those
small nuclear riboproteins are responsible for the formation of a lariat intermediate, which is then removed.
This process allows more than one protein to be coded for by a single gene. For 10 points, name this
process of removing introns from an immature mRNA transcript.
ANSWER: Splicing
In some organisms, maturases help stabilize the three-dimensional interactions between molecules
during this process. It doesn't involve changes in single nucleotides, but abnormalities in this process
may lead to beta-thalassemia. A protein involved in this process has one subunit bind to a pyrimidine
rich sequence while the other part binds to an AG sequence. In this process, ESE sites are bound by
(*) SR proteins, which ensure that both the adenine branch point and the GU sequence are properly
positioned. In this process, U1, U2, U4, U5 and U6, small nuclear ribonucleic particles, help cause two
transesterfications which lead to the formation of a lariat loop. SnRNPs (snurps) help organize a namesake
"some" (soam) in this process. For 10 points, identify this process of removing the introns from mRNA.
ANSWER: splicing [prompt on "intron removal" or other descriptive answers until "introns" is read]
In Drosophila, Tra promotes this process and Sxl ["S-X-L"] prevents it. Maturases are required for one
form of this process to occur quickly. SR proteins bind to the ESE at its start. During this process,
morpholinos can inhibit the imperfect binding of U2 to form the branch point at A. Alternative forms of it
lead to the generation of different isoforms of fibronectin. Two transesterifications occur during this
process, whose intermediate has a "lariat" shape. Tom Cech discovered that this process could be
autocatalytic, in the case of ribozymes. It follows polyadenylation and addition of a 5 prime cap in
posttranscriptional processing. For 10 points, name this process by which snRNPs ("Snurps") catalyze the
removal of introns from mRNAs.
ANSWER: mRNA splicing
Advocates of this theory tend to believe in such occurrences as "heterogenisis" and "abiogenisis". In In
1760, Lazarro Spallazini had a sealed glass flask with broth that was boiled which was meant to disprove
this theory; however, proponents of the theory stated that Spallazini boiled off all the components to create
life. It was not until 1861 when Pasteur invented his swan-necked flasks that this theory was disproved and
all but put to rest. FTP name this theory popularized in the action of maggots being born from rotten meat
that states that living organisms can arise from nonliving.
ANSWER: spontaneous generation or spontaneous creation
John Needham offered experimental proof of this principle, but his conclusions were disputed by
Lazzaro Spallanzani. This idea was countered in an experiment which used a flask with a (+) bent
neck, and turned cloudy only when the flask was flipped upside-down. One of the first challenges to
this theory was made by Francesco Redi, who discovered that (*) maggots do not appear on meat
covered with a cloth. Louis Pasteur conclusively debunked this theory, which was replaced with the theory
of biogenesis. For 10 points, name this obsolete principle that living things can originate from non-living
starting material.
ANSWER: spontaneous generation
Vitruvius's belief in this idea led him to suggest building libraries facing eastward. This idea was
disproven for fungi by Pier Antonio Michelli. Aristotle propounded this idea using the idea of pneuma. It
was partly disproven in an experiment involving placing meat in a jar by Francisco Redi, and finally
disproven by boiling broth in a swan-necked flask. For 10 points, name this idea from biology disproven by
Louis Pasteur, which believed that some forms of life could arise from dead matter.
ANSWER: spontaneous generation
Jan Swammerdam tried to disprove this theory in order to prove the existence of God. In response to John
Needham's attempt to prove this, Lazzaro Spallanzani performed an experiment involving a sealed
container partially evacuated of air, in which he boiled soup. Despite its obvious flaws demonstrated by
Francesco Redi, this theory persisted well into the 19th century because Darwinism suggested that life
evolved from chemical substances. Finally disproved using a flask with a bent neck by Louis Pasteur, for 10
points, name this theory, also known as abiogenesis, supported by the observation that rotten meat seems to
"give life" to maggots.
ANSWER: spontaneous generation [accept abiogensis until mentioned]
The density and volume of these structures can be measured and trapped on melinex tape in an
instrument known as a Burkard Sampler. One specific type of these objects can only be fully
observed by combining water, iodine, and potassium iodine into Melzer's Reagent. Another specific
type of these structures prevents the entrance of conidia via a protective sheath known as the (*)
ascus. The "resting" ones are produced through meiosis and can survive harsh temperatures through a thick
cell wall. In alternation of generations, these structures grow into a gametophyte after being formed by
meiosis. For 10 points, identify these reproductive structures used by ferns and fungi, which are asexually
reproducing, unlike seeds.
ANSWER: spores
The use of these drugs during pregnancy correlates with persistent pulmonary hypertension in
newborns. Suddenly stopping the use of one of these drugs can cause "zaps" as part of their namesake
discontinuation syndrome. Like tricyclics, these drugs can be used to treat obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Drugs in this class include fluoxetine and paroxetine. For 10 points, name this class of drugs which inhibit
the removal of a certain neurotransmitter from the synapse and are used to treat depression.
ANSWER: SSRIs [or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; or serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitors]
In one form of this procedure, periodic acid oxidizes diols in sugars, yielding two aldehydes which react
with Schiff's reagent. One variant named for Hoechst is similar to one that uses DAPI. Variants include Gbanding, used in karyotyping, and one which uses hematoxylin and eosin. Masson's variant requires four
solutions, and one that produces silver chromate is named for Golgi. Safranin contrasts with crystal violet,
which identifies peptidoglycan in the Gram form of this process used to differentiate bacteria. For 10 points,
name this microscopy procedure that increases the visibility of different structures using dyes.
ANSWER: staining [accept word forms; accept Gram, Golgi, or Hoechst staining; prompt on dyeing or word forms]
In one model organism, the expression of DEF or GLO genes in conjunction with expression of PLENA
and FARINELLI genes controls the development of these structures, an example of the interaction between
B and C class transcription factors. They are didynamous if they occur in two different pairs of lengths and
can be adnate or connate. Collectively called the androecium, dehiscence frees pollen from their
microsporangia. They are contained within a flower's perianth, arranged around the pistil. For 10 points,
consisting of a filament and an anther, name these male organs of flowers.
ANSWER: Stamen (take anther before it is mentioned)
In one part of this organ a process known as dehiscence occurs, which causes the release of pollen grains
from the stomium. Basifixed and versatile describe two ways that part can be attached to the filament in
this organ. This organ, the Latin name for which means "thread of the warp," contains the anther. For 10
points, name this male reproductive organ of a flowering plant.
ANSWER: stamen
A collection of these entities is called an androecium and organisms lacking these organs are known
as gynoecious. Carpels and this structure fuse into a column in (*) orchids. Pollen is released through
its pores, and other parts of this structure include the filament and the anther. For 10 points, name this male
part of the flower that is contrasted with the pistil.
ANSWER: stamen
These structures are missing in agamous mutants. The enzyme callase localizes to this structure,
which contains a nutritive feeder layer called the tapetum. This structure produces triplets of two
generative cells and one vegetative cell, all of which are released through dehiscences. In Arabidopsis,
there are six of these structures in the third whorl, two lateral and four medial. These main
components of the (*) androecium contain microsporangia, which produce microgametophytes. These
structures consist of a filament and an anther, which makes pollen. For 10 points, name these plant
structures, the counterpart of carpels, which are the "male" reproductive component of flowers.
ANSWER: stamens [or anthers before it is read]
These organisms can express Panton-Valentine leukocidin, which is a beta-pore forming toxin. The
SaeRS two-component system regulates the expression of virulence factors in this organism, and the
commonly-used immunoglobulin-binding protein Protein A was isolated from this organism.
Particular subsets of this organism contain the mec cassette and the vanA gene, which confer
resistance to certain antibiotics. This organism, which is catalase positive, coagulate positive, and
beta-hemolytic, secretes the TSST-1 superantigen responsible for toxic shock syndrome. Also the cause
of acute endocarditis and impetigo, a subspecies of this bacterium is resistant to methicillin and is rampant
in hospitals. For 10 points, name this gram-positive bacterium that grows in grape-like clusters, partly
named for its golden color.
ANSWER: Staphylococcus Aureus (Accept S Aureus, Staph Aureus, etc)
Unlike a similar molecule, this compound typically has about thirty subunits between alpha-1-6 branches.
Phosphorylated monomers are connected to AP during the synthesis of this compound. This polymer
gelatinizes after water penetrates its granules, because its crystal structures decompose when amylopectin
swells. This polysaccharide turns dark purple in the presence of iodine solution, and is converted to maltose
by the cleavage of its alpha-1-4 glycosidic linkages by amylase. Many staple foods like potatoes are rich in
this complex carbohydrate. For 10 points, identify this long-branched glucose polymer used by plants for
energy storage.
ANSWER: starch [or amylum; accept amylopectin before it is read; accept amylose before "alpha-1-6 branches" is read and prompt afterwards; do not prompt on or accept "glycogen"]
One member of this class of drugs is mixed with Ezitimibe in a common formulation, and patients with
some variations in SCLO1B1 are at increased risk of side effects when taking them. The first in this class
of drugs was derived from fermented Aspergillus by Merck. Myopathy and muscle breakdown are
potentially serious complications of these drugs since they reduce levels of coenzyme Q. These drugs work
by inhibiting an enzyme responsible for synthesizing mevalonate, known as HMG-CoA reductase. These
drugs have no effect on HDL level, but they significantly reduce LDL, thus preventing the progression of
atherosclerosis. For 10 points, name these drugs that include Lipitor and Zocor, which lower blood levels of
cholesterol.
ANSWER: statins
One of these is usually treated with a 1% Permethrin cream and pyrethrins. Another, caused by a
spirochetal bacterium, was dubbed "The French Disease" by Girolamo Fracastoro in a 1530 epic
poem. A third is asymptomatic when found in the cervix but causes cloudy white discharge from the
male urethra. Cold sores are caused by a viral version of them, but it is more famous for causing painful,
tender lesions throughout the personal areas. FTP, name these maladies categorized by their method of
transmission.
ANSWER: STDs, STIs, or clear equivalent knowledge
In the intestines, they are generated in the crypts, and they are affected by beta-catenin. In the
blood, they come in myeloid and lymphoid types and are capable of forming colonies. In plants, they
are usually found in the apical meristem, and they are grown on a layer of feeder cells in tissue
engineering labs. Other prominent sources of them include the bone marrow and the umbilical vein,
but those gathered from embryos are the most controversial. For 10 points, name these
undifferentiated cells that can divide almost indefinitely.
ANSWER: stem cells [accept stem cells after "cells"]
They can form spherical embryoid bodies in vitro and multi-tissue-containing teratomas in vivo. Their
unique abilities can be partially attributed to the transcription factors like Nanog and Oct-4. The
hematopoietic and mesenchymal ones found in bone marrow allow for the production of a broad variety of
blood and connective tissue cells, respectively, thus demonstrating the differentiating ability of these. Some
cancer tumors are believed to contain mutated varieties of these that contribute to the disease's metastasic
abilities. FTP, name this class of self-renewing cells that come in fetal, adult, and embryonic varieties with
varying degrees of potency.
ANSWER: stem cells
One type of these objects can lead to teratoma when applied to normal tissues. Transplants of the
hematopoietic type of these objects can help treat lymphoma or leukemia. If they can develop into any
tissue of the three primary germ layers, they are called pluripotent. Ones that can individually develop into
viable organisms are called totipotent. Sources of these cells include mammary glands, bone marrow, and
the umbilical vein. For 10 points, name these undifferentiated cells with adult and embryonic types.
ANSWER: stem cells
The Hox genes NANOG and Oct-4, as well as the transcription factor SOX2, are critical to
maintaining the function of these cells, which require fibroblasts called feeder cells to be grown in
cultures. A property of them may be induced in other cells by the oncogene cMyc. The inner mass
cells of the blastocyst are (*) pleuripotent ones, while only the cells of the morula are truly totipotent. For
10 points, name this class of cells, able to differentiate into specialized cell types while replenishing
themselves through mitosis.
ANSWER: stem cells
A pulse chase can be used to show that these cells lay at the bottom of crypts between intestinal villi. The
iPS type of these cells can be made by adding transcription factors to epithelial cells. Till and McCullough
showed that the hematopoietic type of these cells, which are found in the bone marrow, are capable of (*)
regenerating a mouse's immune system. An early fertilized egg is the only natural source of the totipotent
type of these cells. Donor DNA was inserted in an enucleated embryonic one of these cells in order to form
Dolly the Sheep. For 10 points, identify these cells, which have the ability to both regenerate and
differentiate.
ANSWER: stem cells
James Thomson's lab used OCT4, Sox2, NANOG and LIN28 to create them, while Takahashi and the rest
of the Yamanaka lab used OCT3/4, SOX2, C-Myc and Klf4. They usually require a layer of irradiated
fibroblasts known as feeder cells to be grown in culture. Both of the papers mentioned in the lead-in found
teratomas instead of nice results, so the standard approaches of mesenchymal or umbilical vein ones are still
the safest. For 10 points, identify this type of cell that can undergo an unlimited number of symmetrical
divisions without differentiating, the use of which embryonic type is still under ethical review.
ANSWER: stem cells (award 10 points and look amazed if someone buzzes with induced pluripotency stem cells, award 10 points out of spite if someone buzzes with teratoma but don't bother prompting on "tumor")
Fibroblasts that are transfected with Oct4 and Sox2 can be turned into this type of cell. This type of cell
gives rise to teratomas, which are particularly frequent in the gonads. Bone marrow transplantation is
effective against leukemia because marrow contains hematopoietic cells of this type, which can give rise to
common myeloid progenitors. The morula consists exclusively of the totipotent type of these cells. Prior to
2006, embryos were the only human source of pluripotent ones, and thus were a subject of controversy. For
10 points, name these cells that can reproduce themselves and differentiate to form other types of cells.
ANSWER: stem cells [accept any more specific answer like pluripotent stem cells]
When these entities are injected into the body without the proper cofactors to control their growth, they can
turn into a teratoma. One super-effective type of them is obtained from the morula. By definition, they
violate the Hayflick limit, and subtypes of them include mesenchymal and hematopoietic, the latter of which
is replaced in leukemia treatments. Shinya Yamanaka's lab created an "induced" type, and any of three
germ layers can form when a "pluripotent" one differentiates. Sometimes created by therapeutic cloning, for
10 points, name this type of unspecialized cells which come in the "adult" and controversial "embryonic"
types.
ANSWER: stem cells
Takahashi and Yamanaka turned fibroblasts into these cells by using retroviruses to express four genes,
including SOX2 and Klf4. "Hematopoietic" ones in the bone marrow give rise to all different kinds of
blood cells. These cells are pluripotent, since when one divides, one daughter cell remains one of them
while the other becomes something else. Possible applications for these cells include curing Parkinson's
disease and muscular dystrophy. For 10 points, name this type of cells whose "embryonic" variety is the
subject of controversial but promising research.
ANSWER: stem cells [accept more specific answers]
In these cells, Lin28 prevents the cleavage of an miRNA called let-7, and methylation of DNA by Dnmt1 is
repressed in the nucleus. Tcf3 and beta-catenin buffer the concentration of Nanog, which sequesters a
transcription factor called Oct4 in these cells. The ecological term "niche" is sometimes applied to these
cells. They are injected into a blastocyst of a psuedopregnant mouse in the first step of a gene knockout.
Yamanaka pioneered the study of the induced pluripotent type of these cells, which can form the endoderm,
ectoderm, or mesoderm. For 10 points, name these cells that have not yet differentiated into specialized
cells, and which can be be extracted from embryos.
ANSWER: stem cells [or embryonic stem cells; or ES cells; or adult stem cells; or induced pluripotent stem cells; or iPS cells]
One type of these cells form cobblestone areas when plated on a feeder layer, while another type can
be sorted using the marker STRO-1 and is isolated from the stromal vascular fraction. Reynolds and
Weiss isolated another population of these cells from the subventricular zone, which form a
characteristic spherical shape in vitro. John Dick proposed a subpopulation of these cells that exist
within tumors, which, if not killed, will lead to (*) recurrence of the tumor. One variety of these cells,
whose subtypes include mesenchymal and hematopoietic, can be artificially created by transfecting Klf4
and Sox2. Another type can be isolated from the inner cell mass of a blastocyst. For 10 points, name this
general category of undifferentiated cells, whose embryonic variety can be induced to differentiate into any
cell type.
ANSWER: stem cells [accept more specific answers such as "embryonic stem cells" as "ES" or "induced pluripotent stem cells" as "iPS cells"]
The Hox genes NANOG and Oct-4, as well as the transcription factor SOX2, are critical to
maintaining the function of these cells, which require fibroblasts called feeder cells to be grown in
cultures. A property of them may be induced in other cells by the oncogene cMyc. The inner mass
cells of the blastocyst are (*) pleuripotent ones, while only the cells of the morula are truly totipotent. For
10 points, name this class of cells, able to differentiate into specialized cell types while replenishing
themselves through mitosis.
ANSWER: stem cells
Some of the earliest clinical experiments using these were in the treatment of Stargardt disease, a genetic
macular degeneration that causes severe vision loss. Mesenchymal [mes-un-KY-mul] types are being tried
in an effort to protect pancreatic beta islet cells in patients with type 1 diabetes, and hematopoietic [heemaa-toe-poh-EE-tik] types are used to treat bone marrow cancer. They undergo asymmetric cell division,
creating one cell identical to the parent and another that is not. Their ability to specialize into any of the
three germ layers is known as pluripotency. Name these cells, many of which are found in the blastocyst
[BLAAS-toh-sist] of an embryo and have been politically controversial.
ANSWER: stem cell(s)
These entities have been extensively researched at the University of Wisconsin which contains the Thomson
Lab and Kyoto University which contains the Yamanaka Lab. The former lab extracted these entities from
teratoma tumors. Sources of extraction for these entities can be found in the olfactory bulbs and the
hippocampus, which yield the neural varieties of these entities. The small intestine's villis are sources of
extraction for the epithelial varieties of these cells. For 10 points, name these pluripotent cells with adult
and embryonic varieties which have caused controversy over ethics in research due to disagreements over
exactly when life begins.
ANSWER: stem cells
One type of these structures is the hematopoietic variety, from which white blood cells, red blood cells, and
platelets form. These structures undergo the process of differentiation to become specialized through
various stages triggered by their genes. These cells are able to proliferate, as they hold the unique ability to
replicate many times through cell division, and two types of these cells are "adult" and "embryonic," the
latter of which is able to repair damaged tissues and organs in people. For 10 points, name these cells that
are at the center of an ethics debate about the creation and destruction of human embryos.
ANSWER: Stem Cells
These cells are maintained by the secretion of leukemic inhibitory factor, and one method of
creating them involves transfection with SOX2, Klf2, and Oct-4. The transcription factor NANOG is
highly regulated by these cells. After forming cylindrical bodies they are grown on a lawn of
mitomycin-c and fibroblasts. These cells are missing the checkpoint between G1 and S phases. These
cells have a tendency to form teratomas, and are extracted from the inner cell mass of a (*) blastocyst.
Therapeutic cloning is a potential application of these cells. These cells are pluripotent, meaning they have
the ability to form almost any tissue in the human body. For 10 points, name these cells, which are
extracted from human embryos.
ANSWER: embryonic stem cells [do NOT accept "adult stem cells" at any point; accept IPS or induced pluripotent stem cells before "inner cell mass", prompt after]
Birds have an extension of this bone called a keel. In apes, these have seven sections, which led Galen to
believe the same was true in humans, though Vesalius [veh-SAY-leeus] discovered that these have only
three sections. Its top section is the manubrium [maa-NOO-bree-um], which is flanked by the clavicles
[KLAV-uh-kuls]. Its lowest section is the xiphoid [KSIE-foid] process, which can be injured during CPR.
Name this bone at the front of the rib cage also known as the breastbone.
ANSWER: sternum (prompt on "breastbone")
These compounds are characterized by a structure of seventeen carbon atoms in four rings, forming a
namesake "nucleus" of gonane, which is the simplest of these compounds. Some of these compounds are
used to reduce inflammation and suppress the immune system, which can treat rheumatoid arthritis;
examples include prednisone and cortisone. Hormonal examples of them include estradiol, an estrogen, and
testosterone, an androgen. For 10 points, tissue and muscle growth can be stimulated by the anabolic form
of what compounds?
ANSWER: steroids
Though its not the tongue, this organ has receptors which allow it to "taste" sodium glutamate and
its volume increases when the rugae are stretched. Parietal cells in this entity release an intrinsic
factor necessary for the absorption of vitamin B12, and this entity converts boluses into chyme,
which then passes through the pyloric sphincter into the (*) duodenum. Because pepsinogen, an enzyme
found in this organ, is activated by an acidic environment, signals from the vagus nerve trigger the release
of HCl from the lining of this organ when food is ingested. For ten points, name this organ that lies between
the esophagus and the small intestine in the digestive system.
ANSWER: Stomach
This organ is separated into its right and left halves by the angular incisure, and is divided into such
parts as the omasum and the abomasum in some animals. Cowden's Syndrome affects the glands of
this organ, and Menetrier's Syndrome refers to a pathological enlargement of this organ. The
enteroendocrine or APUD cells of this organ secrete (*) seratonin, and other cells in this organ secrete
the intrinsic factor, which is required to fully process Vitamin B12. This organ has folds called rugae, and it
produces chyme. For ten points, name this organ, whose G-cells secrete gastrin, and whose parietal cells
secrete hydrochloric acid to digest food.
ANSWER: stomach
Mucus-producing foveolar cells are found inside this organ, which secretes a compound needed for
vitamin B-12 absorption. That compound, the intrinsic factor, is secreted by the parietal cells, which also
secrete a mixture of hydrochloric acid called gastric acid. At the lower part of this organ lies the pylorus,
which connects this organ to the duodenum of the small intestine. For 10 points, name this organ which
breaks down food sent from the esophagus and is divided into four chambers in a cow.
ANSWER: stomach
Parietal cells in this organ produce intrinsic factor to help absorb Vitamin B12. In response to distension of
this organ, gastrin is released, and hydrochloric acid is a key ingredient in this organ's acidic juices.
Infection by Helicobacter pylori causes peptic ulcers in this organ, which produces chyme (KIME) that is
sent into the small intestine. For 10 points, name this organ of the digestive system between the esophagus
and small intestine.
ANSWER: stomach
This structure contains foveolar cells, which line it with mucus. This structure is split by the angular
incisure, and its antrum region contains G cells. Cells in this structure secrete the intrinsic factor,
which is necessary for the absorption of vitamin B12. The walls of this structure contain folds called
(*) rugae, and this structure releases the hormone gastrin, which causes chief cells and parietal cells to
increase the secretion of pepsinogen and hydrochloric acid. Helicobacter pylori can cause peptic ulcers in
this structure. For 10 points, identify this digestive organ that lies between the esophagus and the small
intestine.
ANSWER: stomach
A fold that hangs down from this organ is known as the greater omentum. It's not the pancreas, but the
fundus of this organ contains P/D1 cells which produce ghrelin. This organ produces the glycoprotein
known as intrinsic factor, and one bacterium frequently found in this organ is H. pylori. This organ breaks
down a bolus into a liquid substance known as chyme. For 10 points, identify this organ between the
esophagus and small intestine, a digestive organ aiding in the breakdown of food.
ANSWER: the stomach
The walls of this organ are composed of four layers, which are known as tunics, one of which is the
serosa. The greater omentum is located below this organ's greater curvature, and it is composed of
sections such as the cardia, antrum, and fundus. The cell types of this organ include chief and parietal,
the later type of which secretes intrinsic factor and hydrochloric acid. It is separated from the esophagus
by the cardiac sphincter and from the small intestine by the pyloric sphincter. For 10 points, name this
sac that stores food.
ANSWER: stomach
Some cells in this organ produce intrinsic factor, which is necessary for the absorption of Vitamin B12.
H. pylori is a bacterium that invades this organ, whose chief cells release pepsinogen, the precursor to the
enzyme pepsin. It is bounded by the cardiac and pyloric sphincters. Its parietal cells secrete hydrochloric
acid to produce chyme (KIME), which is then passed into the small intestine. For 10 points, name this
organ that receives food from the esophagus.
ANSWER: stomach
In some species, this organ has a structure called the omasum that absorbs water. The reticulum may be
affected by hardware disease in this organ, whose foveolar cells secrete mucus. Its antrum may become
damaged after infection by Helicobacter pylori. Its chief and parietal cells produce pepsin, which processes
boluses. Gastrin regulates the activity of this organ, which produces chyme that is transferred to the small
intestine. In ruminants, this organ has four chambers. For 10 points, name this organ that receives and
digests food from the esophagus.
ANSWER: stomach
A fold of the peritoneum descending below this organ is known as the greater omentum. Although it has
nothing to do with the heart, cells that secrete mucus make up the majority of this organ's cardiac region,
which lies inferior to this organ's fundic region. Overproduction of one of this organ's secretions leads to
Zoellinger-Ellison syndrome, and the walls of this organ are damaged in infections of H Pylori. The chief
cells of this organ secrete pepsinogen, which becomes pepsin when it mixes with the secretion of the
parietal cells. That secretion of this organ, hydrochloric acid, is regulated by the hormone gastrin. For 10
points, name this J-shaped organ that comes directly after the esophagus, an organ that digests food.
ANSWER: stomach
Types of cells present in this structure include enterochromaffin ones and zymogenic ones, which secrete I
and II type-precursors of an associated enzyme. Parietal cells are found in a region of this structure called
the fundus, and certain diseases of this structure are caused by Helicobacter pylori. This structure's walls
contain folds called rugae, which become prominent when the contents of this organ are emptied from the
pyloric canal into the duodenum after producing chyme via the action of pepsin, produced in the gastric
pits. For 10 points, name this human digestive organ located between the esophagus and small intestine.
ANSWER: stomach
Although it is not the pancreas, cancer of this organ can be fought with the S-1 chemotherapy
regimen and is particularly prevalent in East Asian populations. This organ is host to a bacteria
whose virulence is partially based on the presence of the cagA gene. Histamine is secreted by
enterochromaffin-like cells in this organ. Pernicious anemia is caused by the loss of intrinsic factorsecreting cells in this organ, parietal cells. Two of the upper parts of this organ are the fundus and the
cardia. The mucosal lining of this organ is burrowed into by H. pylori, which can cause ulcers and gastritis.
For 10 points, name this organ that contains hydrochloric acid and is found at the end of the esophagus.
ANSWER: stomach
Rugae allow for its expansion. Chief cells in this also produce pepsinogen which digests protein.
Another gland in this is the parietal cells, which secret HCL and intrinsic factors. A bolus passes
through the cardiac sphincter into the fundus section and exits the pylorus section through the phyloric
sphincter. For ten points, name this J shaped hollow organ in the digestive system.
ANSWER: Stomach
Histamine is secreted in this organ by enterochromaffin (en-TARE-oh-kroh-MAFF-in)-like cells. A
valve at the bottom of this organ is called the pyloric sphincter. A bacteria localized to it uses chemotaxis
(kee-moh-TAK-sis) to burrow into the mucus lining the wall of this organ, which expands using rugae
(ROO-guy). That bacteria, H. pylori, increases the prevalence of peptic ulcers in this organ. For 10 points,
identify this organ which sends chyme (KIME) to the small intestine after receiving it from the esophagus.
ANSWER: stomach
Cimetidine and ranitidine are H2 receptor agonists used to treat problems with this organ, while
esomeprazole works by inactivating an H/K ATPase. Bombesin stimulates secretion by G-cells in this
organ, which is missing in lampreys and hagfish. (*) Rennin in this organ serves to proteolytically
inactivate kappa casein, forming curds, and was once harvested from young calves. Mechanical stress in
this organ amplifies the signaling effect of cholecystokinin. Chief cells secrete pepsinogen while parietal
cells serve to maintain an acidic pH. Helicobacter pylori commonly infects this organ and may lead to
gastric ulcers. For 10 points, name this part of the digestive system found between the oesophagus and the
small intestine.
ANSWER: Stomach
A disease affecting this organ causes an overproduction of mucus and an overall enlargement of the organ
as a whole and is known as Menetrier disease. Necessary for the absorption of vitamin B12, a glycoprotein,
intrinsic factor, is produced by this organ's parietal cells. Rennin or chymosin is an enzyme obtained from
this organ in newborn ruminant animals and is used in cheesemaking. When food exits this organ and enters
the small intestine, it is called chyme. Aided in its primary function by hydrochloric acid, for 10 points,
name this organ of the digestive system.
ANSWER: Stomach
It is not the parathyroid, but the Chief cells of this organ release zymogens that are activated by the
secretions of its parietal cells. Patients of pernicious anemia have low levels of this organ's intrinsic factor,
which allows for the absorbtion of vitamin B12. The part of this organ that extends past its upper opening is
referred to as its fundus, and the mucosa and submucosa layers of this organ are folded into rugae. This
organ produces chyme, which travels through the pyloric sphincter into the duodenum, and enzymes
abundant in this organ include pepsin. For 10 points, name this organ that lies between the esophagus and
the small intestine.
ANSWER: stomach
This organ overproduces mucus in Menetrier's disease, while the Roux-en-Y procedure works on it.
One part of this structure is the fundus, and the folds of this organ are called rugae. The pyloric sphincter
originates in it. This organ's contents are often called chyme, and are broken down by a mixture including
hydrochloric acid. For 10 points, name this organ in the digestive system which receives food from the
esophagus.
ANSWER: stomach
In full-grown humans, ghrelin is produced in larger quantities in this region than in the pancreas. It's not
the brain, but APUD cells in this organ produce large amounts of serotonin, and one end of this organ is
bounded by the pyloric sphincter. One disease that can afflict this organ is combated by increased release of
prostaglandin, and is called gastritis, and this organ is aided in its primary function by the use of
hydrochloric acid. For 10 points, name this organ, the first stop for food after being swallowed.
ANSWER: stomach
This organ's fundic and cardiac regions contain foveolar cells which secrete mucus, while intrinsic factor,
which is necessary for vitamin B12 absorption, is released by its parietal cells. Blood supplied through the
left and right gastro-omental arteries allows its enteroendocrine cells to produce somatostatin,
cholecystokinin, and gastrin and its chief cells to secrete rennin and pepsinogen. Its rugae folds increase
surface area, thus allowing for improved digestion in the region between its pyloric and esophageal
sphincters. FTP, name this hydrochloric acid-producing organ which digests food into chime.
ANSWER: stomach
Pathological enlargement of this organ is called Menetrier's disease, and hematemesis can result
from persistent bleeding in it. The uppermost portion of this organ is called the fundus, which
contains glands whose chief cells secrete zymogens. Another secretion of this organ is necessary for
B12 absorption and is called (*) intrinsic factor. Its surface area is increased by folds called rugae. This
organ's parietal cells secrete hydrochloric acid, which, along with enzymes like pepsin, works to produce
chyme from macerated food. For 10 points, name this organ between the esophagus and the small intestine.
ANSWER: stomach
Menetrier disease results in changes to this organ. The Fundic glands in this organ includes parietal
cells which secrete important chemicals to this organs function. This organ has folds called rugae
(ROO-gay) and is home to Helicobacter (*) pylori. Gizzards are an example of this organ, and ruminants
such as cows have four. The pyloric sphincter controls flow from this organ to the small intestine and the
esophagus empties into it. For 10 points, name this acidic organ that breaks down food using acid.
ANSWER: stomach
A large fold of the peritoneum called the greater omentum hangs down from this organ. In this
organ's upper region, called the fundus, chief cells secrete pepsinogen (pep-SIN-oh-jen) and parietal
cells secrete intrinsic factor and (*) hydrochloric acid. The pyloric sphincter at the bottom of this organ
passes a substance called chyme into the duodenum (doo-AH-den-um) of the small intestine. For 10 points,
name this digestive organ, into which food is passed by the esophagus.
ANSWER: stomach
This organ is separated into right and left halves by the angular incisure, below which lies its antrum, where
G cells and D cells are located. One part of this organ features glands that form polyps in Cowden's
syndrome, and "magic looping" takes place under parasympathetic control in that same part, its fundus,
where gases can accumulate. Folds in the walls of this organ are called rugae, and its chief cells secrete
pepsinogen. This organ's contents are prevented from flowing into the next by the pyloric sphincter; those
contents are often called chyme. Hormones characteristic of this organ include gastrin, and its interior is
maintained at pH as low as four. For 10 points, name this digestive system component between the
esophagus and small intestine.
ANSWER: stomach
The antrum region of this organ is the common target of Helicobacter pylori. It can contract into folds
called rugae, and its volume can range from forty-five milliliters to one liter. Its chief cells produce pepsin,
while its parietal cells produce hydrochloric acid. For 10 points, name this organ located between the
esophagus and small intestine on the digestive tract, in which the first stage of chemical digestion takes
place.
ANSWER: the human stomach [do not accept "animal stomach" or specific names for animal stomachs]
This organ, which contains a region called the fundus, produces a glycoprotein used in vitamin B12
absorption called the intrinsic factor. It also contains G cells which stimulate production of a material
composed mainly of hydrochloric acid. This organ sends a material known as chyme from the pyloric
sphincter into the duodenum, the first portion of the small intestine. In cows, this organ is divided into four
compartments. For 10 points, name this main organ of the digestive system which breaks down food after
receiving it from the esophagus.
ANSWER: stomach
G-cells and chief cells are located in this structure, which is divided into left and right halves by the
angular incisures. An enzyme called rennin that breaks down casein is sometimes harvested from
ones belonging to calves It's not the pancreas, but this organ contains a region called the fundus. (*)
Helicobacter pylori bacteria can live in this organ and cause ulcers due to the parietal cells maintaining an
acidic environment. This organ sends a material known as chyme from the pyloric sphincter into the
duodenum, the first portion of the small intestine. For 10 points, name this organ that is divided into four
chambers in a cow and breaks down food after receiving it from the esophagus.
ANSWER: Stomach
This organ is responsible for absorbing vitamin B12 because of its production of intrinsic factor with
parietal cells. The mucosal lining of this organ can become the residence of H. pylori, which causes ulcers.
This organ is connected to the duodenum by the pyloric sphincter. For 10 points, identify this digestive
organ that uses enzymes and strong acids to break down food, and which is located between the esophagus
and small intestine in humans.
ANSWER: stomach
This organ's muscle is surrounded and controlled by orthosympathetic and parasympathetic
plexuses. Canaliculi help expand the surface area of this organ's parietal cells, which release intrinsic
factor to facilitate the absorption of vitamin B12. Folds called rugae allow this organ to expand or
contract, and its chief cells secrete (*) pepsinogen, an inactive molecule that is later converted into the
enzyme pepsin. Through the pyloric sphincter, chyme passes from this organ to the duodenum. For ten
points, name this organ that lies between the esophagus and the small intestine and produces hydrochloric
acid.
ANSWER: stomach
One layer of the wall of this organ, the submucosa, contains Meissner's plexus. Its chief cells secrete
pepsinogen, which is converted to its active form in response to the low pH environment present in
this organ. This organ receives the bolus through the cardiac (*) sphincter, converts it to chyme, then
passes it through the pyloric sphincter to the small intestine. For 10 points, name this organ of the digestive
system with parietal cells that secrete hydrochloric acid.
ANSWER: stomach
This organ's foveolar cells serve a protective function, and an "alkaline tide" results when secretions
of bicarbonate from this organ cause an increase in blood pH. A zymogen released by this organ's
chief cells becomes an aspartate protease. One compound synthesized by this organ's G cells
stimulates the release of histamine from (*) enterochromaffin-like cells. The upward bulge at this organ's
top is its fundus, and a bolus is converted into chyme in this organs. Parietal cells in this organ release
hydrochloric acid, and this organ is separated from the duodenum by the pyloric sphincter. For 10 points,
name this organ that lies in between the esophagus and the small intestine.
ANSWER: stomach
Developmentally, they are divided into agenous, mesogenous, and perigenous varieties; in the last of which,
as with grasses, they are unrelated to surrounding tissue. In dicots, anisocytic ones are surrounded by three
subsidiary cells and they are produced from a sequence of two unequal cell divisions. They move in
response to a loss of chloride and potassium after the release of abscisic acid triggered by the roots. Their
most famous role involves a mechanism that uses PEP carboxylase, prevents photorespiration, and
minimizes water loss, in which they open only at night in CAM plants. FTP, identify these pores used by
leaves for gas exchange.
ANSWER: stoma (or stomate; or stomata)
In flp mutants, a continuation of divisions results in these structures having extra cells, and in too many
mouths mutants, extra of these structures are produced. More prevalent on the abaxial surface, these
structures are affected by a proton gradient that drives the accumulation of potassium ions. The diacytic
type of these structures is found in some dicots, and their structure is similar to hydathodes, which are
responsible for guttation. Promoted by cytokinins, but inhibited by abscisic acid, these structures are opened
and closed by changes in turgor pressure, and each of them are flanked by a pair of guard cells. FTP name
these pores in the epidermis of leaves where transpiration and gas exchange occurs.
ANSWER: stomata [accept stoma; or stomate; or stomatal apparatuses]
These structures develop in response to interactions between EPF1, YODA, and Speechless, and
they develop from asymmetric division of pavement cells. Organisms that undergo the CAM
pathway open these structures during the night. Absciscic (ab-SCIH-SIHC) acid is one trigger for
opening these structures. They are flanked by a pair of (*) guard cells, which shrivel up to close them.
For 10 points, identify these holes used for transpiration in plants, most commonly found on the bottom of
a leaf.
ANSWER: stomata
The only sporophytes that do not contain these are liverworts. They are surrounded by cells that lose
potassium when triggered by abscisic acid, reversing a process started by phototropin and causing a loss of
osmotic pressure and turgor. Those parenchyma [pair-en-KY-mah] cells next to these cells are called guard
cells. Changes in these structures, which often take place in the morning and late afternoon, have a direct
impact on the rates of transpiration and respiration of the plant. Name these gas exchange locations on a
plant epidermis, essentially tiny holes.
ANSWER: stomata [do not accept "stroma"]
Abscisic acid induces their deactivation and cytokinins promote the activation of these
structures. Proton pump activity causes the potassium uptake that activates these structures,
which are parallel to the leaf axis in monocotyledons. CAM plants take up carbon dioxide at
night through the opening of these structures, which are formed by two chloroplast-dense
guard cells. For 10 points, name these gaps in the leaf and stem epidermis through which
transpiration occurs.
ANSWER: stomata [prompt on guard cells before mention]
Mutations in the Too Many Mouths and YODA genes can lead to elevated numbers of these
structures, and in addition to coining the term "protoplasm," Hugo von Mohl gave the first explanation
for how these structures work. Cytosolic calcium ion concentration increases due to abscisic acid's
effect on these structures. The fama mutation results in immature guard cells, and when these
structures are open, there is a slight decrease in turgor pressure. For 10 points, name these structures
that allow for exchange of gases in plants.
ANSWER: stomata [accept stomates]
Their function is inhibited by the ABA hormone, and Zeaxanthin is involved in the activation of these
structures. Transport of protons from the cytoplasm causes their activation with the uptake of
potassium ions. They are inactive during the day in organisms that use malic acid in their metabolism,
and they involve the opening and closing of two guard cells to allow for the diffusion of gases, called
transpiration. For 10 points, identify these structures, which are involved in the exchange of carbon
dioxide and water vapor in plants.
ANSWER: stomata [or guard cells]
Epstein and Steinberg discovered the first of these using multiplicity reactivation experiments. Some
of these entities were discovered by Sydney Brenner by looking at suppressors of mutations in the
head protein of the T4 phage. The accidental incorporation of these things results in the persistence
of EJCs and the activation of UPF1 as part of the NMD pathway. Their function can be modified by
nearby PYLIS and SECIS elements. They were originally dubbed amber, ochre, and opal, and in
eukaryotes they bind to (*) releasing factor and direct the incorporation of a water molecule on the C-
terminus. They occur prematurely in nonsense mutations, and they usually consist of UAA, UGA, and
UAG. For 10 points, name these codons that terminate protein synthesis.
ANSWER: stop codons [prompt on codons; accept nonsense mutations before mention, but do NOT accept "missense"]
An autoimmune reaction to one organism of this genus causes Sydenham's chorea. One organism in
this genus secretes C5a peptidase, and one subgroup is distinguished by bacitracin sensitivity. An
ASO titer is used to diagnose a sequela of infection by one member of this genus, which causes
glomerulonephritis. They are able to inhibit C3 convertase and protect against phagocytosis using the
M protein. The Lancefield antigens were used to sort (*) members of this genus, which are also grouped
by their ability to lyse blood agar. Species include viridans, which infest artificial heart valves, and mutans,
which causes dental caries. Members of this genus are round, gram-positive, and grow in clusters. Another
member of this genus causes scarlet fever. For 10 points, name this genus of bacteria, whose most famous
member causes sore throats.
ANSWER: streptococcus [accept more specific answers]
Hill's ABCX model measures this concept in families. Cox developed a transactional model of this concept,
which Holmes and Rahe measured from one to one hundred on the Social Readjustment Rating Scale.
Another model of this phenomenon, General Adaptation Syndrome, posits that it leads to the successive
stages of alarm reaction, adaptation, and exhaustion. This phenomenon, whose name was coined by Hans
Selye, causes the the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis to release cortisol, which is known as this type of
hormone. It appears in high levels in people with Type A personalities. For 10 points, name this unpleasant
physical tension that causes high blood pressure and ulcers.
**ANSWER: stress
For people with atrial (AY-tree-uhl) fibrillation (fih-brih-LAY-shun), the CHADS2 score gives the
likelihood of these events, which are also the subject of a namesake zero to thirty NINDS scale. TIAs
are weaker versions of these events. These events, which can be caused by obstructions in the branch
points of the Circle of Willis, can cause loss of speech and weakness and paralysis on the side opposite
the (*) block. For 10 points, identify these events in which blood supply to the brain is interrupted.
ANSWER: stroke [or cerebrovascular accident or CVA]
One type of this condition leads to amaurosis fugax, or temporary blindness; that type is caused when bits of
an atherosclerotic plaque in the carotid artery dislodge. It is often more serious in patients with an
incomplete circle of Willis. If this causes damage to Broca's or Wernicke's areas, it can lead to temporary
or permanent aphasia. Often, this condition manifests with weakness in the left side of the body and
drooping of the face. For ten points, name this condition also known as a cerebrovascular accident in which
disruption of blood supply causes dysfunction of the brain.
ANSWER: stroke or cerebrovascular accident
Secor et al. wrote a paper titled "Can we study [these organisms] to extinction?" With eight varieties
in North America, the Lake species of this, Acipenser fulvescens, has an IGFA world record of 168
pounds. Wikipedia claims it is a "royal fish," and all catches are property of the Crown. Also found
in the genuses Scaphirhyncus, which includes the endangered Alabama type, and the
Asian Pseudoscaphirhyncus, the species Huso huso, or beluga, is heavily fished in the Caspian and Black
seas for its roe and is Canada's largest freshwater sportfish. For ten points, name this armored fish family
surviving from prehistoric times, endangered partially from trade in its eggs known as caviar.
ANSWER: Sturgeon [or Acipenser before it is mentioned]
Dysphagia lusoria occurs when this artery is aberrant. In proximal stenosis of this artery, blood flows
backwards through the vertebral artery after going through the circle of Willis, known as this
artery's namesake "steal" syndrome. The thyrocervical trunk and costocervical trunk are branches
off of this artery, and the right recurrent laryngeal nerve hooks around the right version of this
artery. One the left side, this artery is the third branch off of the aortic arch, while on the right it is
part of the brachiocephalic trunk. It also gives off the dorsal scapular artery and is the main blood supply
to the arm. For 10 points, name this artery in the shoulder that gets its name from the fact that it lies right
underneath the clavicle.
ANSWER: Subclavian artery
Gleason proposed an individualistic concept of this process, which focused on abiotic and biotic
heterogeneity. Fredric Clement's theory introduced an equilibrium stage (*) in which foreign species
can no longer compete with established species. Its autogenic form involves alteration of the environment
by the community and its primary form begins with colonization. For 10 points, name this ecological
process in which an embryonic community undergoes a directional change in its plant species that ends with
the establishment of a climax community.
ANSWER: ecological succession
In aquatic environments in which this process occurs, floating plants eventually replace phytoplankton as
part of the hydrosere. Lichens tend to be the first colonizers of exposed rocks, placing them at the start of
the lithosere, which is another example of a seral community which arises in this process. Volcanic ash,
being highly fertile, can bring about the allogenic form of this process. In this process's "primary" form,
those lichens would be pioneer species. Culminating in the formation of a climax community, for 10 points,
name this series of gradual changes in species composition that occur following the disturbance of a
community or the colonization of a new habitat.
ANSWER: ecological succession [accept primary succession; accept secondary succession; accept allogenic succession]
This process includes serial communities composed of r-selected species. The gap phase type of this
process occurs when there is a break in the canopy of a climax community. Nitrogen fixers, lichens
(LIE-kens), moss, and shrubs are the first organisms to arrive in this process. The primary type of this
process can begin with the formation of a new lake or volcanic eruption, and the secondary type is caused
by disturbances such as fire. For 10 points, name this process of species in a region changing over time.
ANSWER: ecological succession
It's not chlorine, but the chlorobi phylum of bacteria is named for this element. A motif containing four
atoms of this non-metal are found in aconitase. Vitamin B1 is named for the fact that it contains nitrogen
and this element. In bacteria, nitrogen fixation occurs in a catalyst containing molybdenum and a cluster of
iron and this element. This element, found in high concentrations in keratin, forms a tertiary structure called
its namesake bridge. This element is found between ethyl and methyl groups in the side chain of
methionine, and it's also found in cysteine.Thiols contain this element. For 10 points, name this element
with symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S before mention]
Granules filled with this element are found in Actinomyces israelii. The TPST enzyme is
responsible for adding a group containing this element to tyrosine. A radical on this element is found
in the active site of ribonucleotide reductase. PDI catalyzes the formation of bonds between two
atoms of this element, which in aconitase forms an active site cluster with iron. Its 35 isotope was
used in the Hershey-Chase experiment to label (*) proteins. The chemoautotrophic bacteria living near
deep sea vents use a compound of this element as an energy source. The side chain of cysteine contains this
element, allowing it to form a type of bridge important in secondary structure stability. For 10 points, name
this element found in thiol groups, with symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S before mention]
Although not carbon, the ring in the structure of lipoic acid contains two atoms of this element bonded to
each other. Aconitase is an example of an enzyme in which atoms of this element form complexes with
iron. The tertiary structure of proteins is helped in part by bonds between two atoms of this element, which
is found in the amino acids methionine and cysteine. Anaerobic respiration in some bacteria releases a
rotten-smelling molecule comprised of an atom of this element bonded to two hydrogens. For 10 points,
name this element with atomic symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S until it is read]
This term is the more common name given to the epipelagic zone. A decrease in the amount of
this thing is central to the subject of Milankovitch cycles. One process that uses this thing creates
carbohydrates and oxygen from carbon dioxide and water. That process is used by non-(*)
chemosynthetic autotrophs. It is reflected back towards the Earth in the greenhouse effect. For 10 points,
identify this thing that provides the energy for photosynthesis.
ANSWER: sunlight [or solar radiation; or insolation; or obvious equivalents like energy from the sun; prompt on thermal radiation]
In September 2013, Thomas Frieden announced that these organisms would be classified as "urgent,"
"serious," or "concerning." CRE is classified as an "urgent" one. A class of these organisms has developed
the mecA gene in a common example of microevolution. Another class of these organisms has evolved
beta-lactamases. Many hospital infections are caused by MRSA, one of these bacteria of species
Staphylococcus aureus. For ten points, give the term used to refer to bacteria that are immune to drugs like
ampicillin or penicillin.
ANSWER: superbugs [or antibiotic-resistant bacteria; prompt on MRSA until it is read; prompt o Staphylococcus aureus until it is read]
This property allows ballistosporic dispersion of basidiomycete spores after a spore and a structure named
for Bueller coalesce. According to the Hildebrand-Scott relation, this quantity is directly proportional to the
cube root of the molar volume of a liquid times the square of the cohesive energy density. Alveoli are
coated with a fluid that lowers this property, allowing small pressure differentials to inflate the sacs during
respiration. This property is the reason why water droplets assume a spherical shape. For 10 points, identify
this property which allows insects to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
Phoresy is one type of this process that ranges from obligate to facultative (fah-CULT-tative).
Epiphytes only exist in this phenomenon. Margulis proposed that mitochondria resulted from this
process within cells. Ectoparasites and pseudocopulation are examples of this process. Acacia trees
provide beltian bodies to ants in this relationship which is exemplified by (*) mycorrhizae
(my-core-HIZ-ay) and roots. Commensalism, parasitism, and mutualism are all forms of this process. For
10 points, name this type of biological relationship in which all members benefit.
ANSWER: symbiosis [or word forms like symbiotic relationship; prompt to be less specific on commensalism until mention; prompt to be less specific on mutualism until mention; prompt to be less specific on parasitism until mention; or word forms of those words]
Epiphytes exhibit an example of this type of relationship called phoresy. This type of relationship
can be classified as obligate, or necessary to survival, and facultative. Shelter, transport, and food are
common motivations for the development of them, and they are exemplified by (*) clownfish and
anemones. This type of relationship can be divided into commensalism, mutualism, and parasitism. For 10
points, name this type of biological relationship in which two organisms live closely together.
ANSWER: symbiosis [prompt on commensalism; prompt on mutualism; prompt on parasitism]
When this behavior occurs in fungi and plants, the result is known as a mycorrhiza. Lynn Margulis
proposed that the "endo" form of this behavior explains the origin of some organelles. Varieties of this
behavior include commensalism and parasitism. The clownfish and the sea anemone exhibit the mutualistic
form of this behavior. For 10 points, name this behavior in which two different species live together, often
both benefiting from the relationship.
ANSWER: symbiosis
Phoresy is an example of this process which ranges from obligate to facultative. This process is always
interspecific and usually involves food. Epiphytes are plants that live on sturdier plants, an example of
commensalism, which is a form of this process. This process often involves cleaning, such as plovers eating
leeches from crocodile teeth. Parasitism is one form of this process, as is the beneficial mutualism
exemplified by clownfish and anemones. For 10 points, name this relationship of organisms living closely
together.
ANSWER: symbiosis [accept commensalism until is is read; prompt on "mutualism" or "parasitism"]
Phoresy and inquilinism are both kinds of this phenomenon and are exhibited by mites and orchids,
respectively. Lynn Margulis contends that this phenomenon drives evolution and developed the "endo" type
of this, which explains the existence of mitochondria and chloroplasts. Nitrogen-fixing rhizobia and
mycorrhyzal fungi both exhibit this behavior with plants, which is similar to the relationship of clownfish
and sea anemones. For 10 points, identify this behavior, a close and long-term interaction between different
species, which includes mutualistic, commensalistic, and parasitic types.
ANSWER: symbiosis
One characteristic of this disease is a globular enamel growth which results in rounded teeth, known as
"mulberry molars". Its secondary stage is marked by palmar erythema, or rashes on the hands and the soles
of feet. The primary sign of infection by this disease is a painless skin lesion, called a chancre. Caused by
the spirochete Treponema pallidum, the first effective treatment for this disease was Arsphenamine, also
called Salvarsan. It was initially dubbed the "French Disease". For 10 points, name this sexually transmitted
infection, reportedly carried to Europe by the crew of Christopher Columbus after his voyages.
ANSWER: syphilis
While being treated for this disease, the pathogen releases fever-producing chemicals in the
Herxheimer (HURKS-high-mur) reaction. When transmitted to a fetus it causes mulberry molars
and deafness. This disease, which is treated with penicillin G, has primary, secondary, and tertiary
phases, and it can invade the brain in late stages. It is caused by the spirochete (SPEE-roh-keht)
bacterium Treponema (treh-poh-NEH-muh) (*) palladium. Some scholars argue that Christopher
Columbus's crew brought this disease back to Europe. For10 points, name this sexually transmitted disease
that causes painless chancres (SHANK-ers).
ANSWER: syphillis
The Wassermann test is used to diagnose this disease. Modern treatment of it is usually with
penicillin, which leads to the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction as the infectious agents are killed. Paul
Ehrlich created Salvasan to treat this disease while looking for a "magic bullet" to cure sleeping
sickness. This disease progresses through three stages, consisting of sores, rashes, and internal organ
damage respectively. The species of bacterium that causes this disease also causes other diseases such
as (*) yaws and pinta, and is named Treponema palladium. For 10 points, name this lethal STD, which is
caused by a spirochete bacterium.
ANSWER: syphilis
This disease's causative agent is subtyped by determining the number of repeats in the arp gene.
One test for it mixes patient blood with cardiolipin. Its later stages are marked by pupils that
accommodate but don't react named for Argyll and Robertson. Its causative agent shares
morphology with Leptospira and shares a genus with the causative agents of bejel, yaws, and pinta.
Its tertiary stage can be marked by aortic dissections and (*) insanity. Paul Erlich developed the "magic
bullet" Salvarsan to treat this disease. Painless chancres are hallmarks of its primary stage, which was also
studied in an ethically dubious experiment in Tuskeegee, Alabama. For 10 points, name this sexually
transmitted disease caused by the spirochete Treponema pallidum.
ANSWER: syphilis [accept neurosyphilis throughout; accept Treponema pallidum until mention; prompt on "Treponema" until mention]
The first effective treatment for this disease was Salvarsan. The first recorded outbreak of this disease
occurred in a French army camp outside Naples. The tertiary form of this disease can cause the
disintegration of cartilage and mental illness from damage to the nervous system. This disease most likely
originated in the Americas before being brought to Europe on Columbus's first voyage. For ten points, name
this often sexually transmitted disease which can lead to the loss of one's nose.
ANSWER: syphillis
This disease received its current name from the titular character of a 16th century poem by Italian physician
Girolamo Fracastoro in which Apollo punishes a shepherd for his impudence. Caused by the T. pallidum
spirochete bacterium, it was once treated with mercury and arsenic. Modern cures still primarily involve
penicillin, despite increases in antibiotic-resistant strains of the bacterium. This disease was first seen on a
major scale during a 1494 epidemic in a French army campaigning in Naples, so it is variably called the
"French Disease" or the "Neapolitan Disease." Untreated, this disease causes neurological damage that
eventually leads to death. FTP, name this sexually transmitted disease, often called the "great imitator"
because its symptoms closely resemble other afflictions.
ANSWER: Syphilis
One study of this disease, led by John Cutler, involved treating intentionally infected Guatemalans with
penicillin. Malaria was used to treat the late stages of this condition until the 1940s. Salvarsan, a "magic
bullet" developed by Paul Ehrlichy, was the first effective treatment for this disease. Researchers in the
"Tuskegee experiment" allowed six hundred black men with this disease to go untreated for forty years. For
10 points, name this sexually transmitted disease.
ANSWER: syphilis
The first effective treatment for this disease was Salvarsan, the "magic bullet" developed by Paul
Ehrlich. It first presents as a single (SHANK-er) chancre, and it was historically known as the "French
disease." An Associated Press story in 1972 stopped a forty year experiment on this disease at the Tuskegee
Institute. For 10 points, name this sexually-transmitted disease caused by the Treponema pallidum bacteria,
which in later stages can cause blindness and madness.
ANSWER: syphilis
In Pseudomonas Aeruginosa, a protein named "exo" followed by this letter functions as a GTPaseactivating protein after being secreted. Calcium channels designated by this letter are active in the
SA and AV Node and are blocked by amiloride. Simian Vacuolating Virus 40 produces a pair of
proteins named for this letter, one of which hexamerizes and inactivates p53. Those are the large and
small antigens denoted by this letter. A cell denoted by this letter is activated by the Lck tyrosine
kinase in a ZAP70-dependent manner, and a series of viruses named for this letter include the organism
used in the Hershey-Chase experiment to infect E. Coli. The aforementioned cells express either CD8 or
CD4 and come in regulatory, cytotoxic, and helper varieties. For 10 points, name this letter which
designates a series of bacteriophages and a lymphocyte cell contrasted with B cells.
ANSWER: T
One subtype of these cells are dysfunctional in IPEX syndrome, and one receptor on them is
targeting by the OKT3 monoclonal antibody. Their development is aided by co-stimulatory CD28
signals, and they are activated following LAT phosphorylation by ZAP70. Their development is the
subject of the Differential Avidity Hypothesis, and TSLP is responsible for activating the dendritic
cells that educate them; that compound is secreted from Hassal's corpuscles. CD3 is present on their
surface, and during development they interact with epithelial reticular cells to undergo rigid positive and
negative selection against self-antigens, which ends with them either expressing CD8 or CD4 receptors.
Coming in suppressor, cytotoxic, and macrophage-activated helper varieties, for 10 points, name this type
of lymphocytes that matures in the thymus that are distinct from B cells.
ANSWER: T Cells or T lymphocytes (prompt on partial, prompt on Thymocytes)
In 1984, Tak Wah Mak discovered these cells's receptors, which had a similar structure but totally
different genetic origin than antibodies. They are let out from their organ of origin if they do not attack
"self" macrophages, since, if they did, they would attack good cells. These cells with natural killer,
cytotoxic, and helper varieties are differentiated by namesake receptors from NK cells and B-cells. For 10
points, name this group of lymphocytes named for their place of origin, the thymus.
ANSWER: T-cells
The AIRE gene is expressed in cells that help these cells mature. The receptor of these cells interacts with a
complex that has two epsilon chains, along with a delta and gamma chain. Lck and ZAP-70 are important to
this type of cell's signaling pathway. Unlike an associated class of cells, they undergo both positive and
negative selection. A very small percentage of these cells are known as delta-gamma cells. FOXP3 acts as a
marker for regulatory ones. They have CD3 and two major types of them are distinguished by whether they
have CD4 or CD8. For 10 points, name these lymphocytes that come in cytotoxic and helper varieties,
which are not B cells.
ANSWER: T cells
These cells are eliminated through activation-induced cell death. A subtype of these cells differentiate in the
presence of IL-12 from macrophages. These cells express CD28, which binds to B7 as part of their
activation. CD3 is a signal-transduction molecule for their receptors, which recognize cell-bound peptides.
These cells are often located in para-cortical areas of lymph nodes. MHC class I molecules interact with
their cytotoxic type, and MHC class II molecules interact with their helper type. For 10 points, name these
lymphocytes that develop in the thymus.
ANSWER: (helper) T cells or lymphocytes [prompt on partial answer or "white blood cells"]
The creation of these cells is aided by the phosphorylation of LAT by ZAP-70, which is recruited by Lck.
The TSLP protein assists in the creation of these cells. These cells express ICOS, but not its ligand.
Secretory vesicles in these cells can contain the protein perforin, and they can also express the Fas ligand.
Unlike some similar cells, these cells do not undergo somatic hypermutation, but they do undergo V(D)J
recombination. MHC proteins present foreign peptides to these cells, which can contain the coreceptors
CD4 and CD8. These cells are part of the cell-mediated immune response, distinguishing them from the
antibody response. The two main classes of this cell are cytotoxic and helper. For 10 points, identify these
lymphocytes that that mature in the thymus, unlike B cells.
ANSWER: T cells [or T lymphocytes]
One type of these cells mediates delayed hypersensitivity reactions. A compound secreted by one type of
these cells is chemically similar to complement protein C9, and makes a hole in the plasma membrane
through which water can enter a cell. That compound, perforin, is produced by the type of these cells that
recognize MHC Class I and CD8 molecules. In addition to the cytotoxic type, another thype of these cells
is destroyed in AIDS. For 10 points, name these lymphocytes produced in the thymus.
ANSWER: T lymphocytes [accept cytotoxic T cells until "cytotoxic"]
Problems with these cells can cause mycosis fungoides, which is also known as Alibert-Bazin syndrome and
is misleadingly named because it looks like a fungal disease. Some of these cells are classified as gammadelta, which contrasts with the alpha-beta receptors most of these cells contain, while others are classified as
CD8. These cells can be genetically modified to bind to the protein CD19 by giving them a chimeric
antigen receptor in what may be a new cure for leukemia. Some of them are classified as natural killer,
memory, or helper cells. Identify these cells that assist B cells with immunity and are created in the thymus.
ANSWER: T cells (or T Lymphona, prompt White Blood Cells or Lymphocytes)
One type of these cells does its job by expressing the Fas ligand on its surface or releasing perforin to
start the caspase cascade. Their surface projects a complex made up of alpha and beta chains linked by a
disulfide bond, the TCR, which recognizes epitopes presented by the major histocompatibility complex on
other cells. Their "cytotoxic," or "killer" variety attacks cancerous cells and cells infected by viruses. For
10 points, name these white blood cells so named because they mature in the thymus, unlike B cells.
ANSWER: T-cells [or cytotoxic T cells]
The activation of these cells involves interactions between the Zap-70 kinase and the ITAM regions of their
CD3 receptors. One class of these cells carries out its function by releasing the enzyme perforin. These cells
recognize peptide segments transported by MHC proteins. As with antibodies, V(D)J recombination affects
the development of these cells. These cells are subjected to positive and negative selection during their
development. These cells are classified into CD4 or CD8 types, and these cells develop in the thymus. For
10 points, name these leukocytes which come in 'helper' and 'cytotoxic' varieties.
ANSWER: T cells [or helper T cells; or cytotoxic T cells]
During these cells's development, they go from double-negative to double-positive to single-positive.
These cells are further classified based on what MHC complex they recognize, as they contain one or both
of the CD4 or CD8 markers. Along with macrophages, HIV infects a type of these cells. Like NK cells and
B cells, these cells are classified as lymphocytes, and have types like cytotoxic and helper. For 10 points,
name this type of white blood cell that matures in the thymus.
ANSWER: helper T cells [prompt on lymphocyte until it is read; prompt on white blood cell until it is read]
The regulatory type of these cells act as suppressors of other types of these cells. One variety of these cells
expresses CXCR5 and can trigger germinal center formation. Interleukin-12 regulates differentiation of
these cells, while interleukin-4 stimulates the production of one type of them. These cells are activated when
their receptors interact with antigens bound to MHC complexes. These cells are classified based on whether
they are CD4 or CD8 positive, both types of which mature in the thymus. One type of them is infected by
the HIV virus. For 10 points, name these white blood cells, which are divided into cytotoxic and helper
varieties.
ANSWER: T cells [prompt on "lymphocyte"]
The development and function of one subtype of these cells is controlled by the transcription factor
FOXP3. Although not CD79, one cluster of differentiation in these cells contains the ITAM motif;
phosphorylation of that motif by Lck allows ZAP70 to bind to their zeta chain. Although not natural
killer cells, another subtype of these cells releases granzymes and perforin. These cells are distinguished
from ones similar in function based on the presence of a namesake receptor, which recognizes antigens
bound to MHC molecules. Their subtypes are distinguished by whether they express CD4 or CD8, which
identify the helper and cytotoxic types. For 10 points, name these lymphocytes that mature in the thymus, as
contrasted with similar cells that mature in the bone marrow, B cells.
ANSWER: T cells [or T lymphocytes; prompt on lymphocytes]
These cells produce the serine protease [SAIR-een PROH-tee-"ace"] granzyme, as well as a protein
that forms holes in cell membranes, called perforin. These cells are activated when their receptors
react with the MHC. When these cells differentiate, they express either CD4 or CD8. The
cytotoxic [SY-toh-"toxic"] examples of these cells, which are responsible for lysing ["LIE-sing"] cancer
cells and infected cells, are nicknamed the "killer" type of these cells. Patients are considered to have
AIDS when they have fewer than 200 of the helper variety of these cells per cubic millimeter. These
cells get their name because they mature in the thymus. Name these immune cells that should not
be confused with B cells.
ANSWER: T cells [accept T lymphocytes or killer T cells; prompt on lymphocytes or white blood cells]
The climate of this region is classified as Dfc, Dwc, and Dsc according to the Koppen classification system.
Common plants from this biome include fireweed and lingonberries. Podzolization occurs when acids from
evergreen tree needles seep into the soil, and because of their high resistance to cold, larch forests can often
be found in large flat areas containing permafrost. This biome is also home to the muskeg, a type of bog that
can be found in glacial depressions. Wapiti, grosbeak, and pine martins are common to these areas, and this
makes up 29 percent of the world's forests. Name this largest land biome, also known as boreal forest.
ANSWER: taiga (accept boreal forest before read)
This biome, which is the most common site of "drunken trees," comes in a "sparse" variant where the
ground is dominated by lichen. The dominant tree genera in this biome include Picea and Pinus, which both
display the conical shape and needle leaves common in this biome. The limit of this biome is where shallow
permafrost prevents wooded vegetation from growing. The tree line marks the end of this biome and the
start of tundra. For 10 points, name this largest terrestrial biome, also known as boreal forest, which
comprises the American Northwoods.
ANSWER: taiga [or boreal forest before read; prompt on Northwoods before read]
The last known one of these animals in the United States was named Coolah, who was a resident of the
Fort Wayne Children's Zoo. In 1996 at Mount William, it was observed that a specific facial tumor disease
was ravaging these animals. Originally known as "Harris's meat-lover," these nocturnal hunters mostly
prefer carrion and can be found at places like Macquarie Heads and Robbins Island. They were driven off
the mainland, presumably by the dingo. For ten points, name this small-dog like carnivorous marsupial only
found on an island near Australia.
ANSWER: Tasmanian devil [or Sarcophilus harrisii; or Harris's meat-lover until it is read]
They are located on structures whose types include foliate, fungiform, and circumvallate, the last
type of which are associated with Ebner's glands, and are localized to areas in front of the sulcus
terminalis. A person typically has between 2,000 and 5,000 of these barrel-shaped structures, which
are located on (*) papillae and can be used to detect umami. For 10 points, name these clusters of cells
that are found on the lining of the mouth and on the tongue, used for detecting gustatory sensations
such as bitterness, sourness, sweetness, and saltiness.
ANSWER: taste buds
The discoverer of this fossil suggested that the gazelle bones found near it were used as tools, an idea
that is largely discredited. Another fossil of the same species as this one is the Robert-Broomdiscovered Mrs Ples. One study suggested that this fossil died by having its eyes poked out by an
eagle. This fossil's foramen magnum is pushed toward the front of its skull, suggesting it walked
upright, which was unusual because its brain case was small. Its discoverer used this fossil, which
initially was ignored in favor of Piltdown Man, to posit that humanity (*) originated in Africa. The
molars of this fossil indicate that it was three years old at death. For 10 points, name this hominid fossil of
genus Australopithecus africanus discovered in South Africa by Raymond Dart.
ANSWER: Taung Child or Taung Boy
One variety of this condition was often mistaken for Friedreich's Ataxia until the 1980s, and its more
common variety is closely related to Sandhoff disease. A common test for it involves the body's breakdown
of 4-methyl-lumbelli-ferone. This disease is caused by a failure to metabolize GM2 gangliosides in the
lysosomes of the brain. That is because a mutation in the HEXA gene causes aberrant activity of
hexosaminidase A, leading to this disorder. It is characterized by a "cherry-red" spot on the retina of
affected individuals and usually leads to death in its sufferers by age two. For 10 points, name this recessive
genetic disorder prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease/disorder
It is triggered by a mutation on the beta-hexosaminidase alpha-subunit gene and is characterized by the inability of
that hydrolytic enzyme to fully catalyse the breakdown of gangliosides, derivatives of fatty acids, leading to
the buildup of GM2 in the nerve cells of the brain. Afflicted individuals present with hyperacusis and a
cherry red spot on the retina, and in later stages, mental and physical deterioration as nerve cells are
distorted by the accumulation of gangliosides. The anomalous presence of this disorder within certain
French Canadian and Cajun populations led to the "Jewish Fur Trader" hypothesis, but it is more commonly
connected with another ethnic group. For ten points, identify this autosomal recessive disease, most often
carried by Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease
Mohri et al showed that in this disease, lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase mRNA is up-regulated.
Similar to Sandhoff disease, this disorder occurs when a gene located on chromosome 15 mutates, resulting
in the termination of the hex-o-sa-min-i-dase enzyme. That enzyme, which is found in the lysosomes of
brain cells, is responsible for breaking down fatty acids known as gangliosides. Symptoms can begin to
show at 3 months of age in, for 10 points, what disease prevalent in Ashkenazic Jews and named for two
biologists.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease/disorder
Ongoing clinical trials are testing for the effectiveness of pyri-meth-amine therapy as a treatment for this
disease and the closely related Sandhoff disease. The drug NB-DGJ is being explored as a method to
suppress the production of the substance whose buildup causes this disorder. This disease is caused by the
mutation of a gene found on the long arm of chromosome 15. The enzyme deficient in this disorder is
normally located in the lysosome, where it typically breaks down GM2 molecules. This disorder is caused
by a buildup of neural gangliosides. For 10 points, name this disorder which is characterized by the
presence of a cherry-red spot in the eye and is most common in Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs Disease
Its late-onset form, called LOTS, is not fatal, but its infantile and juvenile varieties are. Its symptoms
resemble Sandhoff disease, but it is caused by a mutation on chromosome 15 rather than 5. Reduced activity
of the enzyme hexosaminidinase A, caused by a mutation in the HEXA gene, leads to accumulation of the
ganglioside GM2 in the brain's neurons. This autosomal recessive disease causes the appearance of a
cherry-red spot on the retina. Other symptoms include an inability to swallow as well as blindness, deafness,
and paralysis. For 10 points, name this lysosomal storage disorder which is usually fatal by age 5 and is
most common in Ashkenazi Jewish populations.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease
In 2005, Cochran posited that this disease, as well as the similar Canavan and Gaucher's diseases, is
correlated with higher intelligence among those commonly afflicted with it. Nomi Stone suggested it
could be minimized by setting up a compatibility hotline in schools, and its genetic basis is a TATC
insertion in the exon 11, First characterized by the clinical observation of a (*) red spot on the retina, it
occurs due to a low activity of hexosaminidase A, leading to GM2 ganglioside accumulation in the brain.
For 10 points, name this doubly-eponymous disease most common among Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs Disease
Pyrimethamine molecular chaperone is being tested to treat a late-onset form of this disease. A useful
model of this disease is the G444R mutant of Jacob sheep, and French-Canadians suffering from this
disease commonly have a 7-kb deletion in exon 1. The enzyme complex affected in this disease can
form a non-functional "S" dimer if two of its alpha subunits come together. The most wellcharacterized mutation that causes this disease is a TATC insertion in exon 11. This disease is similar
to the "AB-variant" disease and (*) Sandhoff's disease, and a common sign of this disease is a cherry-red
spot on the retina. This disease is caused by mutations in hexosaminidase A, which results in a dangerous
buildup of GM2 gangliosides in the nervous system. For 10 points, name this autosomal recessive disease
whose sufferers often die by age 5, which is common among Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease
The 1278insTATC mutation is the most common cause of this disease, and is thought to have originated
circa 800 AD in central Europe. That mutation causes the accumulation of sialylated glycosphingolipids in
the brain, owing to a defect in hexosaminidase A, as contrasted with Sandhoff disease, in which
hexosaminidase B is also affected. Thus, people with this disease are unable to properly hydrolyze
gangliosides in their lysosomes. It presents with a characteristic red macula and usually leads to death by
age 4. For 10 points, name this incurable genetic disease that is common in Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease [or GM2 gangliosidosis; prompt on "gangliosidosis"]
This disease is often indistinguishable from Sandhoff disease, which affects the same protein, and umbilical
stem cells have recently been used to treat Krabbe disease, which falls into the same classification as this.
Often characterized by the appearance of a cherry red spot in the eye, it is fundamentally caused by a
mutation in the HEXA gene on chromosome 15, resulting in hexosaminidase A depletion and thus
accumulation of the GM2 ganglioside in nerve cells in the brain. As a result, most infants afflicted do not
live past the age of 4. For 10 points, name this autosomal recessive disease commonly afflicting Ashkenazi
Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease
In French Canadians, the most common cause of this disease is a G to A splice site mutation in intron
seven. Another mutation that causes it is a four basepair insertion in exon eleven. This disease is caused by
mutations in the gene encoding hexaminosidase A, leading to a buildup of gangliosides. This
autosomal-recessive disease commonly causes death in infancy. For 10 points, name this disease, common
in Ashkenazi Jews, in which certain fats build up in the brain.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease
This disease is caused by a defective gene on chromosome 15 that results in a lack of the protein
hexosaminidase (hecks-oh-sih-MIN-ih-days) A. The lack of that protein causes the ganglioside
(GANG-lee-oh-side) GM2 to build up in the nerve cells of the brain. A characteristic feature of this disease
is a cherry red spot on the retina. For 10 points, name this disease which typically results in death by age 4
and which predominately affects French Canadians and Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease [or TSD; accept hexosaminidase A deficiency or hex-A deficiency before "hexosaminidase A" is read; prompt on GM2 gangliosidosis before "GM2" is read]
Sandhoff disease is related to this disease, and the metabolism of 4-methyl-lumbelli-ferone is used in the
biochemical test which detects this disease. It is caused by a mutation in the HEXA gene, which leads to a
deficiency of hexosaminidase A. Compounds made of sialic acid and glycosphingolipids called gangliosides
are not metabolized in this condition, which results in the "cherry-red" spot that can be seen on the retina of
patients with this condition. For 10 points, name this fatal genetic disorder that mostly affects infants and is
especially common among Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease
The presence of hepatosplenomegaly can help distinguish the closely-related Sandhoff disease from this
disease. This disease is caused by a mutation of a gene on chromosome 15, which causes an enzyme that
breaks down fatty acids to become less active. The reduced activity of the enzyme hexosaminidinase A is
caused by a mutation in the HEXA gene, and the buildup of ganglioside inhibits neurons in the brain. One
characteristic symptom of this disease is a red spot on the retina. For 10 points, name this autosomal
recessive disorder that is common among Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease
One treatment currently under development for this disease involves pharmacological delivery of the
enzyme sialidase. This disease, which is closely related to Sandhoff disease, can be tested for by
measuring the body's breakdown of 4-methyl-lumbelli-ferone. An insertion mutation causing this
disease results in a deficiency of (*) hexosaminidase A; this leads to buildup of gangliosides in the brain
and causes the hyperacuisis and lack of muscle control associated with this disease. One signifier of this
degenerative disease, which usually leads to death before age 5, is a red spot on the retina. For 10 points,
name this autosomal recessive disorder most common among Ashkenazi Jews.
ANSWER: Tay-Sachs disease
Nerves and blood vessels enter and exit these structures through the apical foramen, and they are anchored
by an avascular layer of cementum. They are innervated by the alveolar nerves, and deciduous ones are a
good source of stem cells. Their centers are filled with a soft tissue, pulp, which is covered by a harder
tissue known as dentin. Calculus appears on their outer surface when mineral salts are deposited on
already-attached plaque. FTP, name these anatomical structures important in mastication, types of which
include incisors, canines, and molars.
ANSWER: teeth
Certain ridges in these structures are called lophs, and they are connected to the alveolar bone. Cells
crucial in their development include ameloblasts. Different types of them include brachydonts and
hypsodonts. The innermost part of these structures is known as the pulp. They are covered by a layer of
hard enamel. For 10 points, name these structures in the mouth that help break up food.
ANSWER: teeth
The outer surface of these structures are covered in a material that contains amelogenins (AM-uh-lo-JENins) instead of collagens. Another part of these structures is covered by cementum (see-MEN-tum); that part
is the root, whose central part is the pulp. The primary type of these structures are typically lost starting
around age six. Enamel covers the upper surface of, for 10 points, what structures used to chew food?
ANSWER: teeth
One portion of these structures includes proteins such as ameloblastins and tuftelins. The gingiva are
located around these structures, which are partially formed by dentin and pulp. Examples of these structures
include incisors, and sharks grow a new set of these structures every two weeks. For 10 points, identify
these structures whose decay is prevented by proper fluoride usage, whose "wisdom" variety is removed
from the mouths of adults.
ANSWER: teeth [accept clear equivalents; accept specific types of teeth such as molars before "incisors"]
ITAS is a semi-quantitative assay used to study the activity of this enzyme; that assay improves upon
the PCR based TRAP assay which is used to detect the activity of this enzyme. The ability of this
enzyme to access its substrate can be regulated by a complex wherein the TIN2 protein tethers the
TPP1/POT1 proteins to the TRF1/TRF2 proteins; that complex is called the shelterin complex.
Compounds that stabilize the formation of a G-Tetrad help inhibit the activity of this enzyme. Much like
DNA polymerase, it possesses thumb, palm, and finger domains, and expression of this enzymes makes
cells immortal and helps them bypass the Hayflick limit. For 10 points, identify this enzyme whose
discovery resolved the end-replication problem, and which lengthens namesake regions of DNA found at
the ends of chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomerase [or telomerase reverse transcriptase; or hTERT]
Chromosomal mutations that cause the absence of one of this enzyme's subunits is associated with Cri du
Chat. Geron's GRN163L attempts to stop cancer cell proliferation by binding directly to this enzyme's
RNA template, therefore inhibiting it. Composed of TERT, TERC, and DKC1, this enzyme adds TTAGGG
repeats to the 3' tail of DNA. Cells without this reverse transcriptase eventually reach their Hayflick limit.
First discovered in 1984 in Tetrahymena by Greider and Blackburn, for 10 points, name this enzyme that
works to elongate its namesake structures found at the ends of chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomerase
The activity of this enzyme is terminated by a complex that is mutated in cerebroretinal
microangiopathy with calcifications and cysts; that is the CST complex. One component of this
enzyme complex is Nop10, which can be mutated in dyskeratosis congenita. One component of this
enzyme is encoded by a gene next to semaphorin F and delta-catenin on the p arm of chromosome 5,
and is therefore deleted in (*) Cri-du-chat syndrome. This complex was originally discovered using
extracts of Tetrahymena by Greider and Blackburn. Aberrant activation of this complex allows cells to
bypass the Hayflick limit, and this reverse transcriptase enzyme adds the sequence TTAGGG to its
substrate. For 10 points, name this enzyme that lengthens the ends of chromosomes, and is often overactivated in cancer cells.
ANSWER: telomerase
The gene that codes for one component of this protein is contained in the short arm of chromosome 5,
which is deleted in cri du chat syndrome, and that gene's loss of function may contribute to that
condition. Inhibitors of this enzyme may be of limited efficacy in treating a certain disease due to the
existence of the ALT pathway. Scott Cohen discovered that this enzyme contains two molecules of
dyskerin. This enzyme is named for the (*) repeats of TTAGGG that it adds to the 3' end of
chromosomes. For 10 points, name this enzyme discovered by Carol Greider and Elizabeth Blackburn, that
compensates for the continual shortening with each replication of its namesake aging structure.
ANSWER: telomerase
This enzyme is suppressed when a subunit of it binds to PinX1. It contains a U-A.U ("U A dot
U") major-groove triple helix within a pseudoknot. The ALT pathway is an alternative to this
enzyme. The aforementioned subunit of this enzyme is the reverse transcriptase TERT, which is
located on the short arm of chromosome 5 and is thus often missing in people with cri-du-chat
syndrome. This enzyme is activated in 90% of cancer tumors. It was discovered in Tetrahymena
by Carol Greider and Elizabeth Blackburn, and its presence can stop cells from reaching the
Hayflick limit. For 10 points, identify this enzyme that adds TTAGGG repeats to the ends of
chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomerase
The inhibitor GRN163L binds to the RNA template of these. In humans this enzyme is made up partly of
TERT, which has a coding region 3396 base pairs long. A therapy using this enzyme is being used in new
cancer treatments because scientists in a Dallas hospital detected it in 90 of 101 tumor samples but in none
of the 50 normal tissue samples. This enzyme has been shown to add the TTAGGG sequence to DNA in the
3-prime region of vertebrates, and is a reverse transcriptase. This enzyme allows for the replacement of lost
bits of DNA, and without it cells will reach their Hayflick limit. When it is dormant in cells they will
become unstable and eventually die. FTP, name this enzyme that works on the telomeres.
ANSWER: Telomerase
This enzyme's functions are duplicated by the ALT pathway, and its promoter contains 5 elements that bind
the transcription factor Sp1. The Mad1/Max dimer of the Myc family downregulates it and the formation of
G-quadroplexes have been shown to slow its activity. Another method of regulating its activity involves the
formation of a t-loop, which prevents it from latching on to a 3' overhang. This protein consists of two
components, a reverse transcriptase and a built-in RNA template, and its activation is used to abrogate the
Hayflick limit. The solution to Crick's end-replication problem is, FTP, what protein which is upregulated
in stem cells and tumors and lengthens the repeat regions at the ends of chromosomes?
ANSWER: Telomerase
Facio-scapulo-humeral dystrophy is believed to be caused by these structures' namesake position
effect, which Baur et al showed could be relieved by Trichostatin A. Their size can be assayed via
Flo-FISH or a TRF southern blot, and they are protected from non-homologous end-joining by the
shelterin complex. The SIR2/3/4 complex relocates to these structures, which form G-quadruplexes in
humans. Their existence solves the end-replication problem, and Greider and Blackburn discovered a
reverse transcriptase that lengthens these structures. Their length sets an upper limit upon the number of
divisions that a given cell can undergo, and they consist of the sequence TTAGGG. For 10 points, name
these ends of chromosomes.
ANSWER: Telomeres
These structures are protected by the shelterin complex. In yeast, these structures bind to the SIR2/3/4
complex, and these structures form stacks of G-quadruplexes. Inhibition of Fbx4, which degrades the TRF1
protein that binds to these structures, is one possible mechanism for a universal anti-cancer drug. These
parts of a larger structure contain G-rich repeat sequences, and their uncapping can lead to the senescence
of somatic cells. The Hayflick limit occurs due to shrinking of these structures after multiple cell divisions,
as a result of the end replication problem. For 10 points, name these genetic structures at the ends of
chromosomes, whose shortening is associated with aging.
ANSWER: telomeres [do not accept or prompt on "chromosomes"]
The enzyme that adds these entities to one molecule contains TERT and TERC components and was
discovered in Tetrahymena by Carol Greider and Elizabeth Blackburn. T loops form at the ends of these
entities, whose uncapping can cause apoptosis. The shortening of these entities results in the Hayflick limit
on cellular replication. In A. thaliana, these entities consist of a repeating TTTAGGG sequence, while in
humans they consist of a repeating TTAGGG sequence. For 10 points, name these nucleotide sequences
that protect the ends of chromosomes from deterioration.
ANSWER: telomere
Imetelstat, a potential new cancer therapy agent, works by targeting the enzyme that repairs these
structures. Blackburn, Greider, and Szostak received the 2009 Nobel Prize for determining the role of
these structures, which typically adopt a G-quadruplex shape. The shortening of these structures
explains the Hayflick limit to cell division and is the basis for the cellular theory of aging, and that
shortening of these structures can lead to cell senescence or apoptosis. Consisting of thousands of
TTAGGG repeats in humans, name these end sequences of chromosomes that prevent genes from
being lost during DNA replication.
ANSWER: telomeres [prompt on chromosomes before "role"]
A 2003 study revealed that these structures in Leach's storm-petrel work backwards. The size of
these structures can be measured by tagging followed by flow cytometry fluorescence measurements.
A PCR-based method to measure their size was developed by Duncan Baird. The aforementioned
techniques are respectively Flow-FISH and STELA. Quadruplexes form in the (*) guanine-rich
segments of these structures. They terminate in a T-loop. New material can be added to the beginning of
one in the form of TTAGGG sequences by their namesake enzyme. The number of times that these
structures can effectively perform their job is the major factor determining the Hayflick limit. For 10 points,
identify these structures located at the ends of chromosomes that help to prevent corruption during
replication.
ANSWER: telomeres
Tankyrase proteins modify proteins that in turn regulate these structures. Sheltrin complexes obscure these
structures so that they are not affected by a cell's repair pathways. Dyskeratosis congenita is caused by a
body's inability to regulate these structures. These structures determine a cell's Hayflick limit. The active
site of an enzyme named after these structures is called its "palm," and that enzyme functions as a reverse
transcriptase to lengthen these structures. In humans, these structures are composed of a series of GGGTTA
repeats, and they solve the end replication problem. For 10 points, name these segments of DNA found at
the tips of chromosomes
ANSWER: telomeres
These structures may form 4-looped structures which are stabilized by HXDV. The existence of these
structures was confirmed when Szostak and Blackburn introduced a linearlized plasmid from a ciliate
protozoan into yeast and the plasmid was not degraded. The complex which produces these is a
ribonucleoprotein whose enzymatic unit is repressed in somatic cells, and cells reach a senescent stage when
these structures reach a critical length called the Hayflick limit. They are continually shortened due to the
end replication problem, and they consist of repeating TTAGGG sequences. For 10 points, identify these
repeating units of DNA found at the end of chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomeres
Along with semaphorine F and delta-catenin, an enzyme that acts on these structures is deleted in
Cri-du-chat syndrome. The shelterin complex localizes to these structures, which can form G-quadruplexes.
The length of these structures is a measure of the Hayflick limit, and they consist of the repeated unit
TTAGGG. These structures solve the end-replication problem and get a little shorter with each cell
division. For 10 points, name these ends of chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomeres
Inability to regulate these structures is the cause of dyskeratosis congenita. These structures are often
studied using Flow-FISH, and iPSCs achieve one of their hallmark characteristics due to the
consistent presence of these structures. The enzyme complexes that give rise to these structures
uniquely do not require extrinsic primers for (*) DNA synthesis; those enzymes are a class of reverse
transcriptases. Repeated cell division causes the shrinking of these structures, which causes cells to
approach their Hayflick limit. Cancer cells can achieve replicative immortality by replicating theses
structures, which in humans are tandem repeats of the sequence TTAGGG. For 10 points, name these
sequences located at the tips of chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomeres
SIRT6 is a deacetylase that acts on these entities, to which that protein also localizes the Werner's
syndrome protein. The telombin protein POT-1 protects these entities, and Flow-FISH is most
commonly employed to analyze them in white blood cells. Klobutcher revealed these structures have
a G overhang, and their remaining (*) length defines a cell's Hayflick limit. These structures, which
consist of TTAGGG repeats, are lengthened continuously in many cancer cells. For 10 points, identify these
sequences that cap the ends of chromosomes, whose shortening upon cell division is linked to aging.
ANSWER: telomeres
These structures are degraded at an abnormally high rate in sufferers of Werner syndrome. They
can exist in stacks of formations stabilized by Hoogstein hydrogen bonding and the presence of
sodium or potassium ions between formations, which are called G-quadruplexes. The majority of
tumor cells demonstrate unusually high activity of the (*) reverse transcriptase that creates these
structures. They are constructed of a series of TTAGGG repeats, and apoptosis or senescence results when
they become too short. For 10 points, name these structures that temporarily solve the end-replication
problem by protecting the exposed ends of chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomeres
The enzyme named after these things is absent in Cri du chat (CREE do sha) syndrome and was
discovered in Tetrahymena. That enzyme, hTERT, adds TTAGGG to the ends of these things in
humans, similar to what occurs in cancer cells. These things are subject to the end replication
problem, and when very short, they lead to cellular (*) senescence (suh-NESS-unce). The discovery of
these things by Elizabeth Blackburn explained Leonard Hayflick's theory that cells could only divide a
finite number of times. For 10 points, identify these series of repeating nucleotides at the ends of
chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomeres
The shelterin complex protects these entities from non-homologous end joining, and they can form Gquadraplexes with bonding between G and C sequences. The TRAP assay is used to study the activity
of enzymes associated with them. Disruptions in TFR2 binding to these regions results in damage
signaling. The RNA-containing enzyme that extends these was discovered by Blackburn and is
responsible for the characteristic repeat of these entities. Their shortening causes the end-replication
problem, which leads to the Hayflick limit on eukaryotic cell division. For 10 points, name this region
found at the end of linear chromosomes.
ANSWER: telomeres
One portion of these structures is characterized by a seven protein shelterin complex which forms a knotlike T-loop. These structures usually take the shape of G-quadruplexes which are stacked in a parallel
fashion and contain either a potassium or sodium ion in their center. The sizes of these structures can be
determined using the q-FISH technique and are repaired with the help of TERT proteins. The number of
times a cell can divide due to limitations in these structures is known as the Hayflick limit. Probably
evolved as a way to limit the 'end replication problem', For 10 points, identify these 'caps' of repeating
DNA at the ends of chromosomes, the shortening of which is thought to cause aging-related diseases.
ANSWER: telomeres
SNARE proteins facilitate reassembly of Golgi bodies during this event, and subpore complexes bind to
partially decondensing chromosomes, resulting in several karyomeres. In plant cells, the creation of the new
cell plate occurs during this stage, and in animals it generally produces a cleavage furrow, ultimately
resulting in two identical daughter cells. Formation of nuclear envelopes also begins to occur during this
event. Occuring between anaphase and cytokinesis, for 10 points, identify this stage of mitosis.
ANSWER: telophase
The TRPM8 receptor is activated either directly or indirectly by a change in this variable. The
symptoms of multiple sclerosis worsen with a change in this variable in Uhthoff's phenomenon. If
altered, this variable can change the firing rate of nerve fibers in the pit organ. It lowers for the
annealing step and increases again for the elongation step of PCR. The (*) HSP chaperone proteins are
upregulated when this variable increases. Progesterone slightly increases the value of this variable on the
day of ovulation, whereas in men, spermatogenesis requires that it be slightly lower in the testes than in the
rest of the body. A large drop in this variable results in hypothermia. For 10 points, name this variable,
which in the human body is optimally 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: basal body temperature [also accept heat, I suppose]
The patient L.H. studied by N. L. Etcoff had a lesion in this area, and its active regions vary systematically
given target rotation. The Meyer's loop that emanates from the lateral geniculate nucleus traverses through
it, and the uncus lies at its anterior extent. Including the fusiform gyrus, it contains Brodmann's areas
twenty-one and twenty-two. Wilder Penfield famously stimulated its ventromedial area, leading to patients
recalling complex experiences like hearing the song "White Christmas." Lesion to its right side causes
inability to recognize faces in prosopagnosia. Lying below the Sylvian fissure, for 10 points, name this lobe
of the brain that receives the ventral stream, involved in object recognition and music perception, found
anterior to the occipital and below the parietal lobe.
ANSWER: temporal
A common tumor of these organs is diagnosed by staining for both PLAP and c-Kit. One cancer of
these organs shows Schiller-Duval bodies on pathology, and originates from remnants of the
endodermal sinus. These organs are tethered in place by the gubernaculum, and patients with the
bell-clapper deformity have increased risk of necrotic injury to these organs. When the
iliohypogastric nerve is stimulated, these organs are drawn towards the body in the (*) cremaster
reflex. Among the cells present in this organ, which contains the seminiferous tubules, are the Sertoli cells
and the Leydig cells, and the products of this organ move into the vas deferens after undergoing meiosis For
10 points, name this organs that reside in the scrotum, the site of sperm production in males.
ANSWER: testes [accept more vulgar answers]
Blood levels of this molecule and its 11-keto derivative are elevated in stoplight parrotfish during the
initial- to terminal-phase transition. Injecting passerines with this molecule triggers a catecholaminedriven signaling cascade that induces singing out of season and increases vulnerability to cuckoldry
by shifting effort from parental investment to extrapair copulations. This molecule induces the
transformation of the mesonephric duct and undergoes 5 alpha reduction to its dihydro form, which
shrinks (*) hair follicles. With its precursor DHEA, this molecule is produced in Leydig cells exposed to
LH. This molecule binds to AR in Sertoli cells, where it allows post-meiotic germ cells to detach when
mature, completing spermatogenesis. For 10 points, name this foremost androgen, a hormone that regulates
male sexual characteristics and is mimicked by anabolic steroids.
ANSWER: testosterone [accept T]
The drug finasteride inhibits this hormone's conversion into a more active metabolite. Oxidation
and loss of a methyl group converts this hormone into estradiol, as catalyzed by aromatase. Like
follicle-stimulating hormone, Sertoli cells transduce signals from this (*) hormone, activating genes
involved in germ cell differentiation. This anabolic steroid secreted by Leydig cells is part of the androgen
family, and it promotes the development of some secondary sex characteristics. For 10 points, name this
steroid hormone, secreted primarily by the testes.
ANSWER: testosterone
This hormone regulates clotting by controlling production of thromboxane A2 receptors, and this
hormone can be converted to estradiol. It can also be converted to DHT, a stronger version of this
hormone. LH stimulates Leydig cells to produce it, and it prompts embryonic development of
seminiferous tubules. Sertoli cells use it for spermatogenesis, and this anabolic steroid also causes the
growth of facial hair and deepening of the voice. For 10 points, name this hormone responsible for
development of the male sex organs.
ANSWER: testosterone
The enzyme 5-alpha reductase reduces this substance to DHT. Low levels of this substance prompt a
feedback loop which increases the production of GnRh. A protein which binds to this substance is
produced in Sertoli cells. The cells which primarily produce it are named for Leydig and are
scattered between the (*) seminiferous tubules. This hormone is converted into estradiol by the enzyme
aromatase. A low amount of this androgen can lead to decreased facial hair. For ten points, name this sex
hormone which facilitates the production of sperm and is contrasted with estrogen.
ANSWER: testosterone [prompt on "androgen" until mentioned]
Leydig cells may form benign tumors that emit this substance. Insects contain ecdysone which is
similar to this chemical in humans. A deficiency of this hormone causes andropause. It reduces the
risk for (*) osteoporosis and is also used to treat prostate cancer, though can it be used as an anabolic
steroid to increase muscle mass. Produced in the testes, for 10 points, name this hormone responsible for
male sex characteristics.
ANSWER: testosterone
This hormone is activated by five-alpha reductase into its dihydro form, and during development
this hormone is responsible for maintaining the Wolffian duct. It requires 17-beta-HSD for its
synthesis. This hormone is produced in response to LH in Leydig cells. Among its effects are the
development of (*) axillary and beard hair, and it is produced in the testes. For 10 points, name this steroid
sex hormone responsible for developing the male reproductive system.
ANSWER: testosterone
Lesions in this structure can cause hemiballism, resulting in the most violent type of involuntary limb
movement. In humans, this structure is the largest in the diencephalon and its two halves sit on each side of
the third ventricle. The somesthetic nuclei connect this structure to the midbrain, and by linking the
cerebellum to the frontal lobe, it permits voluntary motor control. Blocking stimulus signals during sleep,
name this "sensory switchboard" of the brain that relays information on sight, sound, touch, and pain from
the sense organs to the cerebral cortex.
ANSWER: thalamus [do not accept "hypothalamus"]
Its nonspecific portion contains the parafasciular complex and the centre median, both part of the
intralaminar system. It is gated by the somatotopically organized nucleus reticularis, and its ventral
posterolateral nucleus receives the posterior columns. It takes mammillary input and sends it to the
cingulate cortex, while also taking inputs from the basal ganglia and cerebellum and relaying them to the
premotor and motor cortices. Also playing a role in sleep, For ten points, name this part of the brain, whose
lower middle position supports its role as the brain's relay station.
ANSWER: thalamus
This protein can be prepared in a lab using the Lundblad procedure, and it possesses an A Chain and a B
Chain, the latter of which is similar to trypsin (TRIP-sin). It activates Protein C as well as Factors Five and
Eight. This is a serine (SEHR-een) protease (PRO-tee-ase) that is deactivated by hirudin, which is found in
the salivary glands of leeches. This protein cleaves fibrinogen (figh-BRIN-oh-jen) to create fibrin (FIGHbrin) and initiates reactions that cause inflammation and activate blood platelets. Name this protein that
plays a major role in blood coagulation.
ANSWER: thrombin
Albino3 is required to insert proteins into these structure's membranes. VIPP1 is required for
their formation, and proteins move into their lumen via the cpSecA pathway or the twin-arginine
translocator. Their lumen contains the oxygen-evolving complex, and among the proteins localizing
to them are the cytochrome b6f complex. Their lumen has a pH of 4 while the medium surrounding
them has pH 8. Antenna complexes containing carotenoids are found here, and they also contain the
(*) reaction centers of photosystems I and II. A stack of these is called a granum, and they use chlorophyll
for their most notable function. For 10 points, name these small sacs found inside the chloroplast, which
carry out the light reactions of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: thylakoids [prompt on "chloroplasts", "grana", or "granum" throughout]
The chemotherapy agent 5-Fluorouracil acts as an inhibitor in the synthesis of its pryimidine variety. A
common mutation in DNA can occur when these namesake dimers are formed from the exposure of UV
light thus causing kinks in the DNA strand. This is also known as 5-methyluracil since it can be derived by
methylation of uracil on the fifth carbon. Also because it is so close in its composition, this pyrimidine is
replaced with uracil when DNA is transcribed to RNA. FTP name this nucleobase in the nucleic acid of
DNA that is complementary to adenine and is symbolized by the letter T.
ANSWER: thymine
A kinase that acts on this compound is responsible for activating the anti-HSV drug acyclovir.
5-methyl-cytosine deaminates (dee-AM-in-ates) to form this compound. Xeroderma pigmentosum results
when cells are unable to remove cyclobutane dimers of this compound created by UV light. The Azidoform
of this compound is a chain terminator and early HIV drug. For 10 points, name this nucleotide base
that is unique to DNA and forms two hydrogen bonds with adenine.
ANSWER: DNA base T [or thymidine; or thymine; or thymidylate; do not accept "thiamine"]
A congenital absence of this organ can be caused by DiGeorge syndrome, and tumors of this organ are
associated with myasthenia gravis. Following puberty, it is gradually replaced with adipose cells in a
process called involution. Nude mice are useful in research because they lack this organ, allowing foreign
tissues to be grafted. In its cortex, MHCs are introduced to positively select for hematopoietic progenitor
cells that bind strongly. For 10 points, name this immune and lymphatic organ that produces T-cells and
facilitates their maturation.
ANSWER: thymus
This structure is absent when the FOXN1 (read "fox-N-one") gene is deleted. Its epithelial cells express the
AIRE gene and contain Hassall corpuscles. One syndrome in which it is missing is often associated with
hypocalcemia due to low parathyroid activity and is known as DiGeorge syndrome. Patients with
myasthenia gravis often have hyperplasia of this organ. Positive selection for cells that ultimately express
either CD4 or CD8 occurs in this organ's cortex. Cancer development is often studied in mice lacking this
organ because they fail to produce cells that recognize MHC-bound antigens. For 10 points, name this
organ that shrinks as a person ages and that is the maturation site for T cells.
ANSWER: thymus
TSLP is an important cytokine protein produced in Hassall's corpuscles in this structure, and complete
DiGeorge syndrome can result in this structure's absence. Because it gets seeded by blood-borne
lymphocytes from the yolk sac and fetal liver, this organ is the first to become lymphoid in the fetus. During
puberty, this structure undergoes its namesake involution, during which its cells are increasingly replaced by
adipose tissue. CD-4 and CD-8 surface markers develop on lymphocytes processed here. For 10 points,
name this organ of the immune system which lies anterior to the heart and is the namesake of T cells.
ANSWER: Thymus
The functional units of this organ contain a glycoprotein-rich substance known as colloid. This organ's
namesake isthmus connects the lower portions of its two lobes. A set of four organs that lie behind this
larger organ release a hormone that allow osteoclasts to reabsorb bone mineral and thus allows calcium to
enter the blood stream. One disease of this organ results in severely bulging eyes. Autoimmune disorders of
this gland include Hashimoto's and Graves diseases. Rates of metabolism are affected by the T3 and T4
hormones released by this gland. For 10 points, name this endocrine gland located in the neck that can swell
into a goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Thiourea (THY-oh-yu-REE-uh) blocks the action of compounds released by this body part. One
hormone excreted by it induces the metamorphosis of frogs. It contains a pyramidal lobe. Overactivity of
this gland can result in Graves' disease. It regulates blood calcium levels by releasing calcitonin
(CAL-sih-TOE-nin). Proper functioning of this gland requires iodine. For 10 points, name this gland in the
neck that helps regulate metabolism and can be afflicted with goiters (GOY-ters).
ANSWER: thyroid
Baber described parenchymatous cells in this organ of a dog, and in humans, one deficiency associated with
this organ is cretinism. Four glands surrounding it secrete a hormone that raises the level of calcium in the
blood, opposing the calcitonin produced by this gland. It has two lobes connected by an isthmus and is the
main gland affected by a disease that can cause the eyes to protrude, Graves' disease. This gland's
namesake hormone is produced from tyrosine and iodine. Name this endocrine gland located below the
larnyx, whose malfunction can lead to a goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
One severe disorder affecting this gland is called myxedema coma, and a severe overproduction of hormone
here results in its namesake "storm." One way to calm an overproduction of hormone here is by creating a
Wolff-Chaikoff block using an overabundance of a necessary ion, and that overproduction most notably
results in a protrusion of the eyeballs. This is, for 10 points, what gland affected by diseases like Plummer's,
Hashimoto's, and Grave's disease and requires iodine to synthesize its namesake hormone?
ANSWER: Thyroid gland
Some cells in this organ develop from the ultimobrachial body, and dysgenesis of this organ is
linked to Pax8 mutations. This organ descends through the foramen cecum during development.
Granulomas appear in this organ in De Quervain's disease. In another disease, anti-peroxidase
antibodies attack this organ. Exophthalmos, or eye-popping, is a symptom of overstimulation of this
organ, whose main product is cleaved from colloid and is secreted by (*) follicular cells. C cells in this
organ secrete a peptide that opposes the action of PTH, called calcitonin. The main product of this organ is
created by fusing two molecules of tyrosine together and adding iodine, which is why iodine deficiency
causes goiter. For 10 points, name this gland in the neck.
ANSWER: thyroid
An autoimmune disease involving antibodies against this structure's namesake peroxidase causes destruction
of its follicles and is named for Hashimoto. Most of it is located below the cricoid cartilage, but it also
extends up the sides. PTH opposes the action of one of the hormones it produces, and iodine and tyrosine
are required to produce two others. Deficiency of those two hormones, which are named for it, is known as
cretinism in young children. The third hormone, calcitonin, is involved in blood calcium homeostasis. For
10 points, name this butterfly-shaped gland in the lower neck which is enlarged in Graves' disease, creating
goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
A symporter of this organ is inhibited by pertechnate ions, and this organ's function is inhibited by propylthio-uracil and methimazole. This organ forms the foramen cecum as it descends during development. The
parafollicular cells of this organ produce a peptide that opposes the action of PTH. One disease of this
organ is caused by antibodies stimulating the TSH receptor and causes eye-popping; that is Graves' disease.
When this gland is malnourished, it can swell in a goiter. For 10 points, name this gland in the neck that
requires iodine to function.
ANSWER: thyroid
Its acini are arranged in a circle around a glycoprotein colloid while a peptide that can treat Paget's disease
derives from its parafollicular cells, while its two lobes are connected by an isthmus. It can be afflicted by
Graves' Disease as immunoglobulin activates it whereas aging causes it to shrink and to shift lower down.
Hypersecretion caused by excessive stimulation from the pituitary may lead to a condition where it enlarges
into a huge mass. Secreting both calcitonin from C cells and namesake hormones that require iodine, for 10
points, name this butterfly-shaped organ located below the larynx that can become a goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
This structure is attached to the cricoid cartilage by the ligament of Berry, and mutations in the
CTLA-4 gene can trigger T-cells to attack this structure's Hurthle cells in another autoimmune
disease. The parafollicular cells of this structure secrete a hormone which helps regulate blood
calcium levels, while hormones secreted by its follicular cells regulate the rate of metabolism. (*)
Hashimoto's disease affects this structure, while cretinism results from a loss of function in it. Hyperactivity
of this gland can result in Graves' disease. This gland secretes calcitonin and T3 and can be enlarged due to
a deficiency of iodine. For ten points, name this butterfly-shaped gland located in front of the trachea which
is affected by goiter and secretes thyroxine.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
This organ is fixed to the cricoid and cricopharyngeus muscle, and is covered with a thin, fibrous
sheath. One type of autoimmune disease that affects this organ is associated with CTLA-4 gene
polymorphisms; that disease is Hashimoto's disease. Follicular cells in this organ create namesake (*)
hormones, which when produced in excess can cause rapid heartbeat and abnormal metabolic rates. Another
hormone released by this organ inhibits calcium absorption in the small intestine, and osteoclast activity in
bones. Affected by Graves' disease, for ten points, name this hormone that produces T3, T4, and calcitonin,
that when enlarged becomes a goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Some of the hormones produced by this gland are derived from tyrosine [TIE-ruh-seen], and another
hormone is produced in this gland's parafollicular C cells. This gland is overactive in people with Graves'
disease, which can lead to bulging eyes. Responsible for secreting calcitonin [kal-sih-TOE-nin], this gland
is swollen in people with iodine deficiencies that cause goiter. Name this gland that surrounds the trachea
[TRAY-kee-uh] just below the Adam's apple in the neck.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Mutations on the CRYM gene sometimes result in blindness because it transcribes a binding protein for a
molecule that is produced by this organ, which has beta receptors in the cochlea. The drug methimazole is
used to treat conditions that affect this organ. This organ, affected by papillary cancer, is the location of
parafollicular cells. It is attacked by T-cells in Hashimoto and Graves' diseases. This gland secretes
calcitonin and the hormones T3 and T4, and its function can be tested by measuring iodine uptake. Its
enlargement is known as goiter. For ten points, name this gland on the neck that maintains body metabolism
rates.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
It's not the pancreas or intestine, but CTLA-4 polymorphisms signal an autoimmune disease of this
organ which is treated with PTU. The foramen cecum forms during the descent of this organ, which
contains parafollicular and follicular cells. Another autoimmune disease of this organ causes exophthalmos
(ehk-sof-THAL-muss), or eye-popping, and is Graves disease. Goiters occur in this gland when there isn't
enough iodine to make its namesake hormone. For 10 points, name this gland in the neck.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Hashimoto's disease in this organ results in under production of this organ's hormones, which results in
cretinism. By contrast, hyperactivity of this organ is known as Graves' disease. TSH stimulates this organ
to produce T3 and T4, and another important hormone produced by this gland opposes insulin, calcitonin.
For 10 points, name this organ of the endocrine system, a swelling of which is caused by a lack of iodine
and is called goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid
This organ develops from cells at the base of the pharynx in the third to fourth week of gestation. T-cells
attack it in Hashimoto's disease, and hyperactivity of it is seen in Graves' disease. The pituitary gland
releases this gland's namesake "stimulating hormone" to regulate its activity, and a deficiency of a certain
element causes this two-lobed organ to enlarge and become a goiter. That element is necessary for the
formation of T3 and T4. For 10 points, name this gland in the neck that requires iodine to form its
hormones.
ANSWER: thyroid
The destruction of this body part's namesake peroxidase by antibodies may be a cause of Hashimoto's
Disease. This structure produces namesake hormones that are tyrosine derivatives. Those hormones are
overproduced when this producer of calcitonin is afflicted with Graves' Disease. A lack of iodine may
cause a swelling of it called a goiter. For 10 points, name this endocrine gland found in the neck.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
One disease of this body part is known as Prasad's syndrome when present with mania. Another
disorder of this organ causes one's eyes to bulge and a non-pitting edema to develop on the lower
extremities. Those conditions affecting this gland are Hashimoto's disease and (*) Graves's disease.
This gland secretes a hormone that inhibits osteoclast activity, calcitonin. For 10 points, name this
butterfly-shaped gland, located inferior to the Adam's apple, which secretes the hormones triiodothyronine
and thyroxine, and is enlarged in the iodine deficiency disease goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
A disease of this organ was the first to be recognized as an autoimmune disease. Another disease
of this organ causes the eyes to bulge as a result of this organ being overactive. This organ, which
is affected by Hashimoto's disease and Graves' disease, produces a hormone that opposes PTH and
lowers blood calcium, called calcitonin. Underproduction of this organ's namesake hormones results
in cretinism, and this organ produces a pair of hormones called T3 and T4, which contain iodine.
Name this organ affected by goiter, a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
The posterior extensions of this organ's lobes are called Zuckerkandl's tubercles, and those lobes are
connected by an isthmus. Autoimmune diseases of this organ are detected by a peroxidase antibody test and
include Hashimoto's disease. Its malfunction in children can lead to cretinism, and this organ's
parafollicular cells produce a hormone which aids in the metabolism of phosphorus and calcium, calcitonin.
For 10 points, identify this organ which enlarges in Graves' disease during iodine deficiency, resulting in a
goiter.
ANSWER: Thyroid gland
During development of the fetus, this structure begins at a duct in the foramen cecum region of the
tongue. One condition where this structure is overactive is known as Graves disease. Parafollicular
cells in this structure produce a substance that reduces the level of calcium two plus ions in the blood,
while the two main hormones produced in this structure are derived from the amino acid tyrosine.
Iodine deficiency leads to a swelling of this organ known as a goiter. For 10 points, name this largest
endocrine gland in the body found in the neck which produces the T3 and T4 hormones.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
This anatomical structure is involved in the Jod-Basedow and Wolff-Chaikoff effects. The gene Pax8 is
required for the formation of its follicular cells, and antibodies are produced against its namesake
peroxidase enzyme in an autoimmune disease named for Hashimoto. The iodination of tyrosine is involved
in creating its namesake hormones, deficiencies of which in newborns can lead to cretinism. Found on the
ventral surface of the trachea, this bi-lobed structure produces calcitonin. For 10 points, name this gland, an
enlarged version of which is associated with Graves' disease, and is known as a goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
A deficiency of the hormones produced by this structure manifests as cretinism in infants. Graves'
disease can cause overactivity of this structure. Two hormones produced by this structure are formed from
reactions with tyrosine and iodine. Proper regulation of those two hormones, T3 and T4, ensures that goiter,
or enlargement of this structure, does not occur. For 10 points, name this large endocrine gland in the neck
area that should not be confused with the thymus.
ANSWER: thyroid gland [do not accept or prompt on "thymus"]
A cancer that affects this structure is characterized by optically clear nuclei of neoplastic cells that are
referred to as "Orphan Annie eyes." Located on the ventral surface of the trachea, this structure is damaged
in an autoimmune disease named for Hashimoto. This structure secretes one hormone that lowers blood
calcium levels and two iodine-containing hormones. Cretinism is a result of loss of function of this gland, an
enlargement of which is goiter. For 10 points, name this gland that secretes calcitonin and T3 and T4, which
are known as tri-iodo-thyronine and thyroxine.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Zuckerkandl's tubercle is a pyramidal extension of this body component. Another key feature of this
structure is Berry's ligament. Hurthle cells are associated with Hashimoto's disease, an autoimmune
disorder affecting this structure. Its parafollicular cells produce calcitonin, and when it is overactive in
producing a similarly named hormone, weight loss and rapid heartbeat can result. A more well-known
disease associated with it is Graves' disease, and a lack of iodine can cause the enlargement of it. For 10
points, name this endocrine gland in the neck that is afflicted by goiters.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Malfunction of this organ in utero can result in cretinism if it goes untreated after birth.
Underactivity of this organ in utero can result in Hashimoto's disease, and (*) Graves's disease results
from hyperactivity of it. This organ stimulates resorption of calcium by producing calcitonin. This organ's
namesake peroxidase helps the body use tyrosine to produce its T4 and T3 hormones. Iodine deficiency
causes this organ to increase in size. For 10 points, name this endocrine gland which, when enlarged,
becomes a goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Two of its products play a role in fetal brain maturation, and OATP1C1 and MTC8 have been implicated in
their transport across the blood-brain barrier. In humans, this organ is on the same plane as the cricoid
cartilage, and its namesake superior artery emerges from a point above the origin of the ascending
pharyngeal, lingual, and facial arteries. Its follicular cells secrete tyrosine derivatives, its parafollicular cells
secrete calcitonin, which is opposed by PTH produced by four glands embedded in its surface.
Triiodothyronine and thyroxine, or T3 and T4, are the primary products of, for 10 points, this butterflyshaped organ, which may develop a goitre because of iodine deficiency.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Deficiency of this gland's namesake hormone leads to cretinism in newborns, and thyroxine is required to
form that hormone. This butterfly-shaped gland sits at the front of the neck around the larynx and trachea.
Iodine is necessary for the synthesis of this gland's namesake hormone, and a deficiency of iodine causes it
to become enlarged. For 10 points, name this endocrine gland that forms a goiter when not enough iodine is
available.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
In one condition in this gland, antibodies attack a peroxidase or a large dimeric protein here, and
that condition can occur alongside an inflammation of orbital fat and extraocular muscles more
commonly associated with another disease here. The latter condition is treated by carbimazole and
results in "orange-peel" skin and increased sympathetic nervous system function. Its parafollicular
cells secrete a hormone that inhibits osteoclast activity and the absorption of calcium. This gland's major
hormone is activated by deiodinases; relatedly, this gland is enlarged due to iodine-deficient diets in a
condition called goiter. For 10 points, name this gland that secretes thyroxine.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Hashimoto's disease is an autoimmune disease which may result from low levels of a hormone
produced by this gland; congenital errors in that hormone's synthesis can lead to cretinism. Another
disease of this gland is Graves' disease, which is characterized by the presence of a goiter, an enlarged
one of these glands. It produces calcitonin but is better known for two namesake hormones that
contain three and four iodine ions. For 10 points, name this gland in the neck that secretes Thyroxine.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
One cancer affecting this organ results in "Orphan Annie" nuclei. Another disease affecting this organ
causes the eyes to bulge. Graves' disease affects this organ, whose parafolliculuar
(pah-rah-foh-LICK-yoo-lar) or C cells produce a hormone that reduces blood calcium called calcitonin
(cal-sa-tone-in). Its namesake peroxidase (purr-OCKS-sih-days) helps produce two tyrosine
(TIE-row-seen)-derived hormones called T3 and T4. Iodine deficiency causes a goiter in this organ. For 10
points, name this butterfly-shaped endocrine gland in the neck.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
One disease attacking this organ is diagnosed by finding anti-peroxidase antibodies. Another
autoimmune disease of this organ causes exopthalmos, or eye-popping. Besides Hashimoto's disease and
Graves disease, this organ is also dysfunctional in cretinism and myxedema. This organ's parafollicular
cells produce calcitonin. It enlarges in patients who are deficient in iodine, causing goiter. For 10 points,
name this gland in the neck.
ANSWER: Thyroid gland
The CTLA-4 gene can trigger T-cells to attack the follicular cells of this structure, leading to
Hashimoto's disease. Another condition arises when antibodies bind to a receptor and continually
stimulate it, which can lead to blindness in extreme cases; that condition is called Graves's disease. The
parafollicular cells of this gland secrete a hormone that reduces blood calcium levels, calcitonin, and its
namesake hormones require iodine. For 10 points, name this gland that produces thyroxine and
enlarges in goiter.
ANSWER: thyroid gland
Like Hirschsprung's disease, mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are associated with a particular
cancer in this organ, which is also the site of Hurthle cell neoplasm. Anaplastic, medullary, and neoplasms
comprise most malignancies of this organ. The main product of this gland is overproduced in Graves
disease and under-produced in Hashimoto's disease. This organ, which contains two lobes and an isthmus,
has C-cells which secrete a hormone that reduces blood calcium, known as calcitonin. The main product of
this gland is produced in colloidal form, and is produced in T3 and T4 forms. For 10 points, name this
organ which is the site of goiters, a gland in the neck that needs iodine to function.
ANSWER: thyroid
One carcinoma of this organ shows characteristic Little Orphan Annie nuclei and psammoma bodies. One
condition that affects this organ is treated using a pair of drugs that carry a high risk of depleting all
granulocytes, called methimidazole or propylthiouracil. When one product of this organ is under-produced,
mucopolysaccharides are deposited in the skin, causing myxedema. C cells in this organ produce a
substance that opposes PTH called calcitonin, and diseases that affect this organ include Graves' disease
and Hashimoto's disease. This organ is acted upon by TSH, and it secretes T3 and T4. Name this organ,
found below the Adam's apple that can form goiters due to iodine deficiency.
ANSWER: thyroid gland [do not accept or prompt on "parathyroid gland"]
One pathogen named for this organism encodes a protease used to cleave Tandem Affinity
Purification tags, and another pathogen of this organism has one of the earliest discovered satellite
viruses. This organism produces anabasine and anatabine. One product of this organism heavily upregulates alpha-4-beta-2 acetylcholine receptors in the ventral tegmental area and lends its name to
the type of acetylcholine receptor found in the (*) neuromuscular junction. Iwanowsky isolated another
virus that infects this organism, which was also studied by Rosalind Franklin. That organism is a long
rodlike virus that causes leaf mottling. For 10 points, name this plant that has a namesake mosaic virus and
produces the alkaloid nicotine.
ANSWER: tobacco plant [accept tobacco mosaic virus or tobacco etch virus before "namesake mosaic virus"; prompt on nicotine]
Tseng et al attempted to coat it with platinum nanoparticles, and this agent was the subject of one of
the first biological experiments using optical tweasers. In 1971, observations by Butler and Klug of
this agent established that a 20S protein aggregate nucleated the interaction of its coat protein, while
Caspar first described its stacked (*) disk structure. It is the namesake of carboxylates which play a key
role in its disassembly, while Rosalind Franklin showed that its RNA was embedded in its protein,
expanding on Watson's research. Wendell Stanley discovered the lyotropic liquid crystallization of, FTP,
what first virus to be discovered, notable for its infection of family solanaceae, which includes tobacco
plants?
ANSWER: tobacco mosaic virus
It is suspected that it uses the p30 polypeptide to move via the plasmodesmata. The first evidence for this
mechanism was uncovered by Marinus Beijerinck who used serial administrations to show that it was not a
poison. Beijerinck also replicated Dimitry Ivanovsky's experiments using porcelain Chamberlain filters and
called it a "living fluid." In 1955 Rosalind Franklin proposed that its RNA payload was not on the axis but
instead in a groove in the protein sheath. Causing namesake discoloration and spotting on infected plants,
for 10 points, name this first disease classified as a virus nearly a century after it first started devastating a
North Carolina crop.
ANSWER: tobacco mosaic virus or TMV (prompt on just "virus")
In 2006, Tseng et al. showed that its rigidity could help stabilize platinum nanoparticles at its surface to
create digital memory. The Fraenkel-Conrat method allows one to construct this, types of which include the
vulgare and Japanese common strains. Rosalind Franklin supposedly left her work on DNA to build the first
full-sized model of it for the 1958 World's Fair, though it was Wendell Stanley who crystallized it in 1935.
For 10 points, identify this RNA virus named for the discoloration patterns it brings about in infected
leaves, the first virus to be discovered.
ANSWER: tobacco mosaic virus [accept TMV]
A satellite to this infectious agent worsens its symptoms and was fully modeled by Klaus Schulten.
Klug reported a cylindrical intermediate essential to the formation of the long helical rod shape of
this infectious agent. Fraenkel-Conrat showed that it reproduces using RNA, and its p30 protein causes
swelling in the plasmodesmata of its hosts. Wendell Stanley's experiment on this organism showed that
after this virus had crystallized, it was still fully functional. It causes a namesake mottling pattern on leaves
and can also infect tomatos and peppers. For 10 points, name this first virus discovered, which affects its
namesake plants.
ANSWER: tobacco mosaic virus
Its central type typically requires apoptosis, while the transcription of relevant proteins in the thymus is
initiated by AIRE. TCR-alpha and light chain receptor editing happens in some cases; in others, naive cells
in the absence of costimulation merely display anergy. In the absence of its acquired form, transplant
rejection may occur; its induced form is used to treat allergies so the immune system will stop responding to
the presence of an antigen. FTP, identify this characteristic that can be built up over time by someone who
frequently consumes drugs, poison, or alcohol.
ANSWER: immune tolerance
One of these is the antigen of Anti Scl-70 and several inhibitors of them are found in genus Camptotheca,
such as irinotecan and topotecan. Their mechanism involves the formation of a protein bridge and these
enzymes discovered by Wang are able to catenate circular DNA. Type II, which requires ATP hydrolysis,
changes the linking number in steps of two. Gyrase is a special bacterial form of, for 10 points, what class
of enzymes that reduce breaking and supercoliling by introducing single or double stranded breaks into
DNA.
ANSWER: topoisomerases
Along with the centromeres, antibodies targeting these proteins are present in patients with
scleroderma, and a drug that inhibits these enzymes is administered alongside bleomycin and
cisplatin in a common chemotherapy regimen; that drug is etopside. Fluoroquinoline and novobiocin
inhibits this enzyme in bacteria, and cre recombinase is homologous to these enzymes. The active site
tyrosine in this enzyme covalently binds to the gate segment, and then the T segment is passed
through the break. DNA gyrase is one type of these enzymes, and they are responsible for unhooking
circular DNA segments after replication and altering the supercoiling and linking properties of DNA. For
10 points, name these enzymes that, like helicase, untwist and unwind DNA, usually for replication
purposes.
ANSWER: Topoisomerase
One unique version of this enzyme was discovered in 2006 in the archaeabacteria Methanopyrus
kandleri and possesses a buried active site that requires a change in conformation for activity. That
version, known as "V", has a controlled rotary mechanism, as does another class of this enzyme that
includes a viral type that has sequence-specific binding, that being the (*) 1B class. Still another class
of this enzyme is able to fix the catenation problem using a two-gate mechanism that effectively cuts both
sides of its target; that is the type II version of this enzyme. This enzyme generally acts to change the
linking number of its target to disentangle chromosomes before mitosis and fix replication supercoiling.
Responsible for winding, unwinding, and cutting a certain molecule, FTP, identify these enzymes whose
name reflects their function of re-arranging the structural configuration of the molecules that comprise the
topology of DNA.
ANSWER: topoisomerases [accept Topoisomerase II "the Drunkard" from David Seal]
This enzyme was shown to be a component of the complex pol II holoenzyme, implying that this enzyme is
necessary for CDC. Antibiotics like quinolones target these enzymes by forming a complex that inhibits
these molecules' ligase domains but not their nuclease domains, and cancer drugs like amsacrine and
camptothecins target these enzymes. Gyrase is a member of the type II class of these enzymes, which
reduces linking number by two. The first one was discovered in E. coli by Wang. These enzymes are needed
because of tension introduced by the function of helicase. For 10 points, name this class of enzymes that
create small breaks to help to reduce coiling and supercoiling in DNA.
ANSWER: topoisomerases I or II
A diffuse, systemic form of scleroderma arises from the body forming antibodies against these
enzymes, and quinolones are antibiotics that inhibit these enzymes in bacteria. Chemotherapy
inhibitors of their first subgroup include camptothecins. These enzymes change a quantity equal to the
combination of twist and writhe, and a bacterial example of the second type of these enzymes is called
gyrase. For 10 points, name these enzymes whose two types are differentiated based on whether they cut
one or both strands of the double helix, whose function is to change the linking number of DNA.
ANSWER: topoisomerase
The protein that causes this condition appears to be restricted to binding to the V-beta variable chain
and has immunogenic properties independent from its lethality according to experiments conducted
on its "ovine" mutant. One criteria for this disease is the desquamation of the palms and soles after 12 weeks. The rash characteristic of this condition is fine, red, papular, and is often described as
sunburn-like. The protein responsible for triggering this condition binds to both MHC class II and
TCR, resulting in the activation of up to 20% of the patient's (*) T-cells and massive release of TNFalpha and IL-2. This condition causes a cytokine storm and multiple organ failure. For 10 points, name this
potentially fatal disease caused by a superantigen secreted by Staphylococcus aureus, an outbreak of which
was associated with the overuse of super-absorbent tampons.
ANSWER: toxic shock syndrome [or TSS]
The bottom of this organ is the carina, and its enlargement is called Mounier-Kuhn syndrome. It exists just
below the spiracles of some invertebrates. Though its back is muscular, most of it consists of rings of
cartilage, and it contains goblet cells which produce mucin. The top of it is located by the cricothyroid
tissues, and it extends from the larynx until it branches into the bronchi. Identify this organ commonly
called a windpipe.
ANSWER: trachea (prompt on "windpipe")
In eukaryotes, this process is followed by a sequence of 5' (five prime) capping, 3' (three prime)
polyadenylation, and splicing of exons; this produces its monocistronic type of product. The lac operon
insures that structural genes do not undergo this process by automatically attaching a repressor protein to
the relevant operator. This process begins when a promoter is recognized and usually only takes place on a
so-called template strand of DNA. Consisting of initiation, elongation, and termination and following
translation, for 10 points, name this process by which complementary base pairing is used to convert DNA
into mRNA.
ANSWER: transcription
Among the initiators of this process are NF kappa B, sigma boxes, and TATA boxes. The product
of this process is spliced to remove introns and is augmented with a poly A tail. This process is
catalyzed by RNA polymerase (poh-LIHM-ehr-ase) II and sees the nucleotide (NEW-klee-oh-tide)
uracil replace thymime (THIGH-meen). The resulting product of this process is sent to a (*)
ribosome to produce a peptide chain during translation. For 10 points, name this biological process in
which DNA is read and transformed into RNA.
ANSWER: transcription [or gene expression]
This process can be terminated through a palindromic G-C rich hairpin loop or by a protein factor
designated "Rho." In bacteria, this process can be initiated by a sigma factor, while in eukaryotes, it
generally begins after TFIID binds to the TATA box. Unlike a similar process, this does not form
Okazaki fragments because only the 3' strand is used, and the (*) reverse of this process is used by
retroviruses like HIV. Spliceosomes remove introns following this process, during which polymerase adds
complementary nucleotides and replaces thymine with uracil. For ten points, name this process in which
mRNA is synthesized from a DNA template, sometimes contrasted with translation.
ANSWER: transcription (do not accept or prompt on "translation" or "replication")
Termination of this process can be Rho-dependent or Rho-independent. Initiation of this process often
involves a sigma factor, and in prokaryotes, often involves attachment to the Pribnow box. A 5-prime cap
and a poly A tail are added to its product in eukaryotes. Retroviruses employ a reverse form of this process.
In this process, RNA polymerase binds to a promoter and creates a molecule that is later used in translation.
For 10 points, name this process in which messenger RNA is produced from DNA.
ANSWER: transcription
This process can be detected via MS2 hybridization or a Northern blot, and its beginning is one
homology between archaea and eukaryotes. This process's namesake unit must contain at least one
gene, and it is the process by which the subunits of the ribosomes are made. RNA is made longer
lasting with a variation of this process which produces cDNA and is done by telomerase and the [*]
HIV virus, called reverse this. This process is done from the five prime to the three prime direction, unlike
DNA replication. Performed by RNA polymerase to make products to send to ribosomes, for 10 points,
name this process of the creation of mRNA from DNA.
ANSWER: transcription
The rate of this process can be assessed by a nuclear run-on assay. In some organisms it may be
terminated by the rho factor, while in others it begins after the phosphorylation of the CTD. The
results of this process are modified concurrently by snRNPs. The TATA box is the binding site for a
holoenzyme that carries out this process. The five prime caps of the products of this process serve as
binding sites for ribosomes to begin (*) translation. For 10 points, name this process in which DNA is
used by RNA polymerase to create messenger RNA.
ANSWER: transcription
The remolding action of polycomb proteins prevents this process and the homeodomain is found in
"factors" of it. This process often ends with the addition of a poly(A) tail. The removal of exons, in a
process called splicing, also occurs at the end of this process. Retroviruses such as HIV are named for their
ability to perform this process in reverse. The product of this process is subsequently shipped off to the
ribosome. For 10 points, name this biological process in which a DNA sequence is used to create a
sequence of messenger RNA.
ANSWER: transcription
Some proteins responsible for activating this process belong to paired box and winged helix
classes, and sigma factors help initiate it. TPB binds to the TATA box in one portion of this process,
after which a five (*) prime cap and a three-prime poly-adenosine tail is added. This process is divided
into three key steps: initiation, elongation, and termination. For 10 points, idenfity this process, the
synthesis of messenger RNA from a DNA template, which is followed up by translation.
ANSWER: transcription
Rifampicin is a medicine used to treat tuberculosis by inhibiting this. The complimentary sequence of a
sequence which signals the beginning of this occurs near the 3' end of the 16s rRNA, and is UCCUCC. The
eukaryotic equivalent of that sequence is the Kozak sequence, while the sequence itself is known as the
Shine-Dalgarno sequence. Sigma factors determine the specific site on DNA where this process begins,
while is the binding site of eponymous factors for this process. In another step of this, helicase enzymes
"unzip" the double strands of DNA, paving the way for RNA polymerase to add RNA nucleotides to match
complimentary DNA nucleotides. For ten points, name this process in which DNA is copied into RNA,
contrasted with translation.
ANSWER: transcription
In prokaryotes, this process typically begins at the Pribnow Box, where sigma factor 70 binds. This
process is inhibited by a repressor protein, which is encoded by the lacI (LACK-"I") gene in the lac
operon. In eukaryotes, this process typically begins when TBP binds to the (*) TATA box, triggering a
pre-initiation complex that eventually allows RNA Polymerase to bind. This process has three steps:
initiation, elongation, and termination. For 10 points, name this synthesis of mRNA from a DNA template,
which is followed by translation.
ANSWER: transcription
The tat protein in HIV patients greatly increases the rate of this process, which is also enhanced
in the presence of acetyl transferases. Although not methylation, this process is initiated from CpG
islands in some eukaryotes. This process does not occur from (*) Barr bodies because they have been
highly methylated. The product of this process is capped with methyl-guanosine and gets a poly-A tail.
Retroviruses can do this process in reverse. This process is initiated at a promoter and is mostly catalyzed
by RNA polymerase. For 10 points, name this process of making messenger RNAs from DNA.
ANSWER: transcription [do not accept "translation"]
Hairpin loops are formed to signal the termination of this process. A TATA box and proteins combine to
form a preinitiation complex to allow this process to occur in eukaryotes. Viruses such as HIV use the
reverse form of this process to combine with a host cell, and uracil acts as a replacement for thymine during
it. Following this process, a poly-A tail is added to its product, and important enzymes involved during it
include helicase and RNA polymerase. For 10 points, name this process during which genetic information
from a DNA strand is copied into messenger RNA, which is followed by translation.
ANSWER: Transcription
Toward the end of this process, enzymes such as CPSF and CStF bind to the phosphorylated C
terminal domain of the main enzyme of this process. It is terminated when a GC rich sequence with
inverted repeats forms a hairpin like structure. In prokaryotes, sigma factors are necessary to initiate
this process, while in eukaryotes, a TFIID subunit interacts with a four nucleotide structure called
the Pribnow box, initiating this process. The Pribnow box is analogous to the TATA box found in
prokaryotes, and the addition of a poly A tail is independent of the template. For 10 points, name this
process which uses RNA polymerase to make a copy of mRNA from DNA.
ANSWER: transcription
The FACT complex assists in one phase of this process, and one protein that initiates this process is
mutated in Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17, in which its poly-Q tract is expanded. This process is inhibited by
actinomycin D. In bacteria, the rho factor can terminate this process, and sigma factors help initiate it.
Roger Kornberg isolated the protein complex responsible for initiating this process, which assembles itself
at the TATA box. RNA polymerase II binding starts this process, which creates its product from 5 prime to
3 prime. For 10 points, name this genetic process in which DNA is read and written to RNA.
ANSWER: Transcription
In mammals, this process is facilitated by proteins with a structural motif that consists of two
histidine and two cysteine molecules also bound to a zinc ion. In eukaryotes, this process is controlled
by distal and proximal control regions which are found on an enhancer region upstream of the (*)
TATA box. In bacteria, this process is regulated by operons, and this process's namesake factors facilitate
the binding of RNA polymerase which produce a single stranded molecule with DNA as a template. For 10
points, name this process which produces a strand of mRNA for use in translation.
ANSWER: Transcription
This process is upregulated when TBP binds to the TATA box, and can be mediated by riboswitches.
In prokaryotes it proceeds via abortive initiative cycle, while in eukaryotes immediately following
this step, introns are removed from the product by splicesomes and a modified guanine cap and a
poly A tail are added. This process begins when namesake factors bind to (*) promoter sites, and then
RNA polymerases copy DNA into a new RNA strand. For 10 points, name this process in DNA expression
which makes up the central dogma of genetics along with translation.
ANSWER: Transcription
For studying the molecular basis of this process, the 2006 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Roger
David Kornberg. During the pre-initiation and initiation stages of this process, TFIID interacts with the
Pribnow box. The termination stage of this process involves the lollipop-shaped hairpin loop. This
process's factors bind to the Goldberg-Hogness box also known as the TATA box. The non-coding introns
produced from this process are spliced before translation takes place. Thymine is replaced with uracil, for
10 points, during this process in which RNA polymerase produces a copy of mRNA from a DNA template.
ANSWER: transcription
This process is stopped by alpha-Amanitin, a toxin found in some mushrooms. In eukaryotes [yoo-KAIReeohts], this process can be blocked by chromatin compaction or histones, usually takes place near a TATA
box, and occurs simultaneously as the creation of a five prime cap. In prokaryotes, it ends with the breaking
of hydrogen bonds after the creation of a sugar-phosphate backbone. The reverse of this process can be
carried out by some viruses, including HIV. Name this process carried out by RNA polymerase, which uses
a DNA nucleotide sequence to create RNA.
ANSWER: transcription
Spacer that does not undergo this process includes Bam islands. The inchworm model of this process refers
to the discontinuous movement of one enzyme. This process in bacteria terminates with the addition of a
rho factor, and initiates using a sigma factor. Factors named for this process have DNA-binding domains,
such as zinc finger motifs. Regions known as promoters indicate where this process begins. Modifications
after this process include the addition of a five-prime cap. For 10 points, name this process that encodes
messenger RNA and precedes translation.
ANSWER: transcription
Many proteins that control the rate of this process contain zinc finger domains. In some organisms, a
structure named for Pribnow is the site of this process, which in prokaryotes begins when a holoenzyme
forms from the binding of a sigma factor. In eukaryotes, its initiation is greatly aided by the acetylation of
histones and often occurs at the TATA box. This process is followed by a step in which lariats form and
introns are spliced out after polymerase has bound to and run along the template strand. For 10 points,
identify this process through which a DNA template is turned into messenger RNA.
ANSWER: transcription
A feature that can promote this process in eukaryotes (you-KAIR-ee-"oats") is called a TATA box. This
process forms a polycistronic ("PAUL"-ee-sis-TRON-ic) product when it occurs on the entire lac operon.
An enzyme called integrase (IN-tuh-"grace") follows a reversal of this process, which is done by viruses
like HIV. This process is followed by the addition of a five prime cap and a three-prime poly-adenosine tail.
For 10 points, name this process, the creation of a molecule of RNA complementary to a strand of DNA.
ANSWER: transcription
One class of these proteins contain a winged helix or forkhead box domain, while another class of these
is inhibited by Rb protein and regulates the production of cyclins, called E2F. Another class of these
homodimerizes after being activated by the JAK kinase and regulates the production of interferon, and are
known as the STAT proteins. An example of them from yeast used in various experiments is GAL4, which
binds to UAS. They operate by recruiting coactivators or histone acetyltransferases and bind to consensus
sequences. Many of these proteins contain a leucine zipper or a zinc finger. Basal ones include TFIID,
which binds to the TATA box, and most contain an activating domain and a DNA binding domain. For 10
points, name these proteins responsible for recruiting RNA polymerase and promote their namesake
process of RNA production.
ANSWER: transcription factor [or TF; prompt on DNA binding protein]
The "general" kind of these proteins form the pre-initiation complex. The binding sites of these proteins
can be determined by the ChIP-Seq assay, and they bind to consensus sites. These proteins consist of a
DBD region and a TAD region where they can be regulated. These proteins often contain motifs like
helix-turn-helix and leucine zippers. Six of them are found in the basal preinitiation complex, while another
of these found in humans binds to the TATA box. The function of these proteins is affected by the
methylation or acetylation of surrounding histones. They work by binding to either enhancer or promoter
regions. For 10 points, name these proteins which affect the rate at which RNA strands are copied from
DNA.
ANSWER: transcription factors
These molecules were where the U-turn motif was first discovered. The protein EF-Tu binds to these
molecules and their 3 prime end is always capped with the sequence CCA. The presence of inosine in
these molecules allows Crick's wobble hypothesis. The tertiary structure of these molecules is in the
shape of an L. They are "charged", or have an amino acid added, by an aminoacyl synthetase, and they
bind to the A-site and P-site in the ribosome. These molecules' T arm and D arm are part of their cloverleaf
secondary structure. For 10 points, identify this type of RNA whose anticodon loop contains a
complementary sequence to an mRNA codon.
ANSWER: tRNA [or transfer RNA; or "ribonucleic acid" in place of "RNA"; prompt on RNA]
Recent studies have found that these molecules can be responsible for a specific cleavage and can control
transcription in a ColE1 plasmid. The two classes of enzymes that act on them differ in the presence of
HIGH and KMSKS consensus sequences and which terminal OH group of these molecules that they affect.
Roughly L-shaped in tertiary form, one part of their secondary structure is the T-psi-C loop, where psi
represents pseudo-uridine. Usually depicted as a clover-leaf structure, the wobble hypothesis explained why
there can be fewer of them than possible codons. For 10 points, name these RNA structures that bring
amino acids to a growing polypeptide chain.
ANSWER: transfer RNA
.An explanation of how one subset of these particles are formed from larger precursors is given by the
punctuation model. These molecules can be broken up by ELAC2 and angiogenin when the cell is under
stress. The genes that lead to the formation of these molecules have A and B box component promoters.
The function of one version of this molecule is aided by its affinity to IF-2 and weaker affinity to EF-TU.
These molecules bind at the A site and are released from the E site. These molecules are charged by
namesake aminoacyl synthetases. They have a shape described as cloverleaf or L shaped. These molecules
can have wobble pairing with their target codons. For 10 points, name these molecules that bring amino
acids to the ribosome.
ANSWER: tRNA [or Transfer RNA; prompt on RNA]
Amino acids are connected to this molecule by a synthetase [SIN-thuh-tase] made using an aaRS gene, and
this molecule is called charged when the amino acid is attached. Robert Holley mapped the example of this
molecule that binds to alanine [A-luh-neen]. A mapping of these molecules generally includes a TPsiC arm,
DHU arm, and anticodon [an-tie-KOE-don] as part of its cloverleaf structure. Name these molecules that
move amino acids to ribosomes [RIE-boe-soems], a type of ribonucleic [rie-boe-new-KLAY-ik] acid.
ANSWER: transfer RNA (accept tRNA or transfer ribonucleic acid, prompt on "RNA" or "t" or "ribonucleic acid")
These molecules contain such unique nucleotides as pseudouridine, hypoxanthine, and inosinic acid. It has a
CCA tail at the 3-end of the molecule, which is important for recognition in translation. First hypothesized
by Francis Crick, they can come in aminoacyl and peptidyl varieties, which can be attached to two different
sites on ribosomes. They have a loop for the anticodon, which makes them look like clover leaves. For 10
points, identify these molecules that carry amino acids to ribosomes during protein synthesis, one of the
three types of RNA.
ANSWER: transfer RNA or tRNA
Puromycin and Tetracyclines occupy the site where these molecules would normally bind to inhibit a
certain process. Ester linkages are formed between these molecules and a certain type of molecule
bound with AMP in a process called charging. The aforementioned charging process is catalyzed by
aaRS, and these molecules contain a molecule of pseudouridine on their T(Psi)C arms. In prokaryotes,
one of these molecules bound to fMet is bound to (*) IF-2 to form an initiation complex. Elongation
factors guide these cloverleaf shaped molecules to the A-site, and then these molecules are translocated to
the P and E sites of the ribosome before exiting. For 10 points identify these amino acid carrying molecules
used in translation whose anticodons bind to mRNA.
ANSWER: tRNA [Accept transfer RNA]
The aminoacylated form of this molecule complexes with EF1(alpha)-GTP, and it includes both the D loop
and the T(Psi)CG loop. Another loop in this molecule contains inosine, which is largely responsible for the
"wobble" that allows this molecule to base-pair with several different codons. This molecule binds to
the A site of a ribosome, where its attached amino acid is incorporated into a nascent protein. For 10
points, name this type of RNA that base-pairs with mRNA.
ANSWER: tRNA [accept transfer RNA]
One enzyme critical for the function of these molecules has a monomeric and a dimeric class, the
latter of which targets these molecules' adenosine 76. A CCA tail is added during processing to the 3'
("three prime") end of these structures, which pairs with its 5' ("five prime") end to form an
acceptor stem. Their D arm functions as a recognition site for an (*) aminoacyl synthase key to their
function. They can possess pseudouridine or inosine in their anticodons, which permits wobble pairing; the
anticodon is located on one loop of these molecules' cloverleaf structure. For 10 points, name these
molecules that bring amino acids to ribosomes to be added to a growing polypeptide chain during
translation.
ANSWER: tRNA [or transfer RNA; prompt on RNA]
Different types of this molecule that perform the same function are called isoaccepting. This molecule
contains inosine and reacts with a certain enzyme to undergo aminoacylation. This molecule assumes a
cloverleaf-like structure containing D, T, and A arms needed to properly fit into the P and A sites of
another molecule. Wobble base pairing was originally proposed to describe this molecule, which contains a
three base region called an anticodon used during translation. For 10 points, name this form of RNA which
directs an amino acid to a growing peptide chain and is synthesized in the ribosome from a corresponding
mRNA strand.
ANSWER: tRNA [or transfer RNA; or transfer ribonucleic acid; prompt on RNA]
The Blue-White screen uses this process to detect the success of ligase operations in X-gal, and one
major medical application of this process are HEK 239 cells. This subject of Axel Patents is often
facilitated by rubidium chloride, and was shown to be unaffected by trypsin in an experiment
examining its namesake principle, named for Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty. The presence of one
organism's protective polysacchiride capsule was key in an experiment that used dead (*) mice to
confirm this process, Griffith's experiment, while proficiency conducting this action - usually driven by
Type IV pili - is referred to as "Competence." Chilling cells in a solution of divalent cations and
electroporation are methods of artificially enhancing this action, since they create holes in cellular
membranes. An analogue of the viral transduction process, FTP, identify this process in which foreign
genetic information is incorporated into a cell, seen most clearly in bacteria, which should not be confused
with conjugation.
ANSWER: Transformation
The TOP10 line has shown particularly high susceptibility to this technique in the lab. This technique can
be performed on certain plants by dipping them in a solution of Agrobacterium, and other efficient methods
to perform this technique involve the application of Lipofectamine or Fugene prior to it. General
susceptibility to this process is termed "competence" and performing it in cold temperatures in the presence
of calcium chloride improves its efficiency for less competent cells. Another common method of performing
this technique is by applying a current to open up the cell membrane before placing cells in a plasmid
solution. For 10 points, identify this process by which cells take up foreign pieces of DNA, examples of
which include transfection and transduction.
ANSWER: transformations [accept transfections before mentioned but not "transduction"]
Binding and translocation in this process in prokaryotes are controlled by the GTPases EF-Tu and EF-G.
One class of molecules essential to this process possesses a D arm and T arm, a so-called cloverleaf
structure, and that class of molecules may exhibit wobble pairing, especially with inosine. That
aforementioned antibiotic works by binding to the 30S subunit, and this process relies on codon-anticodon
pairing and terminates at either UAA, UAG, or UGA. For 10 points, name this process during which the
ribosome surrounds a sequence of mRNA and turns it into a corresponding chain of amino acids.
ANSWER: translation
This process is upregulated when fragile X mental retardation-related protein and Argonaute 2
associate with AU-rich elements, and rapamycin inhibits this process by inhibiting p70 s6 kinase. It
involves a "racheting mechanism" in which EF-G hydrolyzes GTP, and in eukaryotes, the Kozak
consensus and (*) Shine-Dalgarno sequences play roles in its initiation. After that initiation, the P site is
occupied by a tRNA molecule that binds an AUG codon. This process ends when a stop codon appears in
the mRNA sequence and binds a releasing factor rather than tRNA. For 10 points, name this process by
which information contained in codons is converted to an amino acid sequence shortly after transcription.
ANSWER: translation [accept logical equivalents]
Puromycin terminates this process prematurely by preventing an eEF2-catalyzed step called translocation.
In prokaryotes, the 16S component must pair with the Shine-Dalgarno sequence before this process can
begin, and in eukaryotes, GTP hydrolysis powers movement from the A site to the P site. Upon discovering
that a molecule involved in this process had fewer than 61 varieties, Crick proposed wobble pairing. This
process is initiated by AUG, which is a sequence that codes for methionine. In it, tRNAs match their
anticodons to codons. For 10 points, name this ribosomal process in which an mRNA template is decoded
to generate a polypeptide.
ANSWER: translation [prompt on "protein synthesis"]
Linezolid and ricin act by inhibiting this process; tetracycline specifically blocks the A site, preventing the
binding of an acylated molecule that participates in it. In prokaryotes, it begins somewhere downstream of
the Shine Dalgarno sequence. This process begins with the recognition of AUG, which codes for
methionine, and proceeds as tRNA binds every set of three base pairs, called a codon. For ten points, name
this ribosomal process by which messenger RNA is turned into proteins.
ANSWER: translation
A transcient ester linkage between a carboxylic acid group and a hydroxyl group is made during this
process, and in prokaryotes, the factors Ef-G and Ef-Tu assist in this process. This process is followed by a
step in which its results are verified by hydrolytic editing. In prokaryotes, it begins with the binding of the
Shine-Dalgarno sequence. A new amino acid is added to the peptide sequence when a molecule of tRNA
with the corresponding anticodon brings it to the binding site. For 10 points, name this stage of protein
synthesis where mRNA is used by a ribosome to form a polypeptide chain, the step following transcription.
ANSWER: translation [prompt on protein synthesis]
One site important in this process helps with alignment in prokaryotic cells and is named for Shine
and Dalgarno. In eukaryotes, the protein eEF-2 is used in the elongation phase of this process. The
antibiotic tetracycline works by binding to the 30S subunit of a certain organelle in order to inhibit
this process. This process takes place at an organelle that is created by the (*) nucleolus and begins
with the AUG codon. This process involves tRNA attaching to recently transcribed mRNA to link together
the correct amino acids. For 10 points, name this process in which the ribosomes "read" the mRNA made
during transcription in order to create proteins.
ANSWER: translation
This process is inhibited in culture using cyclohexamide, and the Rotavirus uses the NSP3 protein to
trigger it. Some viruses use an IRES to trigger it, which can be performed in vitro using the S30 E. coli
extract. Diptheria toxin targets EF-2, which works with the GTP-hydrolyzing EF-Tu protein during this
process' elongation stage. The attachment of a water molecule by the releasing factor is used to terminate
this process. This process begins after the Kozak consensus sequence triggers the binding of the small
subunit, which finds the start codon. For 10 points, name this process that occurs when tRNA comes to the
ribosome, in which a messenger RNA is read in order to create proteins.
ANSWER: translation [or protein synthesis or equivalents until the very end]
LepA can reverse this process, and in some organisms, this process sees protein EF-3 utilize ATP to reduce
affinity for the substrate at L1. The characteristic ratcheting mechanism of this process involves GTP
hydrolysis by EF-G, while EF-Tu, which works as a proofreader, also employs GTP to bind the substrate.
Beginning with binding to the Shine-Dalgarno sequence in prokaryotes, it sees movement of the substrates
through aminoacyl, peptidyl, and exit sites. This process ends when the nascent peptide is complete and the
two subunits dissociate. For 10 points, name this second step of protein synthesis in which a ribosome reads
messenger RNA following transcription.
ANSWER: translation [accept translocation until "EF-Tu"]
This process is the target of drugs such as macrolides and aminoglycosides. The protein RRF dissociates the
units involved in this process. EF-G brings GTP to the site of this process, as does EF-Tu. This process can
begin once the 30s and 50s subunits of a certain organelle bind together. Anticodons bind to codons during
this process, which activates a reaction that increases the peptide chain. This process uses mRNA as the
template and occurs in the ribosome. For 10 points, name this cellular process that results in protein
synthesis.
ANSWER: translation
Nonsense-mediated decay occurs during the pioneering round of this process. During this process, if
a signal peptide is located, this process excretes into the endoplasmic recticulum. During this process,
eIF4-G binds to eIF3 and PAPB-1 to circularize the substrate. Enzymes recognize this location of this
process through the Kozak sequence and the Shine-Delgarno box in prokaryotes and eukaryotes,
respectively. During this process, specific molecules pass through the A, P, and E sites of a certain
organelle. In this process, peptide bonds are formed between those tRNA molecules via the 23s ribosomal
RNA. For ten points, identify this process of protein synthesis.
ANSWER: Translation
This process is initiated by a compound called fMet ("F"-"met"). In prokaryotes (pro-KAH-ree-yotes),
this process starts at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence. One organelle that plays a key role in this process is
formed by the association of a 50S and 30S subunit to form a 70S complex. Molecules enter this process at
the A site and exit at the E site in this process. This process involves the pairing of anticodons on tRNA to
codons on mRNA, and it occurs in the ribosome. For 10 points, name this cellular process in which proteins
are produced.
ANSWER: translation
The SECIS element allows this process to continue and opposes the action of RF2. This process is
made more efficient with the use of ergosomes, and binding of SRP causes it to temporarily halt. In
prokaryotes, one part of this process requires thermostable and unstable factors as well as EF-G, and
it is initiated by the (*) Shine-Dalgarno sequence. That sequence is upstream of AUG, which binds to a
tRNA and moves into the P site. Another section of mRNA then enters the A site, and this process ends if
that sequence is a stop codon. Peptide bonds form between amino acids as part of, for 10 points, what step
of protein synthesis that uses ribosomes and follows transcription?
ANSWER: translation
This process begins with the formation of the 43S complex from the 40S complex and an eIF2 ternary
complex. The hydrolysis of GTP during this process in elongation factor 2 permits the translocation from
the A site to the P site. Release factors bind after the amber, ochre, or opal sequence is revealed, terminating
this process. Francis Crick proposed wobble to explain why there were only 45 and not 64 anticodon loops
to bind during this process. This biological process is initiated by methionine and in eukaryotes it occurs on
the rough ER. For 10 points, name this process in which RNA facilitates the synthesis of proteins in the
ribosome.
ANSWER: translation
The antibiotic tetracycline (TET-ruh-"sigh"-klin) acts by inhibiting this process. During this process,
proteins called elongation factors allow a molecule with a characteristic cloverleaf structure to enter the A
site. That molecule carries with it an amino acid joined by an ester bond and possesses a three-base
sequence called an anticodon (ANN-"tie"-KO-don). Always beginning with methionine and ending with the
stop codon, for 10 points, name this process by which a strand of mRNA is turned into a protein.
ANSWER: translation
During the pathogenesis of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia, one of these events results in the PML gene
being under the control of the retinoic acid receptor. One of these puts the c-myc gene under the control of
the immunoglobulin heavy-chain enhancer in Burkitt's lymphoma. This is the mechanism for the
formation of a structure which encodes the Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase named for Philadelphia, which causes
chronic myelogenous leukemia. The loss of two p arms occurs in the Robertsonian type of this, which is
responsible for a small percentage of Down syndrome. They can be balanced or unbalanced depending on
whether genetic material is lost in the process. For 10 points, name this moving of parts of one
chromosome to another.
ANSWER: translocation [prompt on rearrangement]
A study of sphingosine kinase in Arabidopsis cells showed that it must work in conjunction with the
hormone ABA in the promotion and inhibition of this process. Blue light and temperature conditions can
also help to regulate it, and this process is responsible for a 97% loss of wet mass in most plants. It is
mediated by the inflow of potassium and water forcing guard cells to bend and form openings in the leaf.
For 10 points, name this part of the water cycle which takes place through plant stomata, the loss of water
analogous to mammal perspiration.
ANSWER: transpiration
The Charlesworth-Langley hypothesis pertains to their locations and these entities have been
proposed as explanations for the C-Value paradox. One of them determines the rate of hybrid
dysgenesis within germ lines and is analogous to the to copia one. While P element in drasophila,
LINEs are types of these entities that lack LTRs and require reverse transcriptase, and the class II
ones are described as (*)"cut and paste." Discovered by Barbara McClintock in 1983, for ten points, name
these genetic material which are sometimes called "jumping genes."
ANSWER: transposons or transposable elements [prompt on "jumping genes"]
Mos1 is one of these that belong to the Mariner/TC1 family, and an example produced in-vitro is called the
"Sleeping Beauty" system. The Tn family forms composite structures of these entities, while one
widespread example leads to hybrid dysgenesis in fruitflies, that being the P element. Their ends often
possess inverted repeats, and, in a similar fashion to certain viruses, one type uses a reverse transcript to
"copy and paste" DNA, known as the retro type. For 10 points, identify these entities discovered in maize
by Barbara McClintock, that are also called jumping genes.
ANSWER: transposons [prompt on jumping genes before mentioned]
In bacteria, one type of them is the insertion element. P and gypsy elements are ones found in Drosophila,
and two human types are LINEs and SINEs, which include Alu. Unlike the retro variety, which uses an
mRNA intermediate and reverse transcriptase, the class 2 variety uses a cut-and-paste method and does not
leave a copy of itself behind. They are mutagens, and can cause diseases by disrupting stretches of coding
DNA. They make up 50% of the human genome, and 90% of the maize genome, where they were first
discovered. For 10 points, Barbara McClintock discovered which moveable genetic elements, also known
as "jumping genes"?
ANSWER: transposons [or transposable genetic elements; prompt on "jumping genes" before they're mentioned]
In Drosophila, one of these structures gives rise to hybrid dysgenesis. One of these structures that is flanked
by inverted repeats and made up of directed repeats can be used to introduce new DNA into an organism's
genome without using a virus, and is called the "Sleeping Beauty" one. One of these structures that is likely
to be the reverse transcript of 7S RNA is called the Alu element. Class I of these structures are further
classified as LINEs or SINEs depending on whether they code for reverse transcriptase, and some of these
structures function via a "cut and paste" mechanism. For 10 points, name these structures discovered by
Barbara McClintock in maize, which are often called "jumping genes."
ANSWER: transposons [accept transposable elements or TEs; prompt on jumping gene before mentioned]
In plants, Tourist and Stowaway are the main representatives of a class of these entities called
MITES. The Tc1/Mariner superfamily of these entities was used to construct the synthetic Sleeping
Beauty system of these. Locations where these entities had been are often identified by short direct
sequence repeats. In primates, the most common of these belong to the (*) Alu family. Members of
Class I [one] of these entities sometimes contain long terminal repeats, and they may be classified as SINES
if they are transcribed by RNA polymerase III or LINES if they encode reverse transcriptase. The first of
these discovered was the Ac/Ds system found in maize by Barbara McClintock. For 10 points, name these
mobile genetic elements often nicknamed "jumping genes."
ANSWER: transposons [or transposable elements; accept "Class II transposons" or "DNA transposons" until "Tourist"; prompt on "TE"]
The Charlesworth-Langley hypothesis pertains to their locations and these entities have been
proposed as explanations for the C-Value paradox. One of them determines the rate of hybrid
dysgenesis within germ lines and is analogous to the to copia one. While P element in drasophila,
LINEs are types of these entities that lack LTRs and require reverse transcriptase, and the class II
ones are described as (*)"cut and paste." Discovered by Barbara McClintock in 1983, for ten points, name
these genetic material which are sometimes called "jumping genes."
ANSWER: transposons or transposable elements [prompt on "jumping genes"]
One type of these entities is characterized by identical sequences of about 400 repeated base pairs
flanked by inverted repeats of about 15 base pairs. Another type of these structures is responsible for
causing the condition of hybrid dysgenesis in Drosophila. In addition to MITEs and P elements,
another type of these structures found abundantly in humans is called Alu elements which are a form of
SINEs. The first one to be discovered is the Ac-Ds system which was found during studies of the maize
plant. First discovered in 1983 by Barbara McClintock, for 10 points, identify these mobile sequences of
DNA that are often nicknamed "jumping genes."
ANSWER: transposons [or jumping genes before mentioned]
The Alu element in humans is an example of one of these entities. One class of these entities utilizes
reverse transcriptase to carry out its "cut and paste" mechanism. Surrounded by inverted repeats, these
elements were first discovered by Barbara McClintock in maize, where they are responsible for mutations
that alter the color of kernels. For 10 points, name these sequences of DNA known as "jumping genes,"
which can move to a different location in an organism's genome.
ANSWER: transposon [accept transposable element; accept retrotransposon; prompt on jumping gene s until mention]
One of them has a conserved gag, and is analogous to copia in Drosophila. Another of them requires att-L
and att-R sites, and relies on the formation of a Holiday junction. Both the BARE-1 type of Hordeum
vulgare L. and the A and B types of the Mu phage possess constructs with U5 and U3 binding sites for
tRNA, not found in LINEs and SINEs. Another type is useful in signature tagged mutagenesis of
Drosophila, and is called the P-element. The Alu repeat is common in humans, and they are generally
divided into two varieties, depending on the presence of LTRs and the use of a reverse transcriptase
mechanism. FTP name these entities responsible for the colors of corn kernels, discovered by Barbara
McClintock, also known as jumping genes.
ANSWER: transposons or transposable elements
During this period, the continent of Cimmeria collided with Laurasia's eastern edge. The first
corals appeared during this period, as well as the eozostrodon, one of the first true mammals. The
seed ferns known as Glossopteris went extinct at the end of it. The extinction that preceded this
period destroyed a multitude of insects, and this period is marked by no coal deposits, which is
known as its coal gap. This period followed the so-called (*) "Great Dying", which occurred at the end
of the Permian period. Taking its name from the distinct layers of red bed, chalk, and black shale that can
be found in Germany, this period is the first of the Mesozoic. For 10 points, name this geologic period
followed by the Jurassic period.
ANSWER: Triassic Period
One of the late subdivisions of this period, the Carnian, left behind several fossils at Ischigualasto,
Argentina. Animals that started during this period include ichthyosaurs and archosaurs. It was also late in
this period that Laurasia and Gondwana separated from Pangaea. It followed the Great Dying, largely
considered the worst extinction event in world history, at the end of the Permian Period. The first period of
the Mesozoic Era, it was followed by the Jurassic Period. Name this period given its name because its
remains were stored in three layers.
ANSWER: Triassic period
Upon discovering the remains of these creatures, Othniel Marsh believed the bones belonged to an extinct
bison. Scannella and Horner proposed in July that the variation in shape between skulls of this animal
suggests that it is an earlier growth stage of the previously distinct genus Torosaurus. These animals had a
large, epoccipital-bone-lined frill at the back of their skulls. This herbivorous dinosaur shared the Late
Cretaceous Period with its main predator, the Tyrannosaurus Rex. For 10 points, name this dinosaur that
had three horns on its skull.
ANSWER: triceratops
In 1961, Bruce Erickson discovered a remarkably complete specimen of this organism at the Hell Creek
Formation. A 1907 monograph written by Richard Swann Lull describes a tertiary lineage of this organism
including the species obtusus and hatcheri, though the only species recognized now are prorsus and the
type species, horridus. This animal's front legs had five fingers, while the rear had only four. According to
John Scannella and Jack Horner, the observed size differences in the length of their epoccipital-bone-lined
frills was a result of adult specimens of this creature being mistakenly classified as Torosaurus. It lived the
Cretaceous period alongside its primary predator, Tyrannosaurus Rex. For 10 points, identify this
herbivorous dinosaur, named for the three horns on its face.
ANSWER: Triceratops [prompt on Torosaurus before mentioned; accept it along with any of the given species names]
In 1987, Cobabe and Fastovsky discovered a "new" dinosaur which they named Ugrosaurus, which turned
out to be a specimen of this more famous dinosaur. In the 1990's, Dodson and Lehman confirmed the view
of C.M. Sternberg that this dinosaur was more closely related to Chasmosaurus than to Monoclonius and
Centrosaurus. The two major species of this dinosaur - horridus and prorsus - were discovered by Othniel
Charles Marsh during the "Bone Wars". Because it was one of the last dinosaur genera to evolve, dinosaurs
are taxonomically defined as the descendants of the last common ancestor of birds and this dinosaur. This
bird-hipped herbivore, whose relatives included Torosaurus and Styracosaurus, was a member of the
ceratopsids, and though it was preyed upon by Tyrannosaurus rex, it could defend itself by goring. For 10
points, name this dinosaur whose name refers to its three horns.
ANSWER: Triceratops
These organisms may have evolved from Spriggina and Parvancorina, while those of the order Lichida may
have had horns. Their earliest order is Redlichiida, which did not have the natant hypostome of the ensuing
Ptychopariida and Harpetida types, and the Proetida were the longest-lasting. Though the Agnostina were
eyeless, other orders were among the first species to develop complex compound eyes. Containing over
17,000 identified species, they came into existence during the Cambrian period but died off with most other
marine species during the Permian-Triassic Extinction. For 10 points, name these small arthropod fossils,
named for their three-lobe structures.
ANSWER: trilobites
This phenomenon causes a disorder observed in Erasmus Bartholin and originally thought to have been
caused by atomic bomb testing, Patau Syndrome. Another disorder caused by one of these leads to
hypogonadism and reduced fertility and is named after Kleinfelter. The Simian crease, an unusually round
face, and impairment of cognitive ability are signs of Down Syndrome, which is caused by one of them at
chromosome 21. For 10 points, name this type of aneuploidy in which there are three copies of a
chromosome.
ANSWER: trisomy [prompt on aneuploidy before it is read]
One protein encoded by this system also controls the AroH, Arol, and mtr clusters. One mutation in
this system in S. typhimurium allows the use of anthralinic acid as a growth factor. In some species,
one part of this system requires the MtrB-encoded TRAP protein, whose 11 subunits bind to a series
of G slash U A G repeats. This system is activated by the formation of a certain 2-3 hairpin. This
structure's regulatory region encodes a leader peptide that (*) cannot be synthesized if the product of
this system is unavailable, resulting in the formation of a 3-4 hairpin that stops transcription of structural
genes A through E. For 10 points, name this cluster of repressible and attenuable genes that controls the
synthesis of an aromatic amino acid symbolized W.
ANSWER: trp operon [prompt on "trp"]
This amino acid is unusually brominated in a peptide found in the venom of marine cone snails.
Plant auxins are synthesized from this amino acid, which through a kynurenine intermediate is the
precursor of niacin. High levels of this substance cause the formation of a 3-4 stem loop and allows
the complete translation of a leader peptide, which in turn allows synthesis of a polycistronic RNA
from genes A through E of its namesake repressible (*) operon. Its hydroxylation is the first step in the
synthesis of serotonin. This amino acid is coded for by only one codon, UGG, and has a very bulky,
aromatic indole side chain. For 10 points, name this amino acid symbolized W, which is often incorrectly
assumed to be responsible for turkey-induced drowsiness.
ANSWER: tryptophan [or trp; accept W before mention]
Regulatory T cells use CTLA-4 to breakdown this compound, and expression of IDO is needed to start the
breakdown of it into kynurenine to prevent fetus rejection in mice. The first step of one synthesis of this
compound involves the conversion of glutamine to glutamate (with pyruvate as a byproduct), as chorismate
is converted to anthranilate. This compound can be converted into a neurotransmitter with the help of a
namesake hydroxylase, and then, with the help of pyridoxal 5-phosphate, decarboxylated into serotonin.
This compound shares a property with methionine, as the only other nondegenerate amino acid. What is this
amino acid, whose indole side chain features, for 10 points, a benzene ring adjacent to a nitrogen-containing
pyrrole, synthesized with a namesake operon and abbreviated W?
ANSWER: tryptophan
Artificial supplements of this compound were banned for 12 years by the FDA due to its association
with eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome. Along with methionine, this is one of the non-degenerate amino
acids, since it is specified by only one codon, UGG. When cells in phloem sieve tubes undergo
apoptosis, this compound is converted into auxins. In addition to being a precursor of niacin, this
amino acid's namesake hydroxylase synthesizes the neurotransmitter serotonin from it, which is
further synthesized into melatonin by the pineal gland. (*) For 10 points identify this amino acid,
symbolized W, that many believe is responsible for turkey's sleep-inducing ability.
ANSWER: tryptophan [prompt on "W" before mentioned]
The International Livestock Research Institute controlled the proliferation of these animals in the Ghibe
valley. Artificial odor plumes are often created using urine to "trap" these creatures. The N'Dama resists a
disease transmitted by these organisms, nagana. These animals once completely disappeared when the
island of Principe was culled of its feral pig population. Unlike related species, this animal's females only
fertilize one egg at a time, and their larva burrow to the ground to form a hard shell. These animals carry
trypanosomes that cause sleeping sickness. For ten points, name these biting flies that infest a lot of Africa.
ANSWER: tsetse flies
One drug used to treat this disease unusually turns one's urine orange and inhibits DNA-dependent
RNA polymerase, while another one must be activated by KatG catalase-peroxidase. This disease can be
vaccinated against using BCG. Especially dangerous in immunocompromised individuals, this disease's
causative agents can be contained in granulomas, although this sometimes does not kill off the bacterium
and leads to a latent phase. This disease, which can be diagnosed through the Mantoux test or a chest x-ray,
is caused by a bacterium with an unusually thick and lipid-rich cell wall. For 10 points, name this disease
caused by a Mycobacterium, which was referred to in the past as consumption.
ANSWER: tuberculosis [or TB; accept consumption before the tossup is finished]
This disease produces calcified scars called the Ghon complex at its initial site of infection. It causes
Rasmussen's aneurysm, and it can spread to the neck in scrofula or to the spine in Pott's disease. Caused by
a Gram-positive bacterium commonly treated with rifampin, it is targeted by the BCG vaccine. It causes
necrotizing granulomas and is caused by a Mycobacterium infection. A test for this disease involves a PPD
injected under the skin. Its symptoms include night sweats, bloody phlegm, and chronic cough. For 10
points, name this bacterial lung infection formerly known as consumption.
ANSWER: tuberculosis or MTB
The causative agent of this disease can be typed using either IS6110 RFLP analysis or spoligotyping.
One blood test for the disease is QFT-G, which checks for the presence of interferon gamma. Treatment
uses the DOT strategy. The Mantoux test works by injecting PDD into the patient. That test works for the
latent form of this disease and is a skin test. It is caused by a Mycobacterium. A symptom of it is a
persistent cough. For 10 points, name this deadly disease of the lungs that used to be called consumption.
ANSWER: tuberculosis
A form of this disease that attacks the lymph nodes is the most common type of scrofula. The "miliary"
form of this disease occurs when the lesions are small. Screening for this disease is done via the PPD test,
which is also called the Mantoux test. Like leprosy, this disease is caused by a mycobacterium. The most
common form of this disease starts at a lesion known as a Ghon focus, from which springs a lesion on the
lungs. For 10 points, name this lung disease, rampant in the Russian prison system, which was once known
as "consumption."
ANSWER: tuberculosis [accept TB; or consumption before read]
An experimental drug for treating this disease interferes with mycolic acid synthesis. A now-abandoned
method of treating side-effects of this disease is the pneumothorax technique. Drug-resistant forms of this
disease are usually treated with bedaquiline. One vaccine for this disease is abbreviated BCG, and it can
present through Pott's disease. A screening tool for this disease that replaced the Tine test is the Mantoux
skin test. The organism responsible for this disease is a member of the genus mycobacterium. For ten
points, name this chronic bacterial disease that usually affects the lungs, historically known as consumption.
ANSWER: tuberculosis (accept TB)
Rifampin and isonaizid are part of the first line of treatment for this disease, although the increased
prevalence of MDR strains, and XDR strains resistant to second-line drugs like capreomycin, presents
treatment challenges, as well as the increased susceptibility conferred by HIV infection. The pathogens of
this disease can lie inactive in humans for several years due to the immune system's formation of
granulomas around its pathogens, in which caseous necrosis occurs. The main vaccine for this disease has
been shown to be much more effective in children, leading to efforts to develop an alternative to the BCG
vaccine. What is, for 10 points, this disease, caused by a member of the genus Mycobacteria, named for the
growths that its namesake bacteria causes in the lungs?
ANSWER: tuberculosis
One prominent drug treating this disease targets the dihydrofolate reductase of this disease's bacterial cause.
That drug is isoniazid, which along with rifampicin, is part of the four-drug RIPE regimen used to treat it.
The lipid-rich cell wall of its bacterial cause is composed primarily of mycolic acid, which prevents
diagnosis of this disease by Gram staining. Instead the Ziehl Neelsen stain is used to classify it, and
clinically, either its latent or active form can be detected in the PPD skin test. For 10 points, name this
airborne disease whose symptoms can include coughing up blood, often abbreviated TB.
ANSWER: tuberculosis [accept TB before mentioned]
Cord factors present on the cell surface of its causative agent induce the formation of granulomas,
wherein those pathogens undergo phagocytosis by macrophages, and this disease can be treated with
ethambutol and ripamfin. Virulent strains of its causative agents include the Erdman and H37Rv,
and those organisms appear as a "bundle of cigars" in the Ziehl - Neelsen stain. The BCG vaccine
protects against it, and it is detected by the Mantoux test. Its causative agent belongs to the same genus as
the leprosy causing bacterium, mycobacterium, and was first identified by Robert Koch. For 10 points,
identify this disease which was once called consumption.
ANSWER: tuberculosis [or TB; or consumption until mentioned]
This disease is treated with Rifampicin and Isoniazid. BCG is commonly used as a vaccine for this
disease, although its efficacy has been debated. The miliary form of this disease can spread to other
organs like the liver and spleen. Approximately one third of the world's population is thought to be
infected with this disease. A Totally-Drug-Resistant strain of the causative agent of this disease was
recently isolated in India. Only one tenth of all infected people present with the active form of this
sickness, and it is caused by a (*) Mycobacterium. For 10 points, name this largest killer of AIDS patients,
an airborne contagious disease also called "consumption."
ANSWER: tuberculosis [or TB; accept consumption before it is read]
Attempts to screen this disease are the most common use of Interferon Gamma release allays, though a more
common screen for this is sometimes called the Mantoux (man-TOO) test. The World Health Organization
believes that one-third of the world population has been infected with this and labels it the leading cause of
death of people infected by HIV. It is generally caused by mycobacteria located at a person's pulmonary
alveoli. Name this disease often diagnosed with a skin test and chest X-ray which used to be known as
consumption.
ANSWER: tuberculosis (or TB or consumption)
This disease can be caused by both M. africanum and M. canetti, the latter of which was isolated from a
Somali patient with lymphadenitis. The RIPE or RIPS regimen of antibiotics employs such medications as
isoniazid and rifampin to treat it, though irregular use leads to resistance. It is commonly prevented with the
BCG vaccine, and the most widely used test of its latent variety is the Mantoux (man-TOE) skin test. For 10
points, identify this airborne disease also called consumption, characterized by the coughing up of bloodstained phlegm.
ANSWER: tuberculosis [accept consumption early]
This disease is responsible for Pott's disease when infecting the spine, resulting in spondylitis. In its most
typical form, it results in a Ghon focus, which may spread to the lymph nodes or the heart, the latter causing
the miliary form of this disease. The BCG vaccine for it, invented in 1921, gained widespread acceptance
after World War II; now, it is not used regularly in the U.S. but is in most other countries. This disease can
be detected by photofluorography, or alternatively, through the diameter of indurations caused by the Tine
or Mantoux (man-TOO) tests. Name this deadly pulmonary disease which is often found in drug-resistant
forms.
ANSWER: tuberculosis [accept TB; accept consumption]
The main drug used to treat this disease is activated by the KatG catalase-peroxidase and inhibits an
enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase; that drug is often given alongside ethambutol and rifampicin and is
called isoniazid. Its causative agent has mycolic acids in its cell wall. This disease causes caseous necrosis
and granulomas to appear in the target organ, and it is caused by a mycobacterium. It is often detected
using a skin test. For 10 points, name this disease that affects the lungs and causes a bloody cough.
ANSWER: tuberculosis or TB
This disease's Beijing strain reached the former Soviet Union in the mid-1990s. Albert Calmette and
Camille Guerin developed a vaccine, commonly called BCG, against this disease. Streptomycin was the
first antibiotic that treated this disease, and Robert Koch discovered the bacterium that causes this disease.
Hermann Brehmer was the first to open a sanatorium for patients with this condition. For ten points, identify
this lung disease, sometimes called "consumption."
ANSWER: tuberculosis [or TB; prompt on consumption until it is read]
The DOTS method was originally developed to ensure treatment of this disease, and first-line drugs
to treat this illness include isoniazid and rifampicin. This disease can be diagnosed with the Mantoux
test, also known as a PPD test, in which a bacterial extract is injected just under the (*) skin. Common
symptoms of this disease, which is caused by mycobacterium infection, include high fever, weight loss, and
a bloody cough. For 10 points, give this disease that usually afflicts the lungs but also commonly advances
into the spine when untreated, and was once called consumption.
ANSWER: tuberculosis [or TB; prompt on consumption before mentioned]
A mutated form of transcription factor c-myc is found in these structures. These structures release
molecules like basic fibroblast growth factor to induce poorly-regulated angiogenesis in surrounding
microvessels. Complications such as hyperuricemia can occur in their namesake lysis syndrome. When
these objects circulate through the bloodstream it is called hematogeneous spread, or more generally
metastasis. These bodies often highly express oncogenes, and they are most commonly manifested as
carcinomas. For 10 points, identify these swellings which can be either benign or malignant and may be
caused by cancer.
ANSWER: tumors [prompt on cancer cells]
The FOXDIE virus causes heart attacks by forcing macrophages to release the fictional epsilon form of this
protein; the only useful part of that clue is that this protein is found in macrophages. The binding of this
protein to its receptor results in the dissociation of S-O-D-D, and Tasonermin is a recombinant form of this
protein. This protein has a "jelly roll" beta-sheet structure. DMARD drugs like Remicade and Humera used
to treat rheumatoid arthritis inhibit this protein, , and it works through the TRADD and FADD proteins to
activate NF-kB. It was first discovered as a cytokine. For 10 points, name this protein which gets its name
for its ability to necrotize tumors, an ability which is in its name.
ANSWER: Tumor Necrosis Factor [alpha]
PALB2 binds to a protein coded for by one of these genes. That protein regulates localization and
DNA binding in RAD51. Phosphatase and tensin homolog is one of these genes that functions by
removing membrane localization factors for Akt. One hypothesis about these genes states that
mutations in them are recessive, and thus both need to be mutated for loss of function. That (*) "twohit hypothesis" was proposed by Alfred Knudson after his work on RB1. In addition to the BRCA genes,
another of this type of gene leads to Li-Fraumeni syndrome when mutated and is sometimes called the
guardian of the cell; that gene is TP53. For 10 points, identify this class of genes that prevent cancerous cell
behavior, and when mutated can lead to cancer.
ANSWER: tumor-suppressor gene (accept anti-oncogene)
APC is one of these that controls beta-catenin, and whose inactivation is linked with FAP disease.
The malfunction of another one of these named VHL leads to Von-Hippel-Lindau disease. Multiple
"hits" are needed to deactivate them according to Knudson's hypothesis. A study on a rare childhood
disease affecting the retina lead to the discovery of one of these known as Rb1. The inactivation of
one of them leads to (*) Li-Fraumeni Syndrome. The proteins derived from these genes play a role in
carrying out apoptosis, facilitating DNA repair and regulating the cell cycle, all of which are essential in
preventing the onset of carcinogenesis. For 10 points, name this class of genes opposed by oncogenes, one
of whose members is p53, the "guardian angel of the cell."
ANSWER: tumor suppressor genes or tumor suppressor proteins [or anti-oncogenes before oncogenes are mentioned, do not take "oncogenes," or "proto-oncogenes, which are notably the exact opposite of what we are talking about.]
Cushion plants such as lupines inhabit screes in the fellfields of this biome that is also characterized by
feldmarks, communities of scattered dwarf and prostrate plants. An alas is a depression that can be formed
in this habitat whose warmer ecotones are often marked by krummholz. Animals found within this biome
include lemmings and caribou, and the ground in this biome becomes soggy during the summer due to
melting of permafrost. Including alpine and arctic varieties, for 10 points, name this biome characterized by
cold temperature and lack of trees, often found within the Arctic Circle.
ANSWER: tundra
At the border of the alpine version of this biome, stilted trees called krummholz (KRUM-holes) are found.
This environment is prone to solifluction (sol-ih-FLUCK-shun). A version of this biome is found on the
Colorado Plateau. Lichens (LYE-kens) and reindeer mosses are found in this biome; those plants are fed
upon by caribou in the Arctic version of this biome. This biome contains frozen soil known as permafrost.
For 10 points, name this cold "treeless plain" biome found in places like Alaska.
ANSWER: tundra
The paper that first introduced this condition compared its symptoms to those of Klippel-Feil syndrome. A
mutation in a gene involved in this condition can cause other diseases such as Leri-Weill dyschondrosterosis
and Langer mesomylic displacia. Haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene, the only known gene that is
directly related to this condition, causes short stature and skeletal problems. Amenorrhea is suffered by
people with this condition. People with this condition have a webbed neck and fail to develop secondary
sexual characteristics after puberty, which can be treated with estrogen. For 10 points, name this congenital
disorder in which a female has only one X chromosome.
ANSWER: Turner syndrome
While karotyping is the definitive diagnostic tool for this disease, early symptoms are swollen hands
and feet in newborns, as well as a wide, webbed neck. Symptoms later in life include drooping eyelids
and absent or incomplete puberty leading to undeveloped sexual organs and absent menstruation.
Occurring in 1 of every 2000 live births, For ten points, identify this genetic abnormality caused by an
absent or incomplete X chromosome.
ANSWER: Turner's Syndrome
This disease shares many features with Noonan syndrome, and one variant of this disease is
caused by ring formation. Sufferers of this disease often have trans-illuminating tumors called cystic
hygromas, and it is also associated with coarctation of the aorta and bicuspid aortic valves. 15% of
sufferers also have horseshoe kidneys, and one of the most striking features is the shield-shaped
chest. Estrogen replacement therapy is a common treatment for this condition. Streak gonads are
another characteristic of this disease, leading to (*) infertility. Patients with this condition also have a
webbed neck and mild mental retardation. For 10 points, name this genetic condition, in which patients
have only one X chromosome.
ANSWER: Turner's syndrome
Close relatives of this creature include Gorosaurus and the smaller Albertosaurus, both of which
lived contemporaneously with the unrelated Hadrosaurs. The largest known skeleton of this dinosaur is
found at the Field Museum in Chicago and is named Sue. Jack Horner argues that this therapod was
unable to run because of its heavy head, and that it must have therefore been a scavenger. Much
speculation about this dinosaur focuses on its tiny arms. For 10 points, name this carnivorous dinosaur
of the Cretaceous, whose name translates as "tyrant lizard king".
ANSWER: Tyrannosaurus rex [accept Tyrannosaurus rex]
This organism's teeth were described as "lethal bananas" rather than the typical flat blades seen in other
contemporary carnivorous animals. Fossils of this organism have been almost exclusively confined to
western North America, though a similar species, Tarbosaurus bataar (TAR-bo-SOR-us buh-TAR), was
discovered in the Gobi Desert. In 2007, a collagen sample from this relative of Albertosaurus was found to
be homologous to that of chickens. For 10 points, name this largest-known terrestrial carnivore.
ANSWER: Tyrannosaurus rex [or T. rex]
In 1994, Thomas Holtz argued that the enlarged metatarsal bones of this animal evolved in an
evolutionary arms race since the same structure is also found in its smaller prey. Unique skull
features of this creature include pneumatized or 'honeycombed' spaces, which allowed increased
bone flexibility and compared to other members of Tetanurae, this animal possesses a more U-shaped
jaw structure. The earliest direct relative to this creature is the feathered Chinese Dilong and a
recent debate concerns whether the "Nano" variety is a unique species or juvenile of this animal.
Despite its prominent binocular vision consistent with predatory behavior, Jack Horner argues this
creature is exclusively a (*) scavenger due to its large olfactory bulbs in an on-going debate. The largest
and most complete specimen of this creature is displayed at the Chicago Field Museum and is named "Sue".
Possessing a two-digit forelimb as opposed to the three of the earlier, Allosaurus, FTP, identify this large
North American Late Cretaceous theropod dinosaur whose name translates from the Latin to "king of the
tyrant lizards".
ANSWER: Tyrannosaurus rex
Tinker is the only juvenile one of these creatures while Sue is the largest one to be discovered. This creature
lived during the time that Laurasia and Gondwana was completely separated, for which reason the only
fossils of it are found in North America and Asia. The first evidence of this animal was discovered in 1902
by Barnum Brown in Hell Creek Montana though it wasn't named until three years later by Henry Fairfield
Osborn. Famous for its big body but short arms, this is FTP what famous dinosaur that has a tendency for
chasing Jeff Goldblum around in the Jurassic Park movies.
ANSWER: Tyrannosaur or T-Rex or Tyrannosaurus Rex
Mutations in the FAH and HPD genes cause the elevation of this amino acid in the body, and the formation
of glycogen begins with the addition of glucose to residues of it in the protein glycogenin. Synthesis of
epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine requires it as a metabolic precursor. It displays a much smaller
absorbance than tryptophan at the 280 nm UV wavelength, and, like serine and threonine, residues of this
amino acid are phosphorylated in receptor kinases exemplified by the insulin receptors. For 10 points,
identify this amino acid, synthesized in mammals by the hydroxylation of phenylalanine, which is coded by
the letter Y.
ANSWER: tyrosine [or tyr; accept Yuntil mentioned]
One enzyme has conserved SH2 and SH3 domains that bind to this amino acid and are similar to
another enzyme that acts on residues of this amino acid and activates STAT proteins; those are SRC
and JAK. Sulfation of residues of this amino acid in secretory proteins occurs mostly in the transGolgi network. One disorder related to production of this compound has a rare form that occurs due
to defects in production of (*) tetrahydrobiopterin. That disease, which more commonly occurs due to
mutations in the PAH gene, is phenylketonuria. This amino acid is a precursor to catecholamines like
dopamine and synthesis of thyroxine involves attaching iodine atoms to this amino acid. Phenylalanine,
tryptophan, and this amino acid are the only ones to have phenol groups. For 10 points, name this amino
acid symbolized Y.
ANSWER: tyrosine
This amino acid is iodinated in the thyroid to form the T3 and T4 hormones, and its namesake
hydroxylase converts it to l-DOPA, making it essential for dopamine and a precursor to melanin.
Imatinib inhibits the namesake (*) kinases of this amino acid. It can be synthesized from adding a
hydroxyl group to phenylalanine, and defects in that process result in PKU. It was first discovered in casein,
and thus takes its name from the Greek for "cheese." For 10 points, name this t-initialed amino acid, whose
symbol is Y.
ANSWER: tyrosine (or Tyr; accept Y before mentioned)
Addition of this protein to histone 2B is indicative of transcriptionally active DNA, and this
polypeptide modifies the lysine residues of target proteins. Viral proteins are (*) tagged with a poly
chain of this protein prior to their breakdown and incorporation into major histocompatibility complex
molecules. For 10 points, name this protein that marks cytosolic proteins for proteolytic degradation in
proteasomes and derives it name from the Latin term for "everywhere."
ANSWER: ubiquitin
An enzyme that binds to this protein forms a heterodimer with APPBP1 to modify another protein very
similar to this one called NEDD8. Another enzyme that binds to this protein is encoded in humans by
CDC34. This protein forms thioester linkages with three different classes of enzymes with which it interacts
in sequence. This protein forms an isopeptide bond between its C-terminal glycine residue and a lysine side
chain on its substrate. This protein binds to namesake "activating" and "conjugating" enzymes, labeled E1
and E2, and its attachment to targets by E3 ligases directs those targets to the proteasome. For 10 points,
name this small protein that gets attached to proteins targeted for degradation, which is named for the fact
that it is found in almost all cells.
ANSWER: ubiquitin
Mooren names a type of these entities that occur in the cornea. A disease named for these entities is
linked to SNP rs5771069 in the IL-17 rel gene. Pyoderma gangrenosum causes them to appear over
the skin, and primary sclerosing cholangitis is associated with a form of colitis named for them that is
continuous and usually isolated to the large intestine. Crohn's disease is associated with aphthous
ones appearing in the (*) mouth, and they are also caused in one organ by excessive consumption of
NSAIDs or by infection with an anaerobic urease positive organism treated via triple therapy. For 10 points,
name these breaks or discontinuities in a membrane, whose gastric variety can be caused by Helicobacter
pylori.
ANSWER: ulcers [or sores]
The proximal third of this bone is broken in a Monteggia fracture. Like the mandible, this
bone contains a triangular projection called the coronoid process. The tuberosity of this bone
serves as the insertion point of the brachialis muscle, and the artery named for this bone splits
into namesake anterior and posterior recurrent arteries. The nerve named for this bone can be
compressed in Guyon's canal. The styloid process is on the distal end of this bone, whose
proximal end terminates in a hooklike structure called the olecranon process, which articulates
with the medial epicondyle of the humerus and is near the insertion point of the triceps muscle.
For 10 points, name this bone on the pinky side of the forearm, which lies next to the radius.
ANSWER: ulna
This is used as a crosslinking agent to bind RNA-binding proteins to RNA in the CLIP assay. It's not
bleach or ethanol, but people using fume hoods for tissue culture usually apply this to the hood for
one hour before use. 7-dehydrocholesterol is converted to cholecalciferol via this phenomenon.
Cockayne syndrome is caused by a defect in a pathway responsible for removing the products of this
phenomenon; that pathway is NER. This phenomenon is responsible for creating 6,4 products and
thymine (*) dimers, and people with xeroderma pigmentosum are sensitive to it. It is used to visualize gels
that have been stained by ethidium bromide, and this phenomenon oxidizes melanin, thus darkening skin.
For 10 points, name this type of electromagnetic radiation that has a wavelength between 10 and 400 nm.
ANSWER: Ultraviolet light [prompt on "light" or "sunlight"]
Avobenzone is one of the best-known retardants of this entity. One form of it causes thymine dimers to form
in DNA, and it is often used on ethidium bromide-stained gels following electrophoresis. Its B form causes
the release of melanin from melanocytes in humans to produce a tan color and slow this entity's effects.
Thus, many products aiming to block it utilize melanin derivatives. For 10 points, name this part of the
spectrum just shorter than visible with wavelengths 10 to 400 nanometers, a part of sunlight causing
sunburns, which is blocked by the ozone layer.
ANSWER: ultraviolet light [accept UV; accept UVA until "form"] do not accept "sunlight"]
In humans, OPN 5 is exquisitely sensitive to this phenomenon. Base excision repair is responsible
for excising thymidine dimers in DNA, which are formed by this phenomenon. This phenomenon
causes ethidium bromide to fluoresce, which is why it's used to visualize agarose gels. This
phenomenon oxidizes (*) melanin, which darkens skin, though it is also responsible for the vast majority
of skin cancer. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, a type of radiation with a higher frequency than
violet light.
ANSWER: UV light [or ultraviolet light; prompt on light or sunlight]
A combination of the drug psoralen and this phenomenon is often used as a treatment for psoriasis and
eczema. The OPN5 gene codes for a receptor for this phenomenon in animals. Individuals with xeroderma
pigmentosum are susceptible to damage caused by this phenomenon, which forms covalent bonds that result
in thymine dimers. This stimulus converts ergosterol and 7-dehydrocholesterol to their respective forms of
vitamin D. This form of radiation causes chlorophyll to fluoresce red. Skin cancer can result from
overexposure to, for 10 points, what kind of electromagnetic radiation more energetic than visible light?
ANSWER: ultraviolet light [or UV light]
When this structure attaches incorrectly, it's called a velamentous (veh-lah-MEN-tuhs) insertion.
This structure contains Wharton's jelly, along with a pair of arteries and a single vein that carries
oxygenated blood. The blood contained within it contains large amounts of embryonic-like stem cells,
and this structure connects the (*) placenta to the fetus. For 10 points, name this structure which attaches
to the belly button, a cord that connects the mother to the baby that is cut after birth.
ANSWER: umbilical cord
One method of degrading this compound involves reacting it with water and an electron acceptor, producing
a barbiturate. Plants detoxify from excess amounts of it by converting it to lathyrine. One nucleotide
containing this compound makes bilirubin more water-soluble by transferring glucuronic acid. Thymidylate
synthase is inhibited by an anti-cancer drug containing a fluorine bound to this molecule's ring. The energy
for glycogen synthesis is provided by hydrolyzing a phosphate group on another nucleotide containing this
compound. This compound, which tautomerizes from a lactam to lactim, appears in a cloverleaf shaped
molecule that can wobble and one that can form 5' caps or have its introns removed by splicing. For 10
points, name this nucleobase that replaces thymine in RNA.
ANSWER: uracil [or U]
A monophosphorylated version of this substance is used to treat orotic aciduria. This
chemical's 5-bromo, 2-deoxy version is a common label to assay cell cycle progression in flow
cytometry, and its 5-fluoro version is an antimetabolite. During glycogen synthesis, glucose
monomers are conjugated to a derivative of this molecule, which acts as a carrier. A polymer of
this substance was used by Marshall Nirenberg and Heinrich Matthaei in a classic experiment
that produced a polymer of phenylalanine, which showed that the codon for phenylalanine was
three of this nucleotide. For 10 points, name this nucleobase which is unique to RNA and forms
base pairs with adenine.
ANSWER: uracil [or uridine; accept UMP, UDP, or UTP]
During glycogen synthesis, a diphosphate derivative of this molecule serves as a carrier for glucose
monomers. Cytosine spontaneously deaminates to form this molecule, which can be specifically removed by
DNA glycosidase. Marshall Nirenberg showed that a polymer of this molecule, added to a certain cell-free
extract, would result in the creation of proteins with radioactive phenylalanine. A "pseudo-" form of this
molecule, symbolized psi, is found in one arm of transfer RNA, and it forms two hydrogen bonds with
adenine. For 10 points, name this nucleotide that replacing thymine in RNA
ANSWER: uracil [or uridine]
The propylthio version of this compound is used in the treatment of hyperthyroidism. A derivative of
this compound is administered with leucovorin in a common chemotherapy drug; that derivative is the
5-fluoro version. This compound is synthesized via the decarboxylation of orotic acid. Nirenberg showed
that polymers composed exclusively of it code for peptides containing only phenylalanine. The
deamination of cytosine leads to this compound, a pseudo-version of which is present in tRNA. Originally
discovered in hydrolyzed herring sperm, this pyrimidine has two ketone groups. For 10 points, name this
base pair which replaces thymine in RNA and pairs with adenine.
ANSWER: Uracil or uridine
Its presence would increase the probability of a hyperchromic shift and decrease the melting temperature.
Its namesake N-glycosylase always recognizes it as a mistake to be replaced via excision repair. The
product of deamination from cytosine, which causes the disappearance of G-C base pairs from DNA, this
pyrimidine is abundant even if folic acid is deficient. Isolated from herring sperm, FTP name this nucleotide
base that pairs with adenine, but only in RNA.
ANSWER: uracil
Dehydration of this compound creates carbodiimides. A solution of this substance and lithium
chloride can be used to extract RNA from cells, and it that solution it is present in excess of 8 molar.
This substance was the denaturing agent in the experiment that showed that the three-dimensional
structure of a protein is encoded by its one-dimensional structure, performed on ribonuclease by
Anfinsen. The BUN measures the amount of this substance in the blood, where it is the primary
ineffective solute. It is created by a pathway regulated by the activity of carbamoyl phosphate synthase, and
in that pathway it is created from the transformation of arginine to ornithine. That namesake cycle occurs in
the liver, where it transforms the ammonia from protein catabolism. For 10 points, name this compound, the
primary form of nitrogenous waste secreted by humans.
ANSWER: Urea
The condensation of two molecules of this substance forms a biuret. In the human body, this molecule
undergoes a cycle which reacts ornithine and carbamoyl phosphate to form citrulline. A BUN test is used to
determine levels of this substance in the blood. The reaction of silver cyanate and ammonium chloride
forms this product of the Wohler synthesis. Ammonia and carbon dioxide are reacted to form this molecule
in the Bosch-Meiser process. This organic molecule consists of two amines connected by a central carbonyl
group. For 10 points, name this product of ammonia processing in humans, a molecule for which urine is
named.
ANSWER: urea [or CO(NH2)2; or carbamide; or carbonyl diamide; or carbonyldiamine; or diaminomethanal; or diaminomethanone]
In the body, a reaction that uses the enzyme arginase produces both ornithine and this product in a
process that has a citrulline intermediate. Birds and reptile produce a similar acidified form of this
compound which is excreted as a white mass. Sometimes known as carbamide, it contains two amino
groups bonded to a central carbonyl group and was produced by Friedrich Wohler (VUH-ler) in a reaction
that showed that organic compounds could be produced from simple starting ingredients. For 10 points,
name this compound found in mammalian urine.
ANSWER: urea [or carbamide before it is read; or carbonyl diamide; or CH4N2O]
The first step in the chemical pathway named for this molecule is catalyzed by the enzyme carbamoyl
phosphate synthase. That namesake biochemical process that takes place in the liver and begins with the
combination of ammonia and bicarbonate ions. Friedrich Wohler's attempt to create ammonium cyanate
led to this compound becoming the first organic compound to be synthesized in a laboratory. For 10 points,
name this nitrogen-containing molecule which is excreted out of the body in urine.
ANSWER: urea [or carbamide]
A deeply eutectic solvent is formed from a mixture of this compound and choline chloride. A method
of identifying H. pylori infections detects isotope-labeled carbon dioxide produced from this
compound's degradation by a nickel metalloenzyme. Its biosynthesis depends on the presence of
N-acetylglutamic acid, the obligate allosteric activator of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. Three
ATPs are hydrolyzed to two ADP and one AMP in producing this compound through non-standard
(*) amino acid intermediates, such as citrulline and ornithine, in its namesake cycle. Friedrich Wohler
disproved vitalism by synthesizing this compound from inorganic precursors. For 10 points, name this
compound with formula CO(NH2)2, the form in which mammals excrete nitrogenous waste.
ANSWER: urea [or carbamide]
Transporters of this compound are coded by the SLC14A2 gene. One structure maintains a high
concentration of this molecule by a mechanism in which alternating permeability of the ascending
limb and descending limb and opposite directions of flow create a high sodium gradient in the
medulla; that mechanism is countercurrent multiplication. In his experiment on protein folding,
Anfinsen treated RNase A with 2-mercaptoethanol and this molecule. In a process that creates this
compound, (*) carbamoyl phosphate is created from bicarbonate and glutamine. In that process, arginase
hydrolyzes arginine into ornithine and this compound. For 10 points, name this compound which has a
namesake cycle used in making nitrogenous waste into a form more easily excretable from the body.
ANSWER: urea cycle
Defects in this pathway leads to HHH syndrome and lysinuric protein intolerance, and one intermediate in
this pathway can be decarboxylated to putresciene. The main enzyme of this process is controlled
allosterically by N-acetylglutamate, and that enzyme, mitochondrial carbamoyl phosphate synthetase,
transfers a group from glutamine to phosphorylated bicarbonate. It is linked to the Krebs cycle via the
creation of fumarate, and ther intermediates in this process include citrulline and ornithine, the latter of
which is produced by the cleavage of arginine. FTP, name this cycle that takes place in the cytosol and
mitochondria, responsible for creating a namesake nitrogenous molecule and component of urine.
ANSWER: Urea cycle
The kinin system was discovered upon realization that injection of it leads to low blood pressure, and
the surface tension of it is measured in the Hay test. One disease affecting it in infants is a result of a
mutation in the BCKDHA gene, prevents the breakdown of leucine, isoleucine, and valine, and results in
it smelling like maple syrup. Albumen is found in it in sufferers of Bright's disease, and it normally
contains hippuric acid, creatinine, urea, and other nitrogenous compounds. For 10 points, name this
liquid waste product that is excreted by the kidneys, stored in the bladder, and discharged through the
urethra.
ANSWER: urine [or pee; or other synonyms]
Its specific gravity is about 1.017; this is higher than water's because of dissolved substances, about
60% of which are inorganic. About 119 out of 120 parts of it are reabsorbed into the bloodstream,
leaving about 1.2 quarts per day in the average adult. As blood passes through the glomeruli, blood
pressure, as opposed by the osmotic pull of the plasma proteins, drives water and salts into the
glomerular space at about 7.2 cubic inches per minute. For ten points, name this fluid, typically acidic and
colored yellow, filtered by the kidneys.
ANSWER: Urine (accept equivalents)
This structure is found immediately ventral to the pouch of Douglas. Scarring in this organ can lead to
Asherman's syndrome, and Gartner's ducts may remain in the broad ligament of this organ rather than
vanishing during gestation. Agenesis of this organ occurs in MRKH syndrome, and this organ can also be
bicornate or unicornate in other malformations. This organ's lining, the endometrium, is sloughed off
during menstruation, and when zygotes implant outside of it, ectopic pregnancy occurs. For 10 points,
name this organ of the female reproductive system in which gestation occurs.
ANSWER: uterus
A procedure performed on this organ, the Tokyo method, differs from Wertheim's method by operating on
this organ's cardinal ligament rather than the parametrium. A hydatidiform mole in this organ may result in
deviations from McDonald's rule, which measures the height of this organ's fundus. This organ's innermost
lining thickens during the follicular phase. That layer, the endometrium, is shed in the absence of
progesterone. Two Fallopian tubes connect it to the ovaries, and this organ is connected to the vagina by the
cervix. For 10 points, name this female reproductive organ where the fetus develops.
ANSWER: uterus [or womb]
BCG is an example of these medical entities. The effectiveness of these medical tools are increased by
adjuvants. Attenuation is used to create "live" examples of these entities. The MMR one is given to
children in order to fight three separate diseases. New ones against influenza must be formulated each year.
For 10 points, name these prophylactics that use biological material derived from a pathogen to get the
body to attack the pathogen, thus providing a measure of preventive immunity.
ANSWER: vaccines [prompt on prophylactics]
One example of these things was made from HBsAg isolated from human plasma. One method of producing
these things involves growth in chorioallantoic membrane. These things can be prepared by purifying
capsular polysaccharides. By far the most important developer of these things was Maurice Hilleman.
Administration of these things has the potential to cause anaphylaxis or an Arthus-type reaction. Agents
included with these things that increase their effectiveness, most commonly aluminum salts, are called
adjuvants. In some cases, after a fixed period of time, they are followed by a booster. Their attenuated type
is created with live viruses. For 10 points, identify these things that improve or provide immunity to a
disease.
ANSWER: vaccines
A precursor to the use of these substances was made widespread by Edward Jenner, who used an
organism that names these substances. One discredited theory linked the use of these items to autism.
These items can use an attenuated pathogen or its components in order to stimulate the (*) immune
system, allowing it to recognize future infections from that pathogen. For 10 points, name this
immunological substance that is given to patients to confer immunity to a disease.
ANSWER: vaccines
An example of these things developed by Paul Offit replaced one blamed for several cases of
intussusception. Several units of another example had to be recalled after the Cutter Incident, and yet
another one was contaminated by SV40. Albert Sabin developed an oral one of these things, while the first
of them was inspired by the fact that milkmaids appeared to be resistant to smallpox. For 10 points, name
these drugs developed by Edward Jenner and Jonas Salk, which confer immunity to a particular disease.
ANSWER: vaccine [accept more specific answers]
The majority of the standard array of these things were developed by Maurice Hilleman. Max Theiler
remains the only person to win a Nobel for developing one of these things. The development of the most
successful of these saw a little boy variolated after being injected with pus from a milkmaid's blisters. That
one was developed by Edward Jenner using what we now know to be cowpox. For 10 points, identify these
things used to confer immunity to infectious agents and which include the smallpox one.
ANSWER: viral vaccines
In yeast cells, these structures sometimes grow black particles made of crystallized sodium
phosphates called dancing bodies. In the vascular cambium cells of plants, these many tiny versions
of these are present during the winter but can increase to 90% of the cell capacity in the warmer
months. Versions of these structures that pump out excess water are called contractile ones while those used
in digestion are called 'food' ones. Surrounded by a membrane called a tonoplast, for 10 points, identify
these organelles that play a role in the storage of water, food and other materials.
ANSWER: vacuole
In onions, this organelle contains allinases which are responsible for forming the chemical that causes
tears. Strontium and cobalt can be sequestered within these organelles, which maintain osmotic equilibrium
by pumping potassium. The tonoplast surrounds one of these organelles, which contain the "cell sap". That
is the central one of these, which is responsible for turgor pressure, which maintains the shape and structure
of plant and bacteria cells. For 10 points, name this water-filled organelle.
ANSWER: vacuole
In plants, this structure contains a solution called cell sap, and flowers derive their color from
pigments located in these organelles, such as betalains and anthocyanins. After phagocytosis, a
lysosome merges with "food" one of these organelles to begin digestion. Protists such as Paramecium
expel excess water with the (*) "contractile" type of this organelle. A membrane called the tonoplast
surrounds these structures in plants, which provide turgor pressure through osmosis. Up to 90% of a plant
cell's volume can be occupied by, for ten points, what organelles that store organic compounds and water?
ANSWER: vacuoles
In Plasmodium, proteases (PRO-tee-aze-iz) are found in the "food" type of these organelles. In one form,
they contain a substance called cell sap. In plants, proteins called aquaporins (ock-wuh-PORE-inz) are
found
in the membrane surrounding this organelle, called the tonoplast (TOE-noh-plast). This organelle can take
up as much as ninety percent of a plant cell. This organelle maintains the plant's rigidity by causing a
pressure called turgidity that is determined by their water content. For 10 points, name these storage
organelles found in many cells.
ANSWER: vacuole
A combination of amino acids and water comprise the inside of one type of these structures and is
known as cell sap, while in yeast cells, these organelles contain black particles called dancing bodies
that store phosphate. In plants, the membrane of this organelle is embedded with proteins called (*)
aquaporins, which regulate the flow of water; that membrane is the tonoplast. This organelle expels excess
water with its contractile variant, and it can also prevent a cell from lysing by maintaining its turgidity. For
10 points, name this large organelle that serve as the primary source for a cell's food and water.
ANSWER: Vacuole
The abnormal creation of these objects in animal cells due to ineffectiveness of an enzyme in a related
structure is a major cytological symptom of mannosidosis. A series of HRP membrane flow studies
have placed good bounds on the rate at which these organelles can be created. HLA class II
specialization occurs in these organelles after HLA class II is injected into one (*) containing a
degraded antigen. Cytoplasmic tail anchors can be used to target substances to these organelles by vesicular
transport to create plant bioreactors. In plants these cells are bounded by a membrane known as a tonoplast,
while in animal cells they are usually created by pinocytosis or phagocytosis. Used in plants to generally
store metabolytes and to maintain turgor pressure, FTP, name these organelles which consist of large,
water-filled sacs used to store cellular materials.
ANSWER: vacuoles
Birds, but not humans, have a renal portal type of this anatomical object, which makes their kidney
usage more varied. One of these objects in humans is located by the bow and arrow sign at the end of
a colonoscopy. That object and its associated sphincter muscle form the boundary between sections of
the small intestine. In addition to the ileocecal [ILL-ee-oh-SEE-kul] example of these objects, humans
have two of these that are located at the bases of major arteries and two that are atrioventricular,
the mitral and the tricuspid. Name these objects that allow liquids such as blood to flow in only one
direction.
ANSWER: valves
Diabetes mellitus can damage this micro-system in the retina, and an occlusion of this type often results in
thrombosis. Cooksonia from the Silurian Period is the earliest known plant of this type, and the stems of
dicots are distinguished from monocots by a ring arrangement of these bundles. This term is combined with
gastro- to name the central cavity of cnidarians (nai-DAIR-ee-ins), and the tube feet of echinoderms (ehKAI-no-durmz) are propelled by a water version of this system. Bryophytes like moss lack this tissue type,
whose cambium produces xylem and phloem. Give this term that refers to the transport of liquids through
living things, a term often prefixed with "cardio-" to describe the circulatory system.
ANSWER: vascular
Unlike a predecessor tissue, this tissue gives rise to highly periclinal cells. One uncommon form of this
tissue is a unifacial band that gives rise to cells that support transpiration; this tissue is generally
bifacial, however. Consisting of fusiform and ray cells, this tissue is initially embedded on and
propagates with growth away from the outside of the (*) pith in the organisms in which it appears. It
does not appear in monocot angiosperms because it gives rise to secondary tissues absent in those plants.
For 10 points, name this plant tissue, a lateral meristem giving rise to secondary circulatory tissues like
phloem and xylem and that is similar to another lateral meristem that produces cork.
ANSWER: the vascular cambium [prompt on cambiums or cambia; prompt on meristems before it's mentioned]
The KNOX genes play a role in the growth and coordination of this tissue. When the fusiform initials of this
tissue are of a uniform size, this tissue is called "stratified," and the fusiform initials give rise to cells which
possess an axial orientation. This tissue's isodiametric ray initials give rise to parenchymatous cells. It is
responsible for the secondary growth of dicotyledenous plants, and unlike the cork cambium, this tissue
gives rise to secondary xylem and phloem cells. For 10 points, identify this actively dividing lateral
meristem tissue which is found between the xylem and phloem cells.
ANSWER: vascular cambium [accept apical meristem for the first sentence; prompt on partial]
The drug Vaprisol is an antagonist for this hormone, as are the Vaptan class of drugs and
Democlocycline. The syndrome of inappropriate this hormone is a common paraneoplastic effect of
small cell lung cancer. This hormone triggers the phosphatidylinositol pathway throught V1
receptors in certain smooth muscle tissues. Angiotension II acts to release both Aldosterone and this
hormone. This hormone differs from Oxytocin at only two amino acid residues, and its deficiency is the
most common cause for Diabetes insipidus. The major function of this hormone is to open aquaporins in
the distal convoluted tubule and collecting ducts of the kidneys. For 10 points, name this nine-peptide
hormone that causes reduced urine volume.
ANSWER: Arginine Vasopressin [accept AVP, accept Anti-Diuretic Hormone or ADH, do not accept "Lysine Vasopressin" or "Lysopressin"]
Examples of this type of structure are the hypophyseal and hepatic portal varieties. The presence of
subcutaneous fat in these structures that absorb low-frequency light results in their coloration. These
structures are less muscular than their counterparts and prevent backflow by the presence of valves. Though
not arteries, the umbilical and pulmonary varieties of these structures carry blood away from the heart. For
10 points, name these blood vessels that appear blue and normally carry deoxygenated blood to the heart.
ANSWER: veins
A second species of this animal is named for Polish scientist Halszka Osmolska. A breakthrough study
in 2007 discovered that this animal had ulnar papillae on its arm bones. One of these Late Cretaceous
theropods was found in the "Fighting Dinosaurs" fossil, where this predator was preserved locked in
combat with a Protoceratops. This Mongolian dinosaur's larger relatives included Deinonychus, and
scientists now believe that this turkey-sized dinosaur had features that it may have flapped for stability
while jumping onto larger prey. For 10 points, name this dinosaur with a sickle-claw on its foot, whose
name translates as "fast thief."
ANSWER: Velociraptor
The objects between these things consist of a jelly-like nucleus pulposis surrounded by the annulus
fibrosis, which tears when those objects are herniated. The two highest of these things are called the
atlas and axis, and form a joint with the occipital bone. Those objects, discs, hold these things
together. Humans have twenty-four of them, coming in cervical, thoracic, and (*) lumbar varieties,
though nine more are fused together in the sacrum and coccyx. For ten points, name these bones found in
the spine.
ANSWER: vertebrae [prompt on descriptions, such as the bones that make up the spine]
This taxon is referred to as "Craniata" when it is expanded to admit the hagfish, and classes contained in
this taxon include Agnatha, the jawless fish. Other classes include cartilaginous and bony fishes,
Chondricthyes and Osteicthyes. FTP, identify this sub-phylum, home to the classes Aves and Mammalia,
named for its possession of a spinal column, which shares its name with the series of bones that make up
that column, which come in cervical, thoracic, and lumbar types.
ANSWER: Vertebrates [or Vertebrata; prompt on Chordata if respondent buzzes on a clue about a class contained by this taxon]
The kiss-and-run mechanism proposes a way that these structures are recycled. Sar1 drives the
formation of buds on these structures, and ADP ribosylation factor localizes to them in order to
recruit coatomers. One class of these structures has a triskelion protein surrounding an AP complex.
James Rothman won the 2013 Nobel Prize in Physiology for his discovery of V-SNAREs and
T-SNAREs in the (*) docking of these structures. They have a similar shape as liposomes, and are usually
coated with COPI, COPII, or clathrin. One model of the Golgi proposes that these structures move between
each stack. These objects are formed in axons to release neurotransmitters into the synapse. For 10 points,
name these small "bubbles" that transport molecules around cells.
ANSWER: vesicles [or synaptic vesicles; or vesicle coats before "coated" is read]
Their formation can be mediated by the Sec23/24 homodimer in yeast, but only when used for anterograde
movement. Several ones are found in MVBs, which themselves are a specialized type of this structure. The
tetanus and botulinum toxins interfere with their role in neuronal activity, specifically by targeting tSNARES and v-SNARES, while ones that bear GLUT4 in muscle cells are highly responsive to insulin
levels. The COPI complex allows them to form from the cis-Golgi, while clathrin facilitates their traffic
between the plasma membrane and trans-Golgi. These organelles are typically specialized by their contents,
and serve as the basis for organelles like the vacuole and the lysosome. For 10 points, name these highly
adaptable lipid bubbles within the cell, which come in transport, secretory, and synaptic varieties.
ANSWER: vesicles
Apomixis makes the stamen this type of structure in the common dandelion. Prior to the discovery
of melatonin [meh-luh-TOH-nin], the pineal gland was thought to be one of these in mammals. The
mitosomes of Giardia [gee-AR-dee-uh] parasites bear this relationship to mitochondria, and the teeth
of whale sharks can also be described by this term. The eyes of cave-dwelling fish and salamanders
are often this type of structure, also seen in the pelvises of snakes, the wings of ostriches, and the
human appendix. Identify this term for an organ that served a role in an ancestor species but no
longer has a function.
ANSWER: vestigial structures [prompt on non-functioning, non-working, and anything conveying a similar idea]
One organism of this genus contains the CTX phi prophage in its genome. One species in this genus
exhibits the Kanagawa phenomenon on blood agar; that species also expresses the thermostable direct
hemolysin and is known as the parahemolyticus species. The LuxI/R quorum sensor was discovered in
another organism of this genus, with species name fischeri. The vulnificus species can cause a fatal
blistering infection when exposed to a wound, and a more well-known species in this genus produces a
toxin which activates G-proteins by ribosylation. That species has O1 and O139 pathogenic strains that
cause watery diarrhea. For 10 points, name this genus of comma-shaped bacteria, which includes the
causative agent of cholera.
ANSWER: Vibrio
This man's namesake angle is defined by the intersection of the nasobasilar and nasosubnasal lines. In
encephalitis, the spaces named for him and Robin around the brain's blood vessels become apparent. He
names a triad consisting of venous stasis, trauma, and hypercoagulability that predispose a patient to
venous thrombosis. This anatomy teacher to Franz Boas was a major opponent of Semmelweiss'
hand-washing regime. He added the "functio lasa" condition to classic descriptions of inflammation. This
father of pathology may be most famous for the idea that he stated "omnis cellula e cellula", expanding on
the work of Theodor Schwann. For 10 points, name this German doctor who elucidated the idea that every
cell comes from another cell, thus completing cell theory.
ANSWER: Rudolf Virchow
One example of these entities enters through the plasmodesmata (plahs-mod-dehs-MAH-tuh) using the
protein P30. Icosahedral (eye-kos-uh-HEE-dral) is one type of capsid structure in these entities. One type of
these uses reverse transcriptase (tran-SCRIPT-ays) to produce DNA from RNA. They can reproduce by
either the lytic or lysogenic (lie-soh-GEN-ick) cycles, and the "retro" variety includes HIV. When they
attack bacteria, they are known as bacteriophages (back-TEE-ree-oh-fay-jehs). For 10 points, name this
class of infectious agents that includes rabies, tobacco mosaic, and influenza.
ANSWER: virus
The Bunya types of these particles contain both positive and negative-sense nucleotide sequences and are
therefore classified as ambisense. Their life cycle is typically classified as lytic or lysogenic.
They are covered by protomers which often arrange into a helical or icosahedral shape when forming
capsids, structures which get uncoated so these particles can release their genomes (JEE-nomes).
Some of them work by reverse transcribing, and the early part of their life cycle involves attachment and
penetration. Identify these particles, examples of which include Epstein-Barr, Ebola, and HIV.
ANSWER: viruses
The CXADR receptor is utilized by adeno ones which are icosahedral. Classifications schemes for
them include ICTV and the Baltimore scheme. They can have single or double (*) stranded genetic
material which can be composed of DNA or RNA. Lysogenic ones integrate their genetic material into the
host. Common components include spikes, envelopes, and capsids. Reverse transcriptase is used by retro
ones such as HIV. For 10 points, name these infectious agents that require a host cell to replicate.
ANSWER: viruses
These things can transfer DNA from one organism to another via transduction. Reverse transcriptase is
used in the reproductive cycle of "retro" ones. They can be classified as "helical" or "icosahedral"
depending on the shape of the capsid surrounding their genetic material. These things can reproduce by the
lytic or lysogenic cycle, and more generally by injecting their DNA into a "host" cell's genome. For 10
points, name this infectious particles that cause diseases like West Nile and influenza.
ANSWER: viruses [or bacteriophages, a subset; or virions]
These things are surrounded by spikes called peplomers. Positive- and negative-sense make up two of the
seven categories developed by David Baltimore for these objects. When these things do not have a lipid
membrane, they are called naked. Some of these replicate by reverse transcription, and these are surrounded
by a protein shell called a capsid. Name these objects that can only replicate inside living cells and are
responsible for many diseases.
ANSWER: viruses
The compound AZT is typically used to inhibit one specific example of this group. Members of this
group can replicate using either the lysogenic or lytic cycles. One member of this group named T4 is
known for attacking E. coli. These entities have a protein coat called a capsid. Members of this group that
attack bacteria are called bacteriophages (back-TEER-ee-oh-FAY-jezz). For 10 points, name this group of
infectious agents, which includes the tobacco mosaic and influenza varieties.
ANSWER: viruses [or HIV before "example" is read; or human immunodeficiency virus before "example" is read; or AIDS before "example" is read; or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome before "example" is read]
Sputnik is the name given to an infection that targets the unusually complex Mimi one of these agents.
They can be classified under the Baltimore scheme. One class of them is responsible for the E6 and E7
oncogenes, and some of them have gag genes. Their reproductive cycle can be classified as lysogenic or
lytic. Their central component is a protein capsid which encloses their genetic material, which can be RNA
in the "retro" type. For 10 points, name these infectious agents that require a host cell to replicate.
ANSWER: virus
David Baltimore names a classification scheme for these organisms and also discovered an enzyme
used by one type of these organisms. A model organism for these organisms was discovered by Esther
Lederberg. The DNA of one of these organisms was labeled with radioactive phosphorus while their
protein coat was labeled with radioactive sulfur in the (*) Hershey-Chase experiment. That organism
was the T2 phage and that protein coat is their capsid. Another type of these organisms uses the reverse
transcriptase enzyme to produce DNA from its RNA genome and is their "retro-" type. For 10 points, name
these organisms that reproduce inside host cells and which include HIV.
ANSWER: viruses
Depending on the shape of one of their components, these organisms can be classified as icosahedral,
while positive- and negative-strand differentiate these organisms based on whether material in them
can directly code for proteins. These organisms reproduce through either the lytic or lysogenic cycle,
and their genetic material is surrounded by a protein coat called a capsid. For 10 points, name these
microorganisms that spread infections by replicating through host cells, examples of which include herpes.
ANSWER: viruses [prompt on "capsids" before "reproduce" is read; prompt on "bacteriophages"]
The relative expression of CI ["C-one"] and cro ["crow"] determines whether these structures enter the lytic
or lysogenic cycles. Members of the Epstein-Barr class of these agents are associated with Burkett's
lymphoma and cause infectious mononucleosis. Some of these structures employ the protein reverse
transcriptase to integrate their genetic material into their host's chromosomes and are called their "retro"
type. One class of these infectious agents includes strains such as H1N1["H-1-N-1"] and cause the flu. For
10 point, name these biological structures, examples of which include ebola ["ee-bola"] and HIV.
ANSWER: viruses
These biological entities are classified according to the Baltimore System. One subclass of them
reproduces by using the lytic cycle, and can be called temperate if they use the lysogenic cycle. Ones with
an RNA genome are known as "retro" ones. These entities consist of genetic material encased by a capsid
coat. The tobacco mosaic one was the first isolated. Ones that infect bacteria are known as phages. For 10
points, name these infectious agents that technically are not living because they need a host cell to
reproduce.
ANSWER: viruses [or virii]
One type of these organisms uses reverse transcriptase in its replication process. One theory of their
origin is the cellular origin hypothesis, which states that they evolved from DNA from plasmids or
transposons. They are coated by a protein shell called a capsid. The tobacco mosaic one was the first of
these to be discovered, and other types of them include Epstein-Barr and Ebola. For 10 points, name these
infectious agents, some of which cause influenza.
ANSWER: viruses
These organisms can be classified through the Baltimore classification. One type of these organisms are the
main force behind transduction, and examples of those include T4 and lambda. These organisms undergo
either a lysogenic or a lytic life cycle. Those that infect bacteria are known as bacteriophages, and these
pathogens are comprised of a capsid that surrounds either DNA or RNA. For 10 points, name this type of
pathogen that can only reproduce in living cells, examples of which include herpes and HIV.
ANSWER: viruses [prompt on "bacteriophage"]
Drugs against one type of these entities include amantadine and rimantadine, which block the M2 proton
channel. That same type of this entity binds to sialic acid containing receptors using hemagglutinin. Another
type of this entity uses the CCR5 receptor in humans. Hershey and Chase labeled one type of these entities
with radioactive sulfur and phosphate to show that DNA was the genetic material. The use of a filter that
did not let bacteria pass through led to the discovery of the tobacco mosaic variety. For 10 points, name
these infectious agents that can only replicate inside other living organisms, with examples including
bacteriophages, the flu and HIV.
ANSWER: viruses [prompt on flu, bacteriophage, and HIV until mentioned]
One part of the brain that processes this sense is area MT. Another area key to this sense is
organized into thick, thin, and pale stripes. Cytochrome oxidase blobs and dominance columns
govern the organization of the main processing center of this sense, which in turn outputs to the
dorsal and ventral stream. The lenticulostriate pathway sends signals of this sense from the lateral
geniculate nucleus to the striate cortex in the occipital lobe. The (*) nerve responsible for this sense
crosses over in a chiasm next to the pituitary gland. This sense's output is organized via center-surround
inhibition of ganglion cells, which in turn receive input from rhodopsin-containing rod and cone cells in the
retina. For 10 points, name this sense whose organ is the eye.
ANSWER: vision [or equivalents like seeing, sight, etc.]
Neurons of the superior colliculus in the tectum process this type of input, a fact confirmed by Sperry's
experiments on frogs. The rhabdom is part of a repeating unit called the ommatidium that comprises the
main organ associated with this ability in insects. The inner plexiform layer of one structure involved with
processing it contains interneurons called amacrine cells. A key molecule involved in transduction of this
sense is converted from 11-cis to all-trans. Stargardt's disease and the related "dry" and "wet" forms of a
usually age-related condition can cause the loss of this sense via the degeneration of the macula. Rhodopsin
leads to formation of rods and cones, this sense's photoreceptors. For 10 points, what sense is processed by
the the retina and other parts of the eye?
ANSWER: vision [or seeing or sight; accept word forms, such as the visual sense]
Xavier Bichat argued that this theory required two additional fundamental forces, sensibility and
contractility. Carl Driesch sought to prove this theory by chopping up sea urchin embryos. Louis
Pasteur embraced this theory after his studies of fermentation. Formalized by (+) Jakob Berzelius,
this theory took a hit with Adolph Kolbe's synthesis of acetic acid, 22 years after being dealt a major
blow by (*) Friedrich Wohler's synthesis of urea. For 10 points, name this debunked scientific theory
according to which organic materials possessed a special life force.
ANSWER: vitalism
Two different receptors for this vitamin can dimerize or homodimerize to bind DNA and regulate
gene transcription, and one symptom of its deficiency is xerophthalmia. Bitot's spots are another
symptom of deficiency of this vitamin, which is sometimes administered alongside vaccines because of
its role in bolstering lymphocyte activity. This vitamin is key in the synthesis of (*) rhodopsin. Several
carotenoids can be converted into this fat-soluble vitamin, whose metabolite retinal is necessary for scotopic
vision. For 10 points, name this vitamin found in foods like liver and carrots whose deficiency causes night
blindness.
ANSWER: vitamin A
Remnants of the structure most commonly used in humans to store this molecule are endocytosed
by parenchymal cells that interact with apolipoprotein E in chylomicra. One derivative of this vitamin is
used to treat skin wrinkles, and animals often store it as a palmitate ester. All forms of this vitamin
contain a beta-ionone ring with an attached isoprenoid chain, and a precursor to this compound is
betacarotene. For 10 points, name this fat-soluble protein whose deficiency causes night blindness.
ANSWER: Vitamin A [accept retinol; accept retinal; accept retinoic acid]
This vitamin's carboxylic acid form regulates Hox gene expression. Deficiencies of this vitamin may
lead to xerophthalmia (zer-off-THALL-mee-uh), in which the eye does not produce tears. Its aldehyde form
is a component of 11-cis rhodopsin (roh-DOP-sin), which can isomerize to an all-trans form when light hits
it. For 10 points, identify this vitamin also known as retinol that is important for vision, found in abundance
in broccoli and carrots.
ANSWER: vitamin A [or retinol before it is read]
An overdose of this vitamin can cause inflammation at the corners of the mouth, called angular
chelitis. The skin manifestations of Kaposi's sarcoma can be treated using a derivative of this
molecule, and another derivative is used to treat icthyosis. An oxidized form of this vitamin is used to
treat acute promyelocytic leukemia and binds to a receptor that binds to AGGTCA sequences spaced
by five bases. One derivative of this molecule transforms from an 11-cis state to an all-trans state
when hit by a (*) photon. Retinoic acid is a derivative of this molecule, another derivative of which is the
cofactor of rhodopsin. For 10 points, name this fat-soluble vitamin important in color and low-light vision,
which is also called beta-carotene.
ANSWER: Vitamin A [or beta-carotene before mention; accept retinol, retinal, retinoic acid]
A metabolite of this vitamin has a 13-cis form that is used to treat acne. A sign of a deficiency of this
vitamin is a buildup of keratin plaques known as Bitot spots. Deficiencies of this vitamin include
keratomalacia [ker-ah-to-mah-LAY-she-eh], which causes ulcers, and xerophthalmia [zeer-op-THAL-meeuh]. The absorption of a photon causes this vitamin's namesake aldehyde to isomerize from its 11-cis form
to its all-trans form. Along with D, E, and K, this vitamin is fat-soluble. Sometimes known as retinol, this
vitamin can be derived from beta-carotene. For 10 points, name this vitamin that is found in carrots and is
important in preventing night blindness.
ANSWER: Vitamin A [accept retinol before mentioned]
It is not produced by the thyroid gland, but this substance is transported by the transthyretin enzyme in the
human body. An organism that was genetically engineered to produce this substance was transformed with
the crtI and psy genes. Light converts the cis form of one of this compound's derivatives into its trans form,
which causes a G protein to hyperpolarize a photoreceptor cell after the activation of rhodopsin. Animal
sources of this vitamin provide it in the form of retinol, which is responsible for the toxicity of polar bear
liver. For 10 points, name this fat-soluble vitamin which can be synthesized from beta carotene.
ANSWER: vitamin A [accept beta carotene or retinol before mentioned]
The pigment cryptoxanthin is readily converted to this vitamin. A deficiency in this vitamin prevents the
reformation of rhodopsin. This vitamin binds to nuclear receptors to control gene transcription, though it is
better known for being needed for proper retina function. Liver and carrot are the best sources for this
vitamin. For 10 points, identify this fat-soluble vitamin, a deficiency of which causes night blindness.
ANSWER: Vitamin A [accept retinol before mention of "retina"]
One derivative of this vitamin is a cofactor in the enzyme complex mutated in Maple Syrup Urine Disease.
One derivative of this vitamin called TPP helps catalyze the decarboxylation of pyruvate before it is
transformed into acetyl-CoA. A deficiency of this vitamin in chronic alcoholics leads to WernickeKorsakoff syndrome. This vitamin plays a role in the biosynthesis of GABA, and along with Vitamin B7,
this is one of the only two sulfur-containing vitamins. This vitamin was first named aneurin because of the
severe neurological effects when it was lacking in the diet. Because members of the Japenese navy ate a diet
consisting of polished white rice, they were subject to the most notable form of this vitamin's deficiency.
Name this B vitamin, whose deficiency causes beriberi.
ANSWER: Vitamin B1 [or thiamine]
A hydroxyethyl derivative of this compound is a common intermediate in the synthesis of valine, leucine,
and isoleucine. The transketolase activity of red blood cells is studied to measure the deficiency of this
compound whose pyrophosphate form is a coenzyme used to decarboxylate pyruvate to form Acetyl CoA.
In alcoholics its deficiency results in Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, while a more common deficiency of it
originally resulted from a switch to polished rice. Sometimes called aneurin, it consists of a pyrimidine and
a thiazole ring, and that structure was correctly described by Casimir Funk. For 10 points, identify this
vitamin, whose deficiency causes beriberi.
ANSWER: thiamine [or B1]
Structurally, this compound contains a pyrimidine ring and a thiazole ring, so sulfate preservatives usually
break it down. Dietary deficiency in this compound can result in Wernicke's encephalopathy and another
disorder with two forms, one of which is sometimes called endemic neuritis and weakens capillary walls,
while the other causes nerve damage and partial paralysis. Clinically detected by the level of transketolase
activity in red blood cells, this compound prevents both the wet and dry forms of beriberi. FTP, name this
essential vitamin also called B1.
ANSWER: thymine (accept vitamin B1 before it is mentioned)
Two less common conditions associated with this molecule are Korsakoff's syndrome and Wernicke's
encephalopathy. This compound contains a pyrimidine ring attached to a thiazole ring by a methylene
bridge and its discovery is attributed in part to the research of Christiaan Eijkman and Gerrit Grijsn. Found
in high amounts in wheat germ and pork, an insufficiency of this molecule, typically attributed to those who
eat large amounts of polished white rice, is known as beriberi. For 10 points, name this first water soluble
vitamin discovered which is also referred to as thiamine.
ANSWER: vitamin B1
This compound forms a diphosphate cofactor that facilitates the function of transketolase, whose
reduced activity can confirm diagnoses of Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. A deficiency of this
compound leads to a disease characterized by peripheral (*) neuropathy with or without circulatory
involvement, determining its "wet" or "dry" form. Consisting of a pyrimidine and thiazole ring, its scientific
name denotes its inclusion of sulfur. White, de-husked rice lacks, for 10 points, what essential B vitamin
whose deficiency causes beriberi, also known as thiamine?
ANSWER: vitamin B1 (accept thiamine before mentioned)
Sir Rudolph Peters found that pigeons with an insufficient intake of this compound displayed
opisthotonos, a behavior of head retraction characteristic of this compound's deficiency. One of this
compound's derivatives is a cofactor required for the oxydative decarboxylation of pyruvate, which
then forms Acetyl-Co-A, while another, TPP, is a coenzyme in the catabolism of sugars and amino
acids. A deficiency of this compound in mammals results in (*) beriberi, and it was first named aneurin
due to the detrimental neurological effects it causes when lacking in the diet. A pyrimidine and a thiazole
ring form, for ten points , what water-soluble vitamin, also known as thiamine?
ANSWER: Vitamin B1 (accept thiamine before mentioned)
Antagonists of this vitamin include caffeic acid and tannic acid, which can oxidize this compound's thiazole
ring. In serum, this vitamin is mainly bound to albumin. Deficiency of it can lead to Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome, and this vitamin is also known as aneurin because of the adverse neurological effects that results
if this vitamin is absent from one's diet. In addition to its role in the biosynthesis of acetylcholine and
GABA, this vitamin may be better known for being implicated in a disease with wet and dry forms, whose
symptoms include lethargy, edema, and partial paralysis. For 10 points, name this sulfur-containing B
vitamin whose deficiency causes beriberi.
ANSWER: thiamine [or Vitamin B1]
A derivative of this molecule is sensed by the only riboswitch found in higher eukaryotes, and its
binding to that riboswitch creates an unstable splice variant. The complex mutated in Maple Syrup
Urine Disease relies on this molecule as a cofactor. In E. Coli its synthesis depends on IscS and the
products of an operon with C, E, F, S, G, and H genes, which separately synthesize its
hydroxymethylpyrimidine moiety with its thiazole moiety. The ylid form of that thiazole cleaves a
carbon-carbon bond on substrates. Transketolase uses this compound as a cofactor, and its also used
in an enzyme with E1, E2, and E3 subunits that also uses a (*) lipoic acid tether, the pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex. Deficiency of this compound comes in two forms; a wet form in which capillaries
lose integrity, and a dry form which causes neuritis. That disease is beriberi. For 10 points, name this
compound, also called vitamin B1.
ANSWER: Thiamine [accept Thiamine pyrophosphate; or TPP; accept Vitamin B1 before mention]
Null mutations in the SLC19A2 gene result in Roger's disease wherein the transport of this molecule
is hindered, while a cofactor which decarboxylates carboxylate in the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex is the pyrophosphate of this molecule. Pyrimidine phosphate is an intermediate in its
biosynthesis which couples with a ring structure called thaizole. Christian Eijkman first observed the
causes of the disease that occurs due to its deficiency, and it was discovered in rice bran which helped
explain why more Asians suffered from its deficiency. For 10 points, identify this compound whose
deficiency causes Beri Beri.
ANSWER: vitamin B1 [or thiamine]
Its namesake "responsive megaloblastic anemia" is caused by a mutation in the SLC19A2 gene. Composed
of a substituted pyrimidine joined via a methylene bridge to a five-membered ring with nitrogen and sulfur,
this vitamin's structure was established by R.R. Williams. It is the namesake of a pyrophosphate coenzyme
involved in carbohydrate metabolism, such as the decarboxylation of alpha-keto acids. For 10 points, name
this vitamin, a deficiency of which is common in diets with high amounts of polished white rice that leads to
a nervous system disease known as beriberi.
ANSWER: vitamin B1 (accept thiamin(e); or aneurin(e); or antiberiberi factor)
The first step in this molecule's regeneration is catalyzed by aminopyrimidine aminohydrolase,
yielding a amino-hydroxymethylpyrimidine as one product. A form of this molecule is the substrate
of the only known eukaryotic riboswitch; that riboswitch alters the length of the 3-prime UTR. As
part of the E1 complex, the pyrophosphate ester of this molecule attacks pyruvate via a lone pair on
its (*) thiazole group in the first step of acetyl-CoA synthesis. Arsenic poisoning has the same effect as a
deficiency of this molecule, which has symptoms like cardiac enlargement and weakining of the capillaries.
Those symptoms are the "wet" form of a certain disease that can be cured by eating rice bran, which is rich
in this compound. For 10 points, name this sulfur-containing B vitamin, a deficiency of which causes
beriberi.
ANSWER: thiamine [or vitamin B1; do not accept "thymine"]
This molecule can be used to reduce LDL levels since it prevents fat breakdown in adipose tissue,
while in large quantities it can cause a namesake thickening of the macula. Governed by G-protein
HM74A, it forms when a carbonyl group attaches at the 3 position to pyridine, and along with its
precursor and aspartic acid, it is used to synthesize NADH. The preparation of corn with alkali lime
is used to prevent the horrible lesions and dementia associated with pellagra, resulting from a
deficiency in this vitamin. Synthesized from tryptophan and first discovered in nicotine, FTP, identify this B
vitamin, also called Niacin.
ANSWER: B3 (accept Nicotinic Acid before "nicotine" and "Niacin" before mentioned)
A deficiency in this vitamin can cause lower neck lesions, and people born with Hartnup disease typically
get deficiencies of it because of an inability of the body to break down tryptophan. Too much of it can
increase gout or cause a flushing sensation under your skin, and it is sometimes combined with statins to
treat high cholesterol. It includes a pyridine [PEER-uh-deen] ring and can be converted in the body into
NADH. A deficiency of this can be caused by alcoholism or a diet in which the only grains are barley and
corn. Name this nutrient necessary to avoid pellagra that can be called vitamin B3.
ANSWER: niacin [accept nicotinic acid; accept vitamin B3 before the end]
This molecule's binding to the G109A receptor on adipocytes decreases the flux of free fatty acids to
the liver and increases HDL levels, though it is often given with laropiprant to reduce flushing. It can
be synthesized from tryptophan via a kynurenine intermediate, and mutations in SLC6A19 decreases
the levels of this vitamin in the bloodstream; that mutation causes Hartnup's disease. Consisting of a
carboxyl group bound to pyridine, a deficiency of this vitamin, which is the precursor for the electron
carriers NAD and NADP, causes a disease with diarrhea, dermatosis, and dementia, known as pellagra. For
10 points, name this substance also known as Vitamin B3.
ANSWER: Niacin or Nicotinic acid or Vitamin PP
Deficiency of this substance can sometimes result from Hartnup's Disease and Carcinoid syndrome, the
latter of which occurs because tumors cause tryptophan to be used to create serotonin rather than this
vitamin. Children at risk of Type-I diabetes are injected with its derivative to protect beta cells from decay,
while its non-derived form has been used to reduce LDL levels. A more typical deficiency of this vitamin
comes from diets reliant primarily on maize, an affliction known as pellagra, and its derivative is primarily
used in the body to form coenzymes NADP and NAD. For 10 points, name this substance also known as
Vitamin B3.
ANSWER: Niacin [or Nicotinic Acid; accept Vitamin B3 before mentioned]
Studies have suggested that the addition of this vitamin to histones may play a role in regulating DNA
replication and transcription. Hair loss and a facial rash are common symptoms of its deficiency, which can
be caused by frequent consumption raw egg whites; avidin, a protein in egg whites, can bind this vitamin
and prevent its absorption from food. This water soluble vitamin functions as a coenzyme for five different
carboxylases critical in gluconeogenesis and the metabolism of fatty acids as well as amino acids such as
leucine. The main part of its sulfur-containing structure is two fused rings with a pentanoic substitutient.
For 10 points, name this vitamin frequently designated as B7.
ANSWER: Biotin [accept B7 before mentioned; accept "Vitamin H" as well]
Trimethoprim and pyrimethamine both inhibit a reductase important in the synthesis of this compound, in
bacteria and protists respectively. Along with cyanocobalamin, this compound participates in many one
carbon transfers, such as the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine, or the methylation of dUMP to
dTMP. Because of that step in DNA synthesis, lack of this compound or vitamin B12 leads to
megaloblastic anemia. In the diet, this compound is most commonly found with multiple glutamate
moieties. Most famously neural tube defects can result from its deficiency in pregnant women. For 10
points, name this water soluble vitamin found in leafy green vegetable and enriched grains, also known as
B9.
ANSWER: Folic Acid [or Folate; or Folacin, orVitamin B9; or Vitamin B9 before mentioned]
A methylated form of this compound cannot be processed in Type 2 Arakawa's syndrome, and
deficiencies of it lead to a block in demethylation of 5-methyl-THF according to the methyl trap
hypothesis. It is used as a cofactor by the enzyme that transforms homocysteine to methionine, known
as MTR, and its also used as a co-factor in the creation of succinyl-CoA by methyl-malonyl-CoA
mutase. Defects in its uptake can be treated using folic acid, which is able to stave off the symptoms of
megaloblastosis. Its physiologically present as adenosylcobalamin and methyl cobalamin, and its uptake in
the intestine relies on its binding to the glycoprotein haptocorrin, followed by binding to intrinsic factor. For
10 points, name this vitamin that has a corrin ring surrounding a cobalt atom.
ANSWER: Vitamin B12 or Cobalamin
A deficiency of this molecule causes the degeneration of retinal neurons in a mitochondrially-inherited
disease called Leber's Optic Neuropathy. The Schilling test is used to measure its uptake. It's not iron, but
hypersegmented neutrophils are a finding of its deficiency. This molecule is the cofactor of the MTR
protein, which synthesizes methionine from homocysteine. Myelin damage resulting from a deficiency of
this molecule can be prevented if folic acid takes its place as the cofactor of methylmalonyl coenzyme A
mutase in the production of succinyl coenzyme A. The inability of the parietal cells to produce intrinsic
factor, which is necessary for this molecule's uptake, leads to a deficiency of this molecule in pernicious
anemia. For 10 points, name this B vitamin with a central cobalt atom.
ANSWER: Vitamin B12 [accept specific vitamers such as cyanocobalamin or methylcobalamin or adenosylcobalamin]
Dorothy Hodgkin first deduced the structure of this complex organic molecule, which
contains a tetrapyrrole ring system called a corrin ring. Robert Woodward and Albert
Eschenmoser were able to produce it artificially in 1973 in a synthesis involving nearly 100
steps. George Whipple discovered that dogs could be cured of a certain disease by feeding them
liver, leading George Minot and William Murphy to isolate this vitamin for the first time.
Unusual for an organic molecule in that it contains cobalt, this is for ten points what vitamin
whose deficiency causes pernicious anemia?
ANSWER: Vitamin B-12 (Accept: cyano-cobalamin)
This vitamin is a co-factor in the conversion of methylmalonic acid to succinyl CoA, and along with folic
acid, it is required for the conversion of homocysteine to methionine. Testing for high levels of
methylmalonic acid or homocysteine is more sensitive than Schilling's test for diagnosing deficiency of this
vitamin. The "methyl" form of this vitamin is the form used in the central nervous system, and is converted
in the liver from a more common form. Gastric acid blockers may also inhibit production of intrinsic factor,
which is necessary for this vitamin's absorption and is lacking in pernicious anemia. For 10 points, name
this B-complex vitamin that contains a central cobalt atom.
ANSWER: Vitamin B12 [or cobalamin; accept cyanocobalamin or methylcobalamin]
A complex of cubilin and amnionless absorbs this vitamin. A biologically active form of this
vitamin is abbreviated holoTC. This vitamin is a coenzyme for a reaction that accompanies the
demethylation of methyltetrahydrofolate. Two important reactions for which it is a coenzyme are
the conversion of methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA and of homocysteine to methionine.
Pancreatic proteases free this vitamin from haptocorrin. Autoimmune disorders that attack
parietal cells can cause its deficiency because it must be bound to intrinsic factor in order to be
absorbed in the ileum. The activity of this vitamin is due to the cobalt sitting at the center of its
corrin ring, and its deficiency can lead to megaloblastic or pernicious anemia. For 10 points,
name this B vitamin.
ANSWER: vitamin B12 [or cobalamin]
A derivative of this molecule serves as a cofactor for the methyl-malonyl-Coenzyme A mutase, and it is also
needed for the action of the methyl-transferase that converts homocysteine to methionine. The inactivity of
that enzyme leads to a thymine shortage, which is the cause of problems associated with deficiencies in this
molecule. It can only be absorbed through cubulin receptors in the terminal ileum while bound to a product
of parietal cells known as intrinsic factor. For 10 points, name this vitamin needed to prevent pernicious
anemia, which is also called cyano-cobalamin thanks to its central cobalt atom.
ANSWER: Vitamin B12 [accept Cyanocobalamin before it's read; accept coenzyme B12]
Studies have connected low levels of this substance to increased lead retention in the blood, while it
also may convert cholesterol into bile acids. Its primary functions are to synthesize carnitine and the
neurotransmitter, norepinephrine. Deficiency of this vitamin leads to the loss of teeth and easy
bruising, while it has been shown to reduce the duration of the common cold. Present in high levels in
red peppers, broccoli and grapefruit juice, it is also known as ascorbic acid. For 10 points, name this
vitamin that prevents scurvy and is present in orange juice.
ANSWER: Vitamin C (or Ascorbic Acid)
This molecule was first synthesized independently by Tadeusz Reichstein and Norman Haworth. It has
chemical formula C6H8O6. This molecule is essential in the synthesis of collagen, which explains why
those deficient in it often suffer from bleeding gums. Linus Pauling advocated taking extremely large doses
of this compound, which is also known as ascorbic acid. For 10 points, name this vitamin, the deficiency of
which causes scurvy, which is found in citrus fruits.
ANSWER: vitamin C [accept ascorbic acid before it is read]
This substance acts as an electron donor for enzymes that synthesize carnitine, and also in the
hydroxylation of proline and lysine to produce collagen. Most animals can synthesize this compound
using glycogen from the liver or in a kidney-based synthesis, but humans and other simians have a
defective gene for L-gulonolactone oxidase and thus must consume this vitamin. For 10 points, name
this common antioxidant, a vitamin that Linus Pauling prescribes in megadoses, prevents scurvy, and
comes from citrus fruits.
ANSWER: vitamin C [or ascorbic acid]
This molecule acts in tandem with glutathione in chloroplasts to break down peroxides. This molecule is
present in the chromaffin cells of the adrenal glands, where it acts as a cofactor for the synthesis of
norephinephrine. This molecule reduces iron-III to iron-II in an enzyme required in the synthesis of
collagen. The deficiency of this vitamin causes a disease often characterized by gum disease and purple
patches on the skin. Linus Pauling advocated the taking of high doses of this antioxidant to prevent diseases
such as the common cold. Also known as ascorbic acid, for 10 points, name this vitamin whose deficiency
causes scurvy and which is found in many citrus fruits.
ANSWER: Vitamin C [accept L-ascorbic acid or L-ascorbate before mention, vitamin unnecessary after mention]
Before it was discovered by King and Szent-Gyorgyi in 1932, this molecule's importance was demonstrated
in an experiment by James Lind in 1747. This substance is required for the synthesis of norepinephrine and
carnitine, but most importantly, it hydroxylazes proline and lysine to produce collagen. Linus Pauling
advocated for megadoses of, for 10 points, what vitamin which prevents scurvy and can be found in citrus
fruits?
ANSWER: vitamin C [or ascorbic acid; or L-ascorbate; or dehydroascorbic acid]
Ewan Cameron published a stury detailing how it can reduce cancer occurrence, while it is used to
treat phencyladine psychosis. Irwin Stone recommended making it in a food group of its own league.
This substance is necessary to hydroxylze proline and lysine when synthesizing collage, and Linus
Pauling advocated megadoses of it. For ten points, name this cofactor whose deficiency causes scurvy, a
vitamin sometimes known as ascorbic acid that can be found in citrus fruits.
ANSWER: vitamin C (accept ascorbic acid early)
This compound was first isolated by Albert Szent-Gyorgyi (sent-gee-YOR-gyee), for which he won the
1937 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. James Lind's administration of this compound to his patients
is considered one of the first controlled experiments. This compound's deficiency can lead to spotted skin
and spongy gums. A lack of this vitamin often harmed sailors by causing scurvy, and Linus Pauling
recommended consuming large amounts of it to prevent colds. For 10 points, name this water-soluble
vitamin found in many citrus fruits.
ANSWER: Vitamin C [or ascorbic acid; or ascorbate]
Although it is not glucose, an oxidized form of this molecule is transported by the GLUT1 and GLUT3
proteins. Except for in red blood cells, SVCT2 is involved in the transport of this molecule. This molecule
increases iron intake and acts as a cofactor in the conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine. The inability
of collagen to fulfill its function leads to a condition resulting from the lack of this molecule, and Linus
Pauling encouraged megadoses of this vitamin to fight the common cold. For 10 points, name this vitamin
that is found in oranges and was used by pirates to fight scurvy.
ANSWER: Vitamin C [accept L-Ascorbic Acid or Ascorbate]
This molecule is a coenzyme in the conversion of tryptophan to serotonin. It is a cofactor in the
conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine. Lysine and proline are hydroxylated in order to produce
collagen by this molecule, which was discovered by King and Szent-Gyorgi (sent-JUR-jee). Linus
Pauling's advocacy of megadoses of it has perhaps led to the widespread belief that it wards off the
common cold. James Lind showed that its deficiency causes scurvy. For 10 points, name this vitamin found
in citrus fruits.
ANSWER: Vitamin C [or L-ascorbic acid; or L-ascorbate]
This vitamin enhances iron absorption and is crucial for the synthesis of collagen. Pneumonia as well as
colds can supposedly be treated with megadoses of this anti-oxidant vitamin. Deficiency of this vitamin
leads to a disease characterized by fragile skin and bleeding gums, scurvy. For 10 points, name this vitamin
also called ascorbic (ass-KOR-bic) acid and found in citrus fruits like oranges.
ANSWER: Vitamin C [or ascorbic acid before mentioned]
This nutrient serves as an electron donor in the synthesis of norepinephrine from dopamine. Its ability to
reduce copper (II) and iron (III) can produce superoxide. Organisms that require this nutrient lack the
GULO, or gulonolactone oxidase, enzyme. This nutrient is essential to carnitine and collagen synthesis. Its
deficiency leads to spongy gums, brown skin spots, For ten points, name this nutrient, the common term for
ascorbic acid whose deficiency causes scurvy.
ANSWER: vitamin C (Accept ascorbic acid or ascorbate before "ascorbic acid" is read.)
Before the discovery of this molecule, its importance was realized by men like Richard Hawkins and the
writer of The Surgeon's Mate, John Woodall. James Lind was the first to advocate for the consumption of a
source of this molecule by members of a certain profession. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi ("SAINT"-"GEORGE")
originally misidentified this nutrient as hexuronic acid before truly discovering it. For 10 points, name this
vitamin that some people advocate taking in megadoses, which was eventually used by the British navy to
eliminate sailors' problems with scurvy.
ANSWER: Vitamin C [or L-ascorbic acid; or C6H8O6]
Primates need to eat this nutrient because they are missing the GULO enzyme. Because this blocks some
effects of hydrogen peroxide, it reduces the risk of cancer. This nutrient is necessary in the formation of
tendons because this oxidizes proline to create collagen. A lack of this nutrient causes muscle pain, gum
disease, and weak scar tissue. This vitamin is also known as ascorbic acid, and a lack of this causes scurvy.
Name this vitamin concentrated in berries and citrus fruit.
ANSWER: Vitamin C (accept (L-)ascorbic acid or ascorbate before "ascorbic acid" is mentioned, prompt on "antioxidant")
The highest known naturally occurring concentration of this substance is in the Kakadu plum. One
enzyme needed to synthesize this compound, L-GULO, is a pseudogene in humans but still active in bats.
This substance is an electron donor for the enzyme dopamine beta hydroxylase. This compound is
necessary for the hydroxylation of proline residues in collagen, and deficiency in this vitamin causes a
disease in which ones gums bleed, called scurvy. For 10 points, name this vitamin present in citrus fruits.
ANSWER: Vitamin C [or ascorbate or ascorbic acid before mention]
Simians and passerine birds can no long synthesize this compound, which can be made from in glucose in a
four-step process featuring the l-gulonolactone oxidase enzyme. This vitamin is needed for the synthesis of
norepinephrine, carnitine, and the metabolism of tyrosine, and though it normally acts to reduce oxidative
stress, it can also function as a pro-oxidant. It is most important as a cofactor for prolyl hydroxylase and
lysyl hydroxylase, enzymes which are needed for the proper formation of collagen's triple helix structure.
FTP, name this water soluble vitamin found in citrus fruits whose deficiency is known as scurvy.
ANSWER: Vitamin C or l-ascorbic acid
Inability to synthesize this compound in the body may be due to loss of activity of the Lgulonolactone oxidase enzyme, and it can be produced industrially using the nickel-catalyzed
Reichstein process. Like glucose, it is transported using the Glut1 membrane protein, and this
compound is a cofactor for iron absorption. In humans, this compound is necessary for the synthesis of
carnitine and collagen, and so a deficiency of this compound leads to spots on the skin, slow-healing
wounds, and bleeding gums and is called scurvy. For 10 points each, name this antioxidant vitamin found in
large quantities in citrus fruit.
ANSWER: L-ascorbic acid [or vitamin C]
Studies on Iowa prisoners and British conscientious objectors found that only 10 mg of this substance
per day was needed to reverse the effects of its deficiency, which include brown spots on the skin and
bleeding from mucous membranes. Three enzymes used in the synthesis of collagen use this compound as a
co-factor. Linus Pauling controversially promoted the intake of this compound to combat cancer and the
common cold. Also known as ascorbic acid, this water-soluble compound is deficient in scurvy. For 10
points, name this vitamin found abundantly in citrus fruits.
ANSWER: vitamin C [or L-ascorbic acid or ascorbate before mentioned; just C needed after "vitamin" is mentioned]
This molecule cannot be synthesized in the body without the GULO enzyme. This molecule is a cofactor
for two enzymes that add OH groups to proline to form hydroxyproline, making this antioxidant nutrient
helpful for synthesis of collagen. Nobel-winning chemist Linus Pauling advocated for megadoses of this
vitamin, whose deficiency causes diseased gums from scurvy. For 10 points, name this vitamin found in
citrus fruits.
ANSWER: Vitamin C [or L- ascorbic acid; or ascorbate]
This molecule acts as a cofactor in catecholamine synthesis, such as the conversion of dopamine to
norepinephrine. Ingestion of this molecule may decrease the risk or severity of cataracts, and it may
help regenerate other (*) antioxidants such as Vitamin E. Ingestion of large doses of this molecule was
advocated by Linus Pauling, though it does not appear to help prevent the common cold. For 10 points,
name this vitamin that prevents scurvy and is found in citrus fruits.
ANSWER: Vitamin C
This vitamin promotes cathelicidin production. A polymorphism of the gene coding for this vitamin's
binding protein is associated with Graves' disease, and this vitamin's receptors are highly expressed
in activated T and B cells. It amplifies natural killer cell activity, and overconsumption of it can cause
hypertension and kidney stones. The liver converts it to calcidiol, which the kidneys convert to the (*)
secosteroid hormone calcitriol. Deficiency of this vitamin causes osteomalacia in adults and rickets in
children, both of which are characterized by softening of the bones. For 10 points, name this vitamin that
can be obtained through drinking milk or being exposed to sunlight.
ANSWER: vitamin D
This substance is notably unable to treat a disease caused by the mutation of the PHEX protein, and
this substance's receptor can also be activated by lithocholic acid. This substance causes the
upregulation of TRPV6 in intestinal cells by binding to a nuclear receptor. Harrison's groove,
rachitic rosary, and the valgus deformity are symptoms of deficiency in this substance. Its synthesis
starts from 7-dehydroholesterol, followed by hydroxylation in the 25-position in the liver and in the 1position in the kidney. The activation of this substance is reliant on parathyroid hormone, this substance
results in the increased uptake of calcium in the kidneys and intestines. For 10 points, name this vitamin
deficient in rickets, which is synthesized in the skin from UV light and found in milk.
ANSWER: Vitamin D
The liver converts this vitamin into calcidiol, which is then converted to calcitriol in the kidneys.
Forms of this vitamin act as a hormone that regulates phosphate and calcium concentration in the
body and this vitamin is produced with (*) UV light exposure. Shortage of this vitamin causes
osteomalacia in adults and rickets in children. For 10 points, name this fat-soluble vitamin obtained from
sunbathing or drinking milk.
ANSWER: Vitamin D
Failure in converting this vitamin's 25-hydroxy form to its 1,25-dihydroxy form can cause hypophosphatemia. A pectus deformity known as Harrison's groove is a sign of the disease caused by this
vitamin's deficiency. The formation of inactive lumisterol prevents an excess of this fat-soluble vitamin,
whose main form is calciferol [kal-SIF-uh-rol]. A deficiency of this vitamin in children can cause the
disease rickets, which is characterized by soft bones. For 10 points, name this vitamin found in milk that can
be produced in the skin from exposure to sunlight.
ANSWER: vitamin D
One test to measure for a lack of this vitamin is parathyroid [PAIR-uh-thigh-roid] hormone level. Symptoms
can include numbness around the mouth, arms, and legs and a walking gait that looks like a waddle. It
technically is classified as a secosteroid [seh-COS-tuh-roid] and is not a real vitamin because the body can
generate it without ingesting it. It regulates phosphate and calcium blood levels, preventing the occurrence
of osteomalacia [os-tee-oh-muh-LAY-shuh], which in children is known as rickets. Name this substance
found in cod liver oil and fortified milk that can be generated by humans exposed to the sun.
ANSWER: Vitamin D (accept cholecalciferol or ergocalciferol)
Poisoning by this substance causes azotemia, polydipsia, and itching, while deficiency can cause genu
varum, Harrison's groove, and tetany. Forms of this vitamin include lumisterol, sitocalciferol and
cholecalciferol. Mushrooms are a vegan source of this vitamin. Naked mole rats lack this vitamin
entirely, because it is naturally produced in response to [*] UV radiation, which explains why humans
should get at least 20 minutes of sunlight per day. Helping in the reabsorption of calcium and found in dairy
products, for 10 points, name this vitamin which in adults prevents osteomalacia and in children prevents
rickets.
ANSWER: Vitamin D
Because this vitamin binds to the same receptors as lithocholic acid, some studies have linked
high concentrations of it to lower levels of colorectal cancer. Signs of deficiency of this substance
include genu valgum, rachitic rosary, and Harrison's groove. This vitamin is converted to its
hormonal form through 1-alpha-hydroxylase in the kidney, which is activated by (*) parathyroid
hormone. Forms of this vitamin that come from plants are known as ergocalciferol. This vitamin is
naturally formed by sterols in the skin reacting with UV-B radiation. Deficiency of this vitamin results in
bones with poor calcification and is called osteomalacia in adults, or rickets in children. For 10 points,
name this vitamin, often fortified in milk.
ANSWER: Vitamin D
Overdosing on this vitamin can result in polyuria, polydipsia, and kidney failure, a problem which sufferers
of Williams' syndrome must look out for due to their increased sensitivity to it. This fat soluble vitamin can
be synthesized from 7-dehydrocholesterol, and it is important for the regulation of phosphorus plasma
levels as well as the function of parathyroid hormone. Its effects on hydroxyapatite in bone explain why
deficiency of it results in diseases such as osteomalacia and Rickets. FTP, name this blood calcium levelregulating vitamin that is produced in the skin from sunlight exposure and commonly used to fortify milk.
ANSWER: vitamin D
Symptoms of Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome are mostly due to a deficiency of this vitamin, which
suppresses the metabolism of arachidonic acid and thus helps dilate blood vessels. This vitamin
includes four tocotrienols and three tocopherols in addition to its primary form, alpha-tocopherol,
which is resecreted by the liver. Ataxia, anemia, and myopathies are the primary symptoms of this
vitamin's deficiency, as it preserves nerve conduction by protecting the (*) myelin sheath from
degradation. Found at high levels in nuts and seeds, this vitamin prevents skin damage and may help
prevent cardiovascular disease and cancer by protecting the body from the effects of free radicals. For 10
points, name this antioxidant vitamin.
ANSWER: vitamin E [accept either tocotrienol or tocopherol until mention]
Proteins C and S fail to function in the absence of this molecule, which is required for the
carboxylation of glutamic acid. The calcium-binding Gla domain is similarly dependent on this
molecule, whose synthetic form menadione is converted menaquinone in the liver. Its better-known
phylloquinone form is found in plants such as (*) broccoli and spinach. Because it is produced by
bacteria in the large intestine, newborn babies are often given a supplemental shot of this molecule, whose
deficiency can inhibit post-translational modification of prothrombin. For 10 points, name this fat-soluble
vitamin important in blood clotting.
ANSWER: Vitamin K [accept K after "vitamin"]
A synthetic form of this substance available over the counter is called menadione (MEH-nuh-di-ohn) and all
types of this substance contain a methylated (MEH-thih-lay-tud) naphthoquinone (naaf-thoh-KWI-nohn)
ring. Much of the daily requirement of this substance is supplied by E. coli in the large intestine, explaining
why newborns often receive an injection of this vitamin. Its effect is opposed by warfarin, which prevents
this vitamin from participating in the formation of prothrombin. Found in leafy green vegetables, name this
fat-soluble vitamin necessary for the synthesis of blood clotting factors.
ANSWER: vitamin K [accept phylloquinone; accept phytomenadione; accept phytonadione]
One disorder named for this behavior has a variant named for Akira Sato, and is diagnosed using the
Rome III criteria; that disorder causes this to occur cyclically. If this behavior produces oxidized products,
its products are said to have a coffee-ground appearance. This behavior is induced by stimulation of the
area postrema, which comprises the chemoreceptor trigger zone. This behavior is repeatedly self-induced in
patients with anorexia nervosa using a hand or finger. For 10 points, name this involuntary action known
medically as emesis, in which the contents of the stomach are expelled through the mouth.
ANSWER: vomiting [accept emesis, purging, throwing up, etc.]
WH Kirchner showed that mutants unable to produce sound could not effectively perform this behavior.
An organism performing this action release tricosane and pentacosane, and its effects are sometimes
magnified by an accompanying trembling behavior. Organisms undergoing this behavior travel in a
figure-eight shape with a return phase. Distances are encoded at a ratio of 75 milliseconds per 100 meters in
this behavior. Originally elucidated by Karl von Frisch, this behavior communicates directions in terms of
angle relative to the sun. Used to communicate the position of flowers, for 10 points, name this
communicative dance performed by bees.
ANSWER: Waggle dance [prompt on bee dances or similar answers involving bees]
A series of court battles followed this man's refutation of the Bedford Level Experiment, and he refuted
Percival Lowell's claims about Martian canals in Is Mars Habitable? His work Tropical Nature focuses
largely on warning coloration, and his eponymous effect, also called reinforcement, deals with the
discouragement of hybridization leading to reproductive isolation. Weber and Lydekker have improved a
construct named for him, which was influenced by sea levels over the Sunda and Sahul shelves. For 10
points, name this naturalist who divided Asiatic and Australian fauna with his line, and who devised
evolution by natural selection independently of Darwin.
ANSWER: Alfred Russel Wallace
He contested Percival Lowell's claims that canals on Mars were made by intelligent beings, and he was an
opponent of mandatory smallpox vaccination. This man investigated warning coloration and sex selection,
while Lydekker refined observations he made in a namesake region defined in part by the Lombok Strait.
Those observations were made on a visit to the Malay archipelago that led to his proposal of a distinction
between the fauna of Asia and Australia. FTP, name this man who is most well-known for developing a
theory of natural selection contemporaneously to Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: Alfred Russel Wallace
Rhacophorus nigropalmatus is now known as this scientist's namesake flying frog. A fire on the ship Helen
destroyed most of his work from around the Rio Negro with Henry Bates. Sections about the Celebes and
Malaccas appear in his The Malay Archipelago, which also introduced his namesake line that divides the
islands of Java and Bali. His namesake effect says that reproductive isolation can arise from a phenomenon
that he discovered at the same time as another scientist working in the Galapagos. For ten points, name this
British naturalist who formulated the idea of evolution around the same time as Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: Alfred Russel Wallace
With a second taxonomic name of Rosmarus, three official subspecies of this animal exist, with one
isolated to the Laptev Sea. Males develop large nodules in the skin of the shoulders and neck (*)
known as bosses, and this brown-to-pink coloured animal possesses mystacial vibrissae, sensitive whiskers
for underwater foraging. Their genus derives from the Greek words for "tooth" and "walk" from their
ability to use elongated canines to climb onto ice from the sea. The Pacific variety of these creatures can
weigh up to 3,700 pounds, making it the second largest pinniped to the Elephant Seal. For 10 points name
this only remaining species of the genus Odobenus, a tusked hairless Arctic sea creature:
ANSWER: Walrus [or Odobenus Rosmarus until Odobenus is mentioned]
Channels that are selective for this substance have an aromatic-arginine filter and were discovered by
Peter Agre. Bdelloid (DEH-lloyd) rotifers and tardigrades can enter a cryptobiotic state when this substance
is unavailable. A molecule of this substance is released during the formation of a peptide bond, and this
substance promotes the formation of lipid bilayers because the tails of phospholipids avoid it but the heads
interact with it. For 10 points, name this substance which makes up 53% of the human body and has
formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or H2O until it is read]
This substance is regulated by proteins that have an aromatic/arginine selectivity filter; those
proteins, which are made from six alpha helices, also contain the highly conserved NPA motif. Those
proteins have an "hourglass" structure that aids the passage of this substance into the cell. The
discovery of those proteins won Peter Agre the (*) 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Principal cells have
V2 receptors for a hormone similar to oxytocin that responds to increased plasma osmolality by increasing
the reabsorption of this substance through the creation of channels. Vasopressin or ADH is secreted from
the pituitary and causes the collecting ducts in the nephron to reabsorb more of this substance by inserting
aquaporin-2. For 10 points, name this three-atom molecule essential to life, with chemical formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [accept H2O; accept dihydrogen monoxide]
Channels that allow transport of this molecule have an NPA motif and allow diffusion of other
molecules such as glycerol. Tracheids help in the process of transporting this compound. In response
to light, photosystem II lyses this compound. During cellular respiration, one run of the electron
transport chain results in two molecules of this compound. (*) Turgor pressure is caused by this
compound. This compound makes up most of the weight of the human body. For 10 points, name this
compound with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or H2O until it is read; or dihydrogen monoxide]
This compound is split by a complex containing a manganese center that receives electrons from tyrosine
residues; that complex is found in photosystem II. This compound is the final product of complex IV of the
electron transport chain. Phospholipids have a head group that has an affinity for this substance and a tail
group that doesn't, creating a bilayer when dissolved in this substance. For 10 points, name this compound,
a universal solvent with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or H2O until it is read]
Release factors bind this substance to eRF3-GTP in a ribosome to end translation. The apoplastic and
symplastic pathways transfer this compound. The "potential" of this substance is the sum of its solute and
pressure components, and is symbolized psi. It is evolved into oxygen gas and two electrons to replenish
those lost by photosystem II during the light-dependent reactions. This substance is present in higher
concentration for the hypotonic solution. Tetrameric proteins which allow this substance to enter the cell are
called aquaporins. It forms the largest percent of the cytosol by mass. For 10 points, name this vital
compound for life.
ANSWER: water
In Holothurians its only opening is internal, while its button-shaped madreporite is external in most
other species and leads directly to the stone canal. Its radial canals then follow the ambulacral ridge
to the rows of sac-like organs known as ampullae, whose contraction provides the suction necessary to
operate their attached tube feet. For ten points, identify this hydraulic system possessed by Echinoderms
such as sea urchins and starfish.
ANSWER: water vascular system
The purpose of one feature in this entity was the subject of experiments by Dakin and Fechter. Colacino
found that only 70% of the oxygen transported by this entity was bound to hemoglobin in S. briareus.
Accessory structures to it include Tiedemann's bodies, which produce coelomocytes. Both circular and
longitudinal muscle are found in the ampullae, which lie proximal to this set of structures in one organism.
Ophiuroids contain a slightly unorthodox version of this set of structures. Several ring canals in this set of
structures surround a stone canal, the entrance to which is controlled by the madreporite. Hydraulic pressure
is used to move food into this set of structures through the tube feet. For 10 points, name this set of
structures involved in respiration and locomotion in echinoderms.
ANSWER: water vascular system
These two people benefited from seeing Photo 51. This team used Erwin Chargaff's assertion that purine
and pyrmidine concentrations are equivalent to formulate pairing rules. Maurice Wilkins gave these two
men X-ray diffraction evidence to support their claim that sugar and phosphate made up the backbone of
the genetic material. For 10 points, name this team who discovered the double helix structure of DNA.
ANSWER: James Dewey Watson and Francis Crick [or Crick and Watson]
This procedure can be repeated by stripping the substrate using pH 2.5 glycine solution, and that
substrate is activated using methanol and washed in TBS-T solution. The confirmatory HIV test after
an ELISA consists of using patient serum as a probe in this procedure. Non-fat dry milk is used as a
blocking solution in this procedure, which commonly uses horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated
molecules for visualization. This procedure has an ice-chilled (*) transfer step, which moves the
products of an SDS-PAGE electrophoresis to a PVDF membrane. For 10 points, name this procedure in
which an antibody is used to detect protein on a membrane, which was named as a pun on the DNA-based
Southern blots.
ANSWER: Western Blot or immunoblot [prompt on word forms of "blotting" or "protein blotting"]
One group of these animals evolved from the cethotherium, and one group of these animals have teeth
with cementum on the surface. These animals are divided into the mysticeti and odontoceti suborders, the
latter of which is distinguished by its teeth. The baleen variety of these animals filters plankton from the
environment for sustenance. For 10 points, name these mammals, which along with dolphins and porpoises
comprise the order cetacea, and whose varieties include the blue and the humpback.
ANSWER: whales [or cetaceans until it is read]
This organism is infected by a fungus that infects barberry in the winter, producing aeciospores which infect
this organism to produce asexually-reproducing uridineospores. Another disease of this organism is
characterized by the formation of "bunt balls" which release a fishy odor. In addition to being infected by
Puccinia and Tilletia, this organism has a hexaploid aestivum species which only developed under
domestication. Hybrids of this organism include one with Thinopyrum to protect against Barley yellow
dwarf disease, and triticale, formed with rye. For 10 points, identify this crop which comes in einkorn and
durum varieties, an important cereal used to make bread.
ANSWER: wheat
One type of them secretes perforin and granzymes, and another type was discovered in birds in an organ
called Bursa of Fabrisius. Their specificity arises due to the recombination of Variable, Diversity, and
Joining genes. All receptors on their surface are identical and contain light and heavy chains. Basophil and
Neutrophil are granulocytes which are examples of these cells which bind to antigens. Consisting of NK, B,
and T cells, for 10 points, identify these cells that are sometimes called lymphocytes.
ANSWER: white blood cells [accept lymphocytes before it is read]
Clozapine can cause a reduction in the number of these cells. They can be classified according to the
presence or absence of granules, and those that contain granules include basophils and neutrophils. One
class of these is lymphocytes, which may be natural killer cells, B cells, or T cells, which regulate the
immune system. For 10 points, name these cells of the immune system also known as leukocytes.
ANSWER: white blood cells [accept leukocytes before mention; accept neutrophils before "granules"]
The process by which they enter tissues is called diapedesis. Their progenitor cells include band cells
and myelocytes. Less than one percent of them release the anti-clotting protein heparin, while the most
common form of them are sometimes known as PMNs and secrete lysozymes. In addition to basophils
and neutrophils, they also include eosinophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. For 10 points, name this
only class of blood cells to contain nuclei, a major part of the immune system.
ANSWER: white blood cells [or leukocytes]
One type of these cells is the namesake of extracellular traps, and is subdivided into segs and bands. An
acid-loving type of these cells release major basic protein. The nuclear shape of these cells can be identified
with Wright's stain. The least abundant type of these cells release heparin and histamine. The most abundant
type of these cells is capable of phagocytosis. Divided into granulocytes and agranulocytes, these cells
include eosinophils [ee-uh-SIN-uh-fils], basophils, and neutrophils. For 10 points, name these cells of the
immune system.
ANSWER: white blood cells [or leukocytes; or granulocytes before mentioned]
This person wrote of his conviction "that the world is orderly and can be explained by a small number of
natural laws" in his book on the unity of knowledge, Consilience. He used a term developed by Suzanne
Batra to define species that have a reproductive division of labor, overlapping generations, and cooperative
care of the young. He still uses that term, "eusocial," in his 2012 book The Social Conquest of Earth. The
branch of science associated with him is based on a 1975 book that has been criticized for its genetic
determinism and which attempted to explain the benefits of altruism. Name this expert on ants who wrote
the book Sociobiology.
ANSWER: Edward O(sborne) Wilson
The Wall Street Journal recently reported on this man's new novel, a book it compared to the Iliad. As a
child, he became blind in one eye following a fishing accident; this reportedly led him to focus his field
observations on insects instead of birds or mammals because of his ability to observe them. He won a
Pulitzer in 1979 for the book On Human Nature and a second Pulitzer in 1991 for The Ants, but he is still
best known for a controversial book, Sociobiology, which compared human societies to those of other
animals. FTP, name this evolutionary biologist, a proponent of Biophilia.
ANSWER: E.O. Wilson
According to Cretekos et. al., a bat-specific prx1 enhancer region could be the reason these structures exist
in bats. A samara is a type of seed which has these. A controversial study by Nudds and Dyke in 2010
posited that A. lithographica could not fully use these structures. After metamorphosis, butterflies must
engorge these with hemolymph. Dragonflies are one of only insects to have muscles directly powering these
structures. Convergent evolution explains the presence of these structures in both insects and bats, in which
these structures are homologous to bones in the limbs of other mammals. Name this appendage, commonly
possessed by birds and other animals that can fly.
ANSWER: wings
In 2008 a Japanese team was able to extract stem cells from them, useful because they are so readily
available. They are labeled 1, 16, 17, and 32 in the Universal National System and theories about their
purpose often discuss the shrinking of the human skull. A potential complication with their removal is
paresthesia, which is a numbness of the surrounding areas. Robert Wiedersham identified them as
a vestigial structure in humans, as we now no longer need extra teeth to replace decayed ones, and the
human mouth has become smaller. FTP name these teeth that are often extracted and are farthest back in
the mouth.
ANSWER: Wisdom Teeth or Third Molars
One phylum of this type of animal is a grasshopper parasite that infects its host with the urge to drown itself,
bringing the parasite to the water for breeding. Another phylum of this type of animal bears live young and
gets around with pairs of legs that move together; those are known as Onychophora, or the "velvet" type.
Another phylum of this type of animal displays a distinguishing scolex, while another species of this type
was the first organism to have its entire genome sequenced. For 10 points, name this type of animal
exemplified by C. elegans as well as the phyla platyhelminthes and annelida, the flat and segmented types.
ANSWER: worms
One phylum of animals commonly denoted by this term has an a structure that ends in flame cells and is
used to filter metabolic waste; that structure is the protonephridia. In computing, this term applies to
malicious programs that don't attach themselves to programs but replicate and spread to other computers.
Another phylum of animals denoted by this term possesses a coelem, setae and are segmented. For 10
points, identify these soft-bodied invertebrates that can be found in the phyla Platyhelminthes and
Annelida.
ANSWER: worm
The triangular fibrocartilage (FYE-bro-KAR-til-age) complex provides cushion at one end of this joint.
The eight bones located at this joint include the trapezoid, trapezium, and scaphoid (SCAFF-oyd).
Ligaments at this joint include the ulnar and radial collateral ligaments, and the median nerve that goes
through it can become compressed through repetitive motions such as typing in carpal tunnel syndrome.
For 10 points, name this joint that connects the arm to the hand.
ANSWER: wrist
This is the larger of two structures in which the PAR1 region is present. CGG repeats in this structure cause
partial methylation of the FMR1 gene, leading to a disease named for this structure that causes mental
retardation. All but one of these structures per cell are inactivated via conversion to heterochromatin in a
process called lyonization, which forms Barr bodies. While people with a trisomy of this chromosome are
phenotypically normal, those with a monosomy of it present with Turner syndrome. Red-green color
blindness and hemophilia are recessive traits on this chromosome. For 10 points, name this sex chromosome
which is present in both women and men.
ANSWER: X chromosome
The Sherman paradox concerns a disorder of this entity, which is affected by increased CGG repeats in the
5' ("five prime") untranslated region of the FMR1 gene. That gene is inactivated in this entity's namesake
syndrome. The process of lyonization during embryogenesis inactivates one of these entities and forms a
Barr body. A lack of one of these can lead to webbed necking in Turner's syndrome, while an extra one of
these may result in a learning disability and reduced testosterone output in Klinefelter's syndrome. For 10
points, name this sex chromosome which women typically have two of, contrasted with Y.
ANSWER: X chromosome [prompt on "sex chromosome" before mention, or just "chromosome"]
One mutation associated with this structure can cause hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, a condition in
which sweat glands do not properly develop. Another mutation associated with this structure is the leading
genetic cause of mental retardation. This structure can be Lyonized, or (*) inactivated to form a Barr body,
and some individuals with only one of this chromosome have Turner syndrome. Mutations of genes on this
chromosome can result in color blindness, hemophilia, and its namesake "fragile" syndrome. For 10 points,
name this human sex chromosome that most females have two of and most males have one of, which is
contrasted with the Y chromosome.
ANSWER: X chromosome
Christmas Disease is caused by a defect in this structure, as is Duchenne (du-SHEN) muscular dystrophy.
Martin-Bell Syndrome is a symptom of a "fragile" one of these structures. Inactive ones condense and
become a Barr body. An abnormally low number of these structures in a person can lead to amenorrhea
(AY-MEN-oh-REE-uh) and infertility in Turner Syndrome. For 10 points, name this structure that contains
the genetic cause of hemophilia, two of which are found in women.
ANSWER: X chromosome
This structure encodes the common gamma chain, damage to which causes a form of SCID. In one disease,
a CGG trinucleotide repeat expands on the FMR1 gene on this construct. Lyonization of these produces
Barr bodies in females. Mutations on the dystrophin gene, located at p.21 on this structure, cause Duchenne
muscular dystrophy. Turner Syndrome is due to absence of one of these, while Klinefelter's syndrome is
caused by an extra one. Some diseases passed down on this construct are color-blindness and hemophilia,
and in sex-linked inheritance, most diseases are passed down on this chromosome. Name this chromosome,
of which females have two and males have one.
ANSWER: X chromosome
A cat must have two of these entities in order to have a tortoiseshell or calico color. One of each pair of
these structures is randomly inactivated by the process of lyonization, which produces Barr bodies. An
excessively repeated CGG sequence can make this structure "fragile," and an extra one causes Klinefelter's
syndrome. These chromosomes carry genes for red-green color blindness and hemophilia. For 10 points,
name this sex chromosome contained in every human egg, contrasted with the Y.
ANSWER: X chromosome
One mutation in this structure causes hypophosphatemic vitamin D-resistant rickets, and abnormal numbers
of CGG repeats in its FMR1 gene may cause mental retardation. This structure is coated with RNA by the
Xist gene, and its monosomy causes Turner syndrome. Inactivated to form a Barr body, its recessive
mutations are linked to hemophilia and red-green colorblindness. Reduced fertility resulting from
Klinefelter syndrome affects males with two copies of this structure. For 10 points, name this chromosome
possessed once by males and twice by females.
ANSWER: X chromosome
In 2006, a rare form of endothelial corneal dystrophy was found to be linked to its q25 region. Gonadal
dysgenesis results from a deficiency of these and can cause neck webbing and amenorrhea; that condition is
also known as Turner's syndrome. These can be deactivated in a process sometimes known as lyonization,
which results in a certain sex having one Barr body per somatic cell. They contain more active chromatin
and are larger than their counterparts which, unlike these entities, are unique to one sex. For 10 points,
name this chromosome, two of which are found in each somatic cell of a female and which is contrasted
with the Y chromosome.
ANSWER: X chromosome
The genes for Alport's syndrome and Lesch-Nyhan (LESH-NIE-han) syndrome map to this
structure. Another gene on it codes for the protein FMR1 ("F-M-R-one), though if that gene acquires
too many CGG repeats, this structure becomes fragile. A Barr body is formed if there are two of
these in one cell. Factor VIII is also on this structure, which explains why most hemophiliacs
(hee-moh-FILL-lee-acks) are (*) male, since hemophilia is "linked" to it. For 10 points, name this
chromosome, which females have two of and males have one of.
ANSWER: X chromosome
A mutation of the FMR1 gene can result in Martin-Bell syndrome, also named for the "fragile" form of this
structure. These are inactivated in females in a process called lyonization, resulting in the formation of Barr
bodies. Klinefelter syndrome sees the presence of one or more extra copies of this chromosome in males,
resulting in reduced levels of testosterone. Turner syndrome is a condition in which females may only have
one of these chromosomes. For 10 points, identify this sex chromosome that is present in both males and
females.
ANSWER: X chromosome
De la Chappelle's syndrome indicates the biological, but not immediately apparent, appearance of
too many of these entities, which Muller studied in fruit flies in considering dosage compensation.
Lyonization is the process by which they become (*) inactive, which is how calico calico cats get their
color.This inactivation leads to the formation of Barr bodies from one of these, and it has the lowest density
of genes of any chromosome. Turner syndrome is associated with its absence, while those with Klinefelter's
have an extra one. For 10 points, name this sex chromosome that most women have two of.
ANSWER: X chromosomes
A syndrome named for this structure is also known as Martin-Bell syndrome, and results when it is
"fragile." Deactivated ones condense into Barr bodies, and people with an extra one of them have
Klinefelter syndrome. Hemophilia is a recessive disorder linked to this chromosome, which explains why all
men who carry the hemophilia allele exhibit the condition. For 10 points, name this chromosome, of which
males have one and females have two.
ANSWER: X chromosome
An abnormal number of repeats of the CGG trinucleotide in the FMR1 unit of this structure can result in a
form of mental retardation. Dosage compensation serves to equalize expression in these structures, and the
inactivation of one of these structures in the healthy human female results in a Barr body. Turner's
syndrome affects females that only inherit one of this structure, while Klinefelter's syndrome affects males
who inherit two. This chromosome carries mutated alleles that can result in disorders such as hemophilia
and red-green color blindness. For 10 points, name this sex chromosome, of which female humans carry two
but males carry only one along with a Y chromosome.
ANSWER: X chromosomes [prompt on "chromosomes"]
This structure is associated with a lysosomal storage disease caused by deficiency of alpha-galactosidase A
known as Fabry's disease. The lack of the gene FMR1 on this structure can lead to mental retardation, a
syndrome in which this structure is "fragile." In a process known as lyonization, one of these structures
deactivates to form a Barr body, and a missing one of these structures causes Turner syndrome. Males that
possess an extra copy of this structure have Klinefelter syndrome, and red-green color blindness is a
recessive trait linked to this structure. For 10 points, name this sex chromosome of which females possess
two.
ANSWER: X chromosome
In a disorder involving this structure, the loss of a namesake mental retardation protein prevents
synapse maturation between neurons. Genetic imprinting plays a role in the deactivation of those that
are paternally derived, which results in the condensation of this structure into a dark-staining Barr body.
Turner's syndrome arises from an abnormal number of this molecular structure, and disorders such as
red-green color blindness and hemophilia arise from recessive alleles on this structure. For 10 points,
name this sex chromosome that pairs with the Y chromosome in males.
ANSWER: X chromosome
Despite its length, this structure is listed second-to-last in the Denver system, and in mammals it is prone to
lyonization. A common form of mental retardation is caused by the fragile syndrome of this structure, and
T. H. Morgan discovered that the gene for white eyes in fruit flies is carried on this chromosome. Unlike
other trisomies, possessing three of this structure can still result in a normal phenotype, while tortoiseshell
cats are produced when one of these structures condenses into a Barr body. Responsible for the inheritance
of sex-linked disorders such as hemophilia and colorblindness, name this chromosome, two of which appear
in the genotype of a normal human female.
ANSWER: X chromosomes [prompt on sex chromosomes; do not accept or prompt on "Barr body"]
In one disorder affecting this entity, mutation in the FMR1 gene causes an increase in CGG repeats.
Histone 4 acetylation does not occur during a crucial process involving these that is sometimes named
after Mary Lyon. Horseshoe kidneys and webbed necks are common signs of a disease sometimes
named after Ullrich that results in the deletion of one of these. Men with two of these suffer from
Klinefelter's syndrome, and inactivated ones of these condense to form Barr bodies. For 10 points, name
these genetic entities, of which two are possessed by females but only one by males.
ANSWER: X chromosome
In this technique, the Patterson function can be used to solve the phase problem. Samples undergoing
this technique often have selenium incorporated in order to take advantage of multi-wavelength anomalous
dispersion. The raw data from this process is compared to the model in order to find the R-factor. This
technique was used by John Kendrew on myoglobin derived from sperm whales, and in this technique, a
pure, precipitated macromolecule is mounted on a goniometer and rotated while being bombarded by
radiation. Maurice Wilkins was an expert in this technique who collaborated with Watson and Crick. For
10 points, name this technique which was used by Rosalind Franklin to image the structure of DNA.
ANSWER: X-ray crystallography [or X-ray diffraction]
Scherrer's formula is used to compute the shape factor when using this technique. In this technique, the
accuracy of the resulting model with the raw data is given by the R-factor. The sample undergoing this
technique is placed on a goniometer and rotated. This technique was used by Perutz and Kendrew to study
myoglobin, and this technique was developed by Max von Laue. Another famous application of this
technique produced photo 51, which was shown to Maurice Wilkins; that application of this technique was
performed by Rosalind Franklin to determine the structure of DNA. For 10 points, name this technique
which is used to find the structure of proteins and other macromolecules, in which the sample is bombarded
by high-energy radiation.
ANSWER: X-ray crystallography or X-ray diffraction
The secondary type of this tissue is produced on the adaxial side of the vascular cambium, whereas the
primary type of this tissue is located closest to the pith. Tracheids and vessel elements make up this tissue,
and one mechanism for its function involves the evaporation of water at the mesophyll cells in leaves and
the resulting pressure at roots called transpirational pull, which allows water and minerals to travel through
the plant. For 10 points, identify this type of vascular tissue in plants that is complemented by the phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
This tissue containing torus-margo pits and bordered pits has highly lignified cell walls. Its primary and
secondary types develop from the procambium and vascular cambium, respectively. Along with vessel
elements, this tissue contains elongated cells which are dead at maturity and arranged end-to-end, the
tracheids. Acting by transpirational pull and root pressure, it transports minerals and water upwards from
the roots. For 10 points, name this plant vascular tissue paired with phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
A form of decay in which this tissue is blocked is called tylosis. Mutations in the IRX15 gene result in the
collapse of this tissue. This tissue stains blue-green with Toluidine blue. In protosteles, this tissue is internal
to its counterpart. The inward growth of vascular cambium forms this tissue. This tissue consists of
tracheids and vessel elements and functions via the transpiration-pull mechanism. The secondary form of
this tissue is wood. For 10 points, name this plant tissue that is responsible for transporting water.
ANSWER: xylem
Development of this tissue is divided into centrarch, endarch, mesarch, and exarch types. Common stains
for this tissue include Safranin-O and phloroglucinol, both of which stain lignified cell walls red. It is
composed of vessel elements and tracheids, and is produced on the inside of the vascular cambium. For 10
points, name this plant vascular tissue that transports water and is contrasted with nutrient-transporting
phloem.
ANSWER: xylem [or primary xylem; prompt on vascular tissue before mentioned]
Murray's Law governs the branching of this structure, which is classified as exarch or endarch based
on its growth. This material is absent in the family Winteracaea, and in most organisms, this
structure completely surrounds the pith. The functioning of this tissue occurs through the cohesiontension mechanism. Consisting of (*) tracheids and vessel elements, most of this tissue is dead in mature
organisms. Through capillary action, this tissue is the mechanism through which transpirational pull occurs.
For ten points, name this tissue which transports water in plants, contrasted with phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
Guttation is one way to move substances through it, and it is usually comprised of vessel elements and
tracheids, the former being lacking in gymnosperms. The primary type of this tissue surrounds the
pith and is produced by the procambium, while the secondary type is produced by the (*) vascular
cambium. Cells in it have high amounts of lignin in their cell walls and compose the majority of wood.
Transport through these structures is initiated by transpiration from open stomata. For 10 points, name this
plant tissue that transports mainly water, unlike the nutrient-carrying phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
Centrarch and mesarch are two patterns of development of this tissue. Introduction of solutes into it
is mediated by the Casparian strip, which forces entering materials to pass through the selectively
permeable symplast. Its primary type develops from the (*) procambium and is adjacent to the pith. It
includes lignified cells that are dead at maturity, the vessel elements and tracheids. Guttation is the forcing
of material from this tissue onto leaf tips due to excess root pressure. This tissue uses transpirational pull to
draw minerals and water up from the roots. For 10 points, name this plant vascular tissue that works in
conjunction with phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
In more primitive organisms, thick borders line scalariform perforation plates in this material.
Bordering of this tissue determines amphiphloicity or ectophloicity, and it contains long cells called
libriform fibers and specialized cells called tracheids. Guttation occurs when (*) root pressure forces
material from this tissue out of hydathodes, and the walls of this tissue are highly lignified. This tissue is
produced by the vascular cambium and functions by exerting transpirational pull. For 10 points, name this
tissue that primarily transports water, which comprises the plant vascular system along with phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
Perforation plates are found within a subunit of this structure that only angiosperms have. Endarch
and exarch are terms used to describe the development of this structure. The cells that make up this
structure are from those of vascular cambium that divide towards the inside. Containing (*) vessel
elements and tracheids, this structure's main function is due to capillary action. Unlike its counterpart, it is
made of dead cells. For 10 points, name this tissue in plant stems that transports water and nutrients
upward, often contrasted with phloem.
ANSWER: xylem [accept vessel element and vessel member in the first sentence]
In addition to the respiratory and circulatory systems, this system obeys Murray's law. Cells found in this
system include tracheids and vessel elements, the latter of which generally do not appear in gymnosperms.
The flow of its namesake sap is driven primarily by transpirational pull, but also by root pressure. It is often
contrasted with a type of tissue which transports sugars. For 10 points, name this plant tissue which
transports water, contrasted with phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
Tylosis involves resinous chemicals blocking this tissue type to slow infection. Minerals entering this
tissue must first cross the endodermal Casparian strip, and this tissue has secondary wall thickenings
that can be annular, helical, reticulate, scalariform, or pitted. Both this tissue and ground tissue must
be embedded with lignin to function properly. Transpirational pull allows fluid to move through this
tissue, whose secondary form makes up the heartwood of trees. Tracheids [TRAY-kee-idz] and vessel
elements make up what vascular plant tissue responsible for transporting water, unlike the phloem?
ANSWER: xylem [prompt on vascular tissue before "vascular"]
One component of this tissue initially developed in organisms of the genus Selaginella during the
Permian. This tissue obeys a law which was originally formulated with reference to the circulatory
and respiratory systems, Murray's law. Some early vascular plants possessed a core of this tissue
surrounded by another type of tissue; those two tissues together are called a (*) protostele. This tissue
develops from the "proto" form to the "meta" form, which has larger cells, and there are four main patterns
for its development, all of which have names ending in the suffix "-arch." Gymnosperms possess this
tissue's tracheids, but lack the vessel elements which are found in this tissue in angiosperms. Its primary
function takes place via transpirational pull and root pressure. For 10 points, name this tissue which
transports water in vascular plants, not to be confused with phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
The ends of this tissue are capped by scalariform plates, and it can develop in either endarch or
exarch fashion. Most gymnosperms lack one of this tissue's cell types, vessel elements; both vessel
elements and this tissue's tapered, elongated cells called (*) tracheids have thick, lignified cell walls.
Monocots lack the type of this tissue that grows inward from the vascular cambium, the secondary type.
This tissue functions by negative back pressure and evaporation in the mesophyll cells of leaves, creating,
respectively, root pressure and transpirational pull. For 10 points, name this plant tissue that carries water
and dissolved nutrients from the roots upward.
ANSWER: xylem
In this tissue, the presence of bordered pits in the walls of cells prevents the formation of embolisms. The
secondary kind of this tissue is located on the interior of the vascular cambium and comprises heartwood
and sapwood. Transport in this tissue is partially caused by root pressure, and the secondary walls of its
cells are (*) lignified. Cohesion-tension theory describes how transpirational pull moves sap through this
type of tissue, which is composed of vessel elements and longer, thinner tracheids. Cells are dead at
maturity in, for 10 points, what water-transport tissue that is found in plants and contrasted with phloem?
ANSWER: xylem
Plectosteles, present in some club mosses, have interconnected plates of this tissue, and whether a plant is
ectophloic or amphiphloic is determined by whether this tissue is surrounded on both sides or on one. Its
two principal forms may be differentiated by the size of one of their component cells, called tracheids, and
another highly lignified type, vessel elements, are produced by the fusiform initials of angiosperms. While
only the proto- and meta- forms exist in monocots, in dicots and gymnosperms, another form grows inward
from the vascular cambium, called the "secondary" this. For 10 points, identify this plant tissue responsible
for water and mineral transport, complemented by the phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
Libriform fibers are long pit-containing cells found throughout this tissue, and perforation plates found at
the ends of this tissue can be described as simple, foraminate, or scalariform. The primary type of this tissue
is located closest to the pith, and it is made up of tracheid vessels in most conifers with trachea elements
performing most of its function. This tissue must use the evaporation of water at mesophyll cells in leaves
and negative back-pressure at the roots to carry out its function in a process called transpirational pull,
which allows water and minerals to travel up through plants. For 10 points, identify this dead vascular
tissue in plants that functions differently from phloem.
ANSWER: xylem
The earliest form of this tissue is believed to have been found in the genus Cooksonia during the Silurian
period, and its pattern of development can be characterized as centrarch, exarch, endarch, or mesarch.
Minor structures in this tissue include the scaliform perforations and the fusiform initial. This tissue is
composed of vessel elements and tracheids. Root pressure and transpiration allow water to pass through this
tissue. For 10 points, name this plant tissue, which has a name meaning "wood," and is often contrasted
with phloem.
ANSWER: Xylem
Gnetum is one species which oddly possesses constituent cells of it. That constituent forms from a
fusiform initial and its scaliform perforation is arranged in a ladder-like system. Psilotum possesses a
lobed version of a protostele arrangement of it. Unlike a similar tissue, it stains red for lignin, and it
consists of vessel elements and tracheids. For 10 points, name this transport tissue crucial to
transpiration, which in vascular plants transports water.
ANSWER: xylem
During the RecLOH process, this structure recombines with itself. This structure is the subject of a
shrinking theory, which has significantly impacted the amount of information it contains. A zinc finger
protein at p11.31 on this structure was identified as TDF, until that region was discovered to be its SRY
gene. Mutations involving this entity are explained by Muller's ratchet, and its entropy rate was measured to
be significantly lower than its counterparts. Diseases linked to this structure include Swyer syndrome and
male infertility. For 10 points, name this sex-determining chromosome that is the counterpart to X.
ANSWER: Y Chromosome
The individual with the most distinctive object of this kind was an African-American who was
classified as "Haplogroup 00." A unique version of this object belonging to Albert Perry proves that it
predates the emergence of Homo Sapiens. The "shrinking theory" holds that this object has lost the vast
majority of the material that it once had. Two isoforms of ribosomal protein S4 exist on this structure,
whose most important region is denoted the SRY. Individuals with an extra copy of it grow taller, but have
an otherwise normal phenotype. The first human to have it is known as its namesake "Adam." For 10
points, name this sex chromosome, one of which is possessed by men.
ANSWER: Y chromosome
This chromosome codes for four members of the DAZ family, and along with chromosome 6, codes
for CD24. MIT researchers discovered in 2003 that it is able to recombine with itself in a process known
as RecLOH, and extra copies of it can lead to skeletal deformities. A zinc finger protein at p11.31 was
erroneously called TDF, until that testis-determining factor was discovered to be its SRY gene. For 10
points, name this sex-determining chromosome in most mammals.
ANSWER: Y chromosome
The further propagation of this structure is threatened by deletion of its AZF region. Swyer syndrome
can be caused by a deficiency in this structure's SRY region. A degeneration of this structure in Muridae
and Cricetidae (crick-ET-id-eye) has led many scientists to hypothesize its eventual disappearance within
the next ten million years in primates and humans. The most recent common ancestor of this structure,
named Adam, is often paired with Mitochrondrial Eve. For 10 points, name this sex-determining
chromosome that starts the development of testes and the production of sperm.
ANSWER: Y chromosome
Swyer syndrome is caused by a defect in this structure. A defect in the AZF region of this structure can
cause Sertoli cell-only syndrome. TDF is encoded by SOX genes, which have their locus on this structure.
Because it cannot undergo recombination, this structure, the home of the SRY gene, may have lost over
90% of its genetic information. The "criminal" karyotype includes two of these chromosomes, which are
also the smallest and most misshaped. For 10 points, name this sex-determining chromosome which human
males possess, in contrast to the X chromosome.
ANSWER: Y chromosome
This structure encodes the AR receptor, and this structure's inability to undergo "crossing over"
makes it susceptible to Muller's ratchet. This structure, which contains a pseudoautosomal region,
has been shrinking for the last few (*) million years. Deletions in this structure often cause infertility,
because genes like SRY on this structure are required for testes and sperm development. For 10 points,
name this small chromosome that is only present in males.
ANSWER: Y chromosome
One of them develops the homologs Pif1p and Rrm3p and was developed as an experimental model
by Murdoch Mitchison. In addition to that one with a Swahili species name, pombe, another is used to
counteract acute diarrhea symptoms in children and is known as Boulardii. Their presence is tested with
methylene blue, and several of the Candida genus cause namesake vaginal infections. Cycloheximide
inhibits growth of the Saccharomyces genus, of which cerevisiae ferments beers. For 10 points, name
this class of fungi which are used to make bread.
ANSWER: yeasts
These organisms can be genetically engineered to test for interactions between proteins, which is known as
two-hybrid screening. These organisms include a relatively small number of basidiomycota [bah-SIH-deeoh-mie-koe-tah] and all of the other dikaryas [die-KAR-ee-uhs]. Some of these fungi [FUN-jie] create
zymase [ZIE-mase], and many of them are Ascomycota [as-koe-mie-KOE-tah], including the genus
Saccharomyces [sa-kah-roe-MIE-sees]. Name these organisms, some of which are used in baking to convert
carbohydrates into carbon dioxide or alcohol.
ANSWER: yeasts
Like fruit flies, temperature-sensitive mutants of this organism are commonly studied, and the genome of
this organism was the first eukaryotic (you-KAIR-ee-ott-ic) one to be sequenced. The a or alpha types of
these organisms can fuse in order to reproduce, and this single-celled fungus reproduces asexually by
budding. They can grow anaerobically (AN-air-OH-bic-uh-lee) on fructose and carry out fermentation. For
10 points, name this organism used to make alcohol and bake bread.
ANSWER: yeast [or Sacchromyces cerevisiae]
This organism contains vesicular structures called Berkeley bodies, which are involved in the CTV
pathway. Its vacuoles contain phosphate-rich "dancing bodies". This organism releases A- and
alpha-factors during mating, and since it cannot metabolize nitrate, this organism requires supplemental
ammonia and urea to promote growth. This organism is one of the smallest in the phylum Ascomycota, and
it was the first eukaryote to have its genome sequenced. For 10 points, identify this single-celled fungus
commonly used to leaven bread and make beer.
ANSWER: Baker's yeast [or Saccharomyces cerevisiae]
An "artificial chromosome" named for these organisms can hold up to one million base pairs. In
2009, two species of these organisms, S. pombe and S. cerevisiae, were genetically engineered to
produce vanillin. Another species, Candida albicans, is responsible for infections of the (*) genital area
named after these organisms. Most of these organisms reproduce by budding, and one of them is commonly
used by brewers. For 10 points, name these fungi, one species of which is used to leaven bread.
ANSWER: yeasts [prompt on fungi before mentioned]
The vegetal and animal poles of a frog zygote are distinguished by the location of this substance. The most
common example of deutoplasm, it is the first mass that can reliably be seen by ultrasound in early human
pregnancy, and it is surrounded by a sac, one of the four extra-embryonic membranes, where blood first
forms in a developmental circulatory system. Connected to the gut by a stalk, name this substance that
provides nourishment to the developing embryos of animals and is easily seen in the eggs of fish, reptiles,
and birds, where it has a yellow color.
ANSWER: yolk [prompt on deutoplasm before it is mentioned]
Left-handed helices formed from alternating purine-pyrimidine nucleotides form a type of DNA denoted by
this letter. The sex chromosomes of birds and platypuses are denoted by this letter and W. A disk denoted
by this letter uses desmin-synemin heteropolymers to keep desmin fibers lined up, and a series of those
disks occurs in the I band and is a line denoted by this letter. For 10 points, name this letter, which denotes
a line separating adjacent sarcomeres in muscles.
ANSWER: Z [accept ZDNA before "letter"; accept zigzag DNA before "letter"]
Danilova's study of this organism discovered a new immunoglobulin isotype, dubbed IgZ. This
organism's montalcino, yquem, and dracula mutants are models of various types of porphyria. The
Tol2 transposon is often used in transgenesis experiments in this organism, and mutagenesis is
usually performed in these organisms using ENU. Mutations in SLC24A5 in this organism cause its
skin to turn gold. The KDM6B.1 histone demethylase is required for regeneration in this organism,
which has a notable "Casper" strain that is 100% transparent. It's not Drosophila, but Christine (*)
Nusslein-Volhard works with this organism, which was the subject of the large scale Tubigen/Boston
forward screen. This member of family Cyprinidae gets its name for the large stripes on its flank. For 10
points, name this aquatic model organism.
ANSWER: zebrafish [or Danio rerio or D. rerio]
A genetic disease impacting the body's use of this element is acrodermatitis enteropathica [a-kroe-dehrmah-TIE-tis en-TEH-roe-pa-thih-kah]. A deficiency in this nutrient contributes to anorexia and prevents the
creation of testosterone. This nutrient is often found in high concentrations in the same foods that contain
iron, calcium, magnesium, and proteins, including oysters and veal liver. Too much of this nutrient can
prevent the body from using copper. Name this element whose oxide is used to decrease sunburn and which
shortens cold symptoms.
ANSWER: zinc or Zn
After its creation during a stage called the germinal period this cell undergoes cleavage a mitotic form
of division sometimes known as cleavage. A human form of this cell becomes a blastocyst on the fifth day
and eventually becomes an embryo. These cells are synthesized from two gametes. For 10 points, name this
term which refers to initial cell formed when an organism is produced by sexual reproductive process like
fertilization.
ANSWER: zygote
