This substance is produced through the iridium- or rhodium-catalyzed carbonylation of methanol in the
Cativa and Monsanto processes. This compound's anhydride reacts with salicylic acid in the production of
aspirin. Used industrially in the production of PVA polymers and as a polar protic solvent, this compound
forms cyclic hydrogen-bonded dimers. Like lactic acid, it is produced when certain bacteria ferment
ethanol. It forms ice-like crystals in its very pure "glacial" form. For 10 points, name this second-simplest
carboxylic acid with formula CH3COOH, found in wine and vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid or ethanoic acid
In the Woodward cis-hydroxylation, an alkene is converted into a diol using this compound as the solvent.
The industrial synthesis of this compound occurs via the "insertion" of a CO moiety into a methanol
molecule from a syn-gas mixture, and is catalyzed by a ruthenium-iridium complex; that procedure was
pioneered by British Petroleum, and replaced the rhodium-based Monsanto process. August Kolbe
demonstrated its synthesis from carbon disulfide. When it is free of water, it is referred to as its "glacial"
form, and bacteria of the genus acetobacter produce this compound by the oxidation of ethanol. For 10
points, identify this compound which is found in low concetrations in vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid [accept CH3COOH]
Four equivalents of this compound are bound to an ethylene diamine center in a famous
calcium-binding hexadentate ligand. The protecting groups in solid-phase peptide synthesis are often
removed using a trifluorinated derivative of this compound. One process for producing this
compound uses a rhodium dicarbonyl diiodide catalyst; that process proceeds via carbonylation of
methanol and is the (*) Monsanto process. An anhydrous form of this compound is commonly called
"glacial." This compound can be produced by oxidizing ethanol twice, and it is the second simplest
carboxylic acid, after formic acid. For 10 points, name this acid with formula CH3COOH, which is
commonly found in vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid [or ethanoic acid, acetate; accept CH3COOH or CH3COO- before "CH3COOH"]
In solid-phase peptide synthesis, Wang's resin is often used because it can be cleaved by a trifluoro
derivative of this compound. The chelating agent EDTA contains four equivalents of this molecule bound to
two nitrogen atoms. A process for synthesizing this compound with an iridium catalyst replaced a previous
process using a rhodium catalyst. Those processes synthesized this compound by carbonylating methanol.
When no water is present, this substance forms large ice-like crystals and is termed "glacial". This
carboxylic acid has one more carbon atom than formic acid. For 10 points, name this weak acid found in
vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid [or ethanoic acid; or HC2H3O2; accept acetic or ethanoic after "acid" is first read]
One catalyst used to form this substance contains two iodine and two carbonyl ligands attached to an
iridium atom in a square planar arrangement. That is the Cativa catalyst, which forms this substance via the
carbonylation of methanol. At 16.6 degrees Celsius, crystals of the anhydrous form of this substance can be
isolated in the "glacial" form of it. For 10 points, name this substance with formula CH3COOH, which is
the primary component of vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid [or acetate]
One method of producing this compound uses an iridium di-iodide di-carbonyl catalyst, which
replaced an earlier rhodium-based catalyst. Current methods of synthesizing this compound involve
the metal-catalyzed carbonylation of methanol, which includes the aforementioned Cativa and (*)
Monsanto processes. One form of this compound with no water in solution is commonly used as a
recrystallization solvent; that is its "glacial" variety. It has a pKa of about 4.8 and can be synthesized by
twice oxidizing ethanol. This two-carbon molecule is one of the simplest with a carboxyl group, though it
has one more carbon than formic acid. For 10 points, name this acid with formula CH3COOH, which is
found in vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid [or acetate; accept CH3COO, CH3COO minus, or CH3COOH before the formula is read]
An iodinated version of this compound is used to reduce disulfide bridges during protein sequencing
and to inhibit cysteine proteases. Its trifloro- version is a commonly used mobile phase in peptide HPLC.
One process used to produce this process must suppress both the water-gas shift reaction and the
production of propionic acid; that process uses an Iridium-III catalyst to carbonylate methanol. The
anhydrous version of this compound is referred to as "glacial", and methods to produce it include the
Cativa and Monsanto process. This substance is created by bacteria when ethanol is oxidized twice in a
fermentation-type process. For 10 points, name this substance with formula CH3COOH, an organic acid
that is the primary component of vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid [or acetate]
The Monsanto process is used to produce this compound industrially, and this compound's anhydride is an
important reagent for making aspirin. Reaction of dimethyl ether with carbon monoxide and water produces
this compound, and this compound freezes to form large ice crystals, which is known as its "glacial" form.
The second simplest carboxylic acid, for 10 points, name this weak acid with formula CH3COOH, most
commonly found in vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid or ethanoic acid
A pure form of this substance is called "glacial" because of its ability to solidify into ice-like crystals at
seventeen degrees Celsius. Its production undergoes a methyl iodide intermediate which is followed by
the addition of carbon monoxide, and is called the Monsanto process. It is also produced by the
oxidation of ethanol. For 10 points, identify this organic compound, which is the second most complex
carboxylic acid, has formula CH3COOH, and is commonly found in vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid [accept ethanoic acid until "ethanol"; accept CH3COOH until mentioned]
Napthalene and indole derivatives of this compound are especially active auxins, and four of this
functionality are used to chelate metal ions like calcium and iron three by EDTA. One process to form this
molecule achieves better catalyst loading by using ruthenium with an iridium catalyst; that method is named
for Cativa and succeeded an earlier method employing rhodium by the Monsanto company. Both of those
methods for making it rely on the carbonylation of methanol. Its dry form is often called "glacial." For 10
points, name this component of vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid [or acetate; or ethanoic acid; or ethanoate; accept Dische reagent before "this compound"]
Hermann Kolbe used carbon disulfide to inorganically synthesize this substance. This compound is
used as a solvent in the production of terephthalic acid, but it's mostly used to produce VAM in
paints and adhesives. An iridium catalyst is used in the Cativa process of producing this substance,
which replaced the less efficient Monsanto process. This compound can be formed from the
carbonylation of methanol, and its anhydrous form is its (*) "glacial" variety. For ten points, identify
this second-simplest carboxylic acid with formula CH3COOH, the main component of vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid (or ethanoic acid or methanecarboxylic acid or CH3COOH before mentioned)
This compound is combined with ethylene and oxygen to create VAM, which is used in adhesives and
paints. This compound is produced by the Monsanto and Cativa processes, which are methods of methanol
carbonylation. Its chemical formula is CH3COOH, making it with the exception of formic acid the simplest
example of a carboxylic acid. It is known for being a key ingredient in a liquid with a bitter and sour taste.
Name this component of vinegar.
ANSWER: acetic acid (prompt CH3COOH)
An interesting base-free Heck reaction uses aryltrifluoroborates and this compound to carry out arylation
and oxidation. One equivalent of this compound is condensed in the synthesis of bisphenol A. The Hock
rearrangement of cumene hydroperoxide yields phenol and this compound. The di-hydroxy and monophosphate 
substituted version of this compound isomerizes to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate in glycolysis. Both it 
and its nitrile-substituted version are widely used polar aprotic solvents. Along with 3-hydroxybutyrate 
and acetoacetate, this compound is a certain kind of "body" formed during fatty acid metabolism. This 
compound is commonly used to rinse laboratory glassware containing organic residues. Nail polish 
remover contains, for 10 points, what simplest ketone?
ANSWER: acetone [or propanone]
This compound reacts with hydrogen cyanide to produce methyl methacrylate, which is polymerized to
form acrylic glass. Some bacteria in the Clostridium genus ferment starch into ethanol, butanol, and this
compound. This compound is produced along with phenol from benzene and propylene in the Cumene
process, and can be produced directly from the oxidation of propylene. It's not an acid, but this compound
can result in halitosis after being produced during fatty acid metabolism. Due to its low volatility, this
compound is also used for cleaning laboratory glassware. For 10 points, identify this simplest ketone,
commonly found in nail polish remover.
ANSWER: acetone [or propanone or C3-H6-O]
This is used as a solvent in the Jones reaction. Along with phenol, this is produced by the Cumene
process. Another way to make it is by dehydrogenating 2-propanol. This can dissolve nitrocellulose as it is
an organic solvent. It is used to clean laboratory glassware. This is the simplest ketone. For 10 points, name
this compound found in nail polish remover.
ANSWER: acetone
Most industrial production of methyl methacrylate involves the reaction of cyanide with this compound,
while the controversial plastic bisphenol A is formed by reacting two molecules of phenol with a molecule
of this compound. Like phenol, this compound is typically produced by reacting benzene with propylene to
give cumene, then oxidizing the cumene to give phenol and this compound. Replacing its central atom with
a sulfur produces DMSO. One danger of a high fat, low carbohydrate diet is the possible production of this
compound in the body, which can be found in the urine of diabetics. Older methods for producing this
compound involved the oxidation of 2-propanol. For 10 points, name this common polar solvent, the
simplest ketone.
ANSWER: acetone [or propanone; or dimethyl ketone; or C3H6O]
This compound is a convenient side product of the Meerwein-Pondorf-Verley reduction because it can be
easily evaporated; analogously, it is a popular reagent in the Oppenauer oxidation. Breath that smells of this
compound is a sign of diabetes; it is also found in larger concentrations in people who treat their epilepsy
with high-fat, low-carb diets, which are called "ketogenic." This solvent forms a common cooling bath of
negative seventy-eight degrees Celsius with dry ice, and it is commonly used to rinse glassware. For 10
points, name this component of nail polish remover, the simplest ketone.
ANSWER: acetone
A solution of chromic acid in this substance is used in the Jones oxidation, and this compound occurs
naturally as a by-product of fatty acid breakdown. Useful as a solvent because it is miscible with water, this
substance is also used as a cooling bath of negative 78 degrees Celsius when mixed with dry ice. It is
typically produced via oxidation of isopropanol, which gives a carbonyl in place of the hydroxyl on the
second carbon. It is commonly used to clean laboratory glassware. For 10 points, name this substance found
in nail polish remover, the simplest ketone.
ANSWER: acetone [accept 2-propanone or dimethylketone]
Dimethyldioxirane, used in oxidation of amines, is produced by this compound's reaction with hydrogen
persulfate ion. It can also react with itself in an aldol condensation to form 4-methyl-3-penten-2-one. This
compound can be synthesized, along with phenol, using the cumene process, via the Weizmann organism,
and by oxidizing propene with palladium/copper catalyst. It is also used as a solvent in the Jones oxidation,
and this substance is especially valuable in SN2 reactions, where its lack of hydrogen bond donors keeps it
from interfering with the nucleophile, but its main functional group allows it to stabilize free ions. For 10
points, name this chemical, the simplest ketone and a polar, aprotic solvent.
ANSWER: acetone
Adding two of these chemical groups to morphine results in heroin, and some people are unable to
quickly add this chemical group to isoniazid, making normal doses of that drug fatal. The NatB
complex is responsible for adding this chemical group to several proteins' N-terminal ends. Sodium
butyrate inhibits the removal of this chemical group, and adding it to tubulin is one mechanism of
increasing cell motility. It is typically added to lysine residues of histones in order to facilitate
transcription by HATs, and it is removed from those proteins by HDACs. It can be added to aromatic
systems via the Friedel-Crafts acylation using a two-carbon acyl chloride. Adding it to salicylic acid creates
aspirin. For 10 points, name this group with formula COCH3, a methyl single-bonded to a carbonyl.
ANSWER: Acetyl or Ethanoyl
One of these substances is separated from water and oxygen after being heated in a "roaster" as part of a
regeneration process used in steel pickling. Another type of these can be produced commercially from
Aspergillus niger and sucrose. High temperatures and pressures create one of these in the Monsanto
Process, although more recently the Cativa Process is used. A tosic one of these substances can be reacted
with an alcohol to create an ester in a variation of the Fischer esterification. A useful one of these
substances can be produced in the wet or contact processes, and another of these substances is the namesake
of a biological cycle sometimes named for Krebs. For 10 points, name this class of chemical compounds
whose solutions have pH of less than 7.
ANSWER: acid [go ahead and accept a buzz on any specific acid mentioned before end of first sentence]
A constant named for these substances appears in the Henderson-Hasselbalch (HOSS-el-bock) equation.
That constant, their namesake "dissociation constant," measures their strength in solution. Lewis defined
them as electron pair acceptors, while Bronsted and Lowry defined them as proton donors, contrasting them
with proton receivers, or bases. For 10 points, name these substances which have a pH of less than seven.
ANSWER: acids
The Clemmensen reduction is catalyzed by a zinc amalgam and one of these substances, characterized by
Lux and Flood as oxide ion acceptors. Another type is produced using a vanadium oxide catalyst in the
contact process. Aqua regia is a mixture of two of these substances. H3PO4 is a triprotic one, while
HCOOH, or "formic," is monoprotic. Defined as electron receptors by Lewis and by Bronsted and Lowry as
proton donors, they yield hydrogen ions in solution, according to the Arrhenius definition. For 10 points,
name these substances with pH below 7, often contrasted with bases.
ANSWER: acids [accept HCl or hydrochloric acid in first sentence; accept word forms]
These substances fill their lowest unoccupied molecular orbital in one theory about them that calls them
electron pair acceptors. They donate protons according to Bronsted-Lowry (BRAWN-sted LAU-ree)
theory.
These compounds produce a hydronium ("high"-DRO-nee-um) ion according to another definition, by
Arrhenius (are-REN-ee-us). These substances can also be defined as having a pH of less than seven. For 10
points, name these chemicals that can be neutralized with bases.
ANSWER: acids [or Lewis acids; or Bronsted-Lowry acids; or Arrhenius acids]
One type of these compounds are defined as having a low Hammett function. Polyprotic kinds of this
substance have multiple K sub a values. The Ostwald and contact processes produce two common
substances of this type. These substances can be defined as electron pair acceptors or proton donors by the
Lewis and Bronsted-Lowry definitions, respectively. These substances increase the hydrogen ion
concentration in water by the Arrhenius definition. For 10 points, name these substances with pH values
below 7, often contrasted with bases.
ANSWER: acids
Organic examples of these compounds are combined with alcohols in the Fischer esterification reaction.
There are multiple dissociation constants for polyprotic ones, such as the oxalic and phosphoric kinds. They
are proton donors by the Bronsted-Lowry definition and dissociate in water releasing hydrogen ions. With a
weak acetic kind and strong nitric and sulfuric kinds, for 10 points, what type of compound causes a pH less
than 7 in aqueous solution?
ANSWER: acids [accept carboxylic acids before phosphoric]
These substances are described as having high-energy LUMOs and small ionic radii when they are
"hard" in a system created by Ralph Pearson. The presence of a carbonyl (car-BAH-nill) group attached to
a hydroxyl (high-DRACK-sill) group defines the carboxylic (car-backs-SILL-ick) type of these substances.
These substances turn blue litmus paper red. These substances are characterized as electron pair acceptors
by Lewis theory, and they are characterized as proton donors by Bronsted-Lowry theory. For 10 points,
names these substances which when in solution have a pH below 7.
ANSWER: acids
Aspirin is formed by reacting acetic anhydride with one of these compounds. One member of this class of
compounds is formed in the contact process, and aqua regia is a mixture of two of these substances.
Polyprotic types of them exhibit multiple equivalence points. Lewis theory defines them as electron pair
acceptors, while the Bronsted-Lowry definition describes them as proton donors. For 10 points, name these
compounds which produce hydrogen ions in solution and have pH values below 7.
ANSWER: Acids [accept Salicylic Acid or 2-Hydroxybenzoic Acid before "class"]
Antimony pentafluoride is a part of the magic one. The Hammett function measures the strength of these.
The log of their disassociation constant plus the log of the reduced form over the original makes up the
right side of the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. According to Lewis these are electron pair acceptors,
while according to Bronsted, these are proton donors. For 10 points, name these chemicals such as HCL
that lower the pH of a solution.
ANSWER: acids
The Hammett function can be used to measure the strength of these substances. When a strong one of
these substances is titrated with another type of substance, phenolphthalein turns purple at the
endpoint. They can be defined as electron (*) acceptors; that is the Lewis definition. Depending on the
number of protons they can donate, they can be classified as monoprotic and polyprotic. For 10 points,
name these chemical substances, examples of which include sulfuric and hydrochloric.
ANSWER: acids
Louis Hammett developed a function relating their strength to thermodynamic activity coefficients. The pH
of a solution is related to the negative log of their namesake equilibrium constant by the Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation. Boron triflouride has an unpaired p orbital, which makes it the Lewis variety of these
chemical substances because it readily accepts electrons. According to the Bronsted-Lowry definition, they
donate protons. These produce hydronium in water according to the Arrhenius definition. For 10 points,
name these chemicals which have a pH less than seven.
ANSWER: Acids
The 1994 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to George Olah for using the "magic" variety of these
compounds to create carbocations. One definition of these objects includes compounds, such as boron
trifluoride, in which one element can accept electrons to form a full valence shell. These compounds can
also be defined as those which can donate a proton, or those which can dissociate in water to form hydrogen
ions. For 10 points, name these compounds that have a pH less than 7.
ANSWER: acids
When these substances are added to water, compounds named for Zundel and Eigen, among others, are
produced. The effect of these substances on water is spread through the entire solution by the Grotthuss
mechanism. Antimony complexes form many of the "super-" variety of these; this "super-" class is defined
by a certain position on the Hammett scale. Metal cations with a high charge density act as these when
coordinating ligands. Their strength is most commonly measured by Ka (K-A), the dissociation constant,
They have, among others, Arrhenius, Bronsted-Lowry, and Lewis definitions. For 10 points, name these
substances, which have low pH in contrast to bases.
ANSWER: acids
One of these compounds reacts with a carboxylic acid in the first step of the Schmidt reaction. In oil
refining, alkylation of hydrocarbons requires one of these compounds as a catalyst. The Bronsted catalysis
law applies to them. Effectively, active methylene groups act as these compounds. Like sulfonates, they turn
hydroxyls into good leaving groups, and they also activate carbonyls for nucleophilic substitution. In their
presence, nucleophiles open epoxides at the more substituted carbon. Hydration of alkenes catalyzed by
these compounds proceeds with carbocation rearrangements. These compounds have low-lying LUMOs.
Magnesium cation is a hard one, and boron trifluoride is a Lewis one. For 10 points, name these electron
pair acceptors which have pH less than 7.
ANSWER: acids [or Lewis acids; or Bronsted-Lowry acids; or Arrhenius acids; prompt on electrophiles]
One compound of this type was developed by George Olah and was used to stabilize carbo-cations.
Ralph Pearson's theory about these compounds considers the energy of their lowest unoccupied
molecular orbitals when classifying them as hard or soft. One definition of these compounds equates
them to electrophiles; an example of these compounds under that definition is boron trifluoride.
Solutions of these compounds leave phenolphthalein [fee-nawl-THAY-leen] colorless and turn litmus
red. Lewis defined these compounds as electron acceptors, while the Bronsted-Lowry definition
describes them as proton donors. Name these compounds that have a pH ["P-H"] below 7 and are
contrasted with bases.
ANSWER: acids [accept superacids or Lewis acids]
These substances, which can be solidified by intercalation with graphite, contain a "naked" subatomic
particle that hops around between anions via the Grotthuss mechanism. George Olah prepared one of these
substances that could react with hydrocarbons and noble gases, and gave it the nickname "magic."
Hydrogen fluoride reacts with antimony pentafluoride to yield the strongest known of these substances.
These substances have a Hammett function of minus-12 or below. For 10 points, name these substances
with extremely low pH.
ANSWER: superacids
Louis Pasteur first discovered chirality in crystals of one of these substances. KHP is a salt of one of these
substances often used as a primary standard. Aluminum trichloride and boron trifluoride are examples of
electrophiles, which are also the Lewis type of these substances, defined as electron acceptors. They can be
monoprotic or polyprotic, like the phosphoric and citric types. They are defined as substances that donate
protons or give off hydronium, respectively, in the Bronsted-Lowry and Arrhenius definitions. For 10
points, name these chemicals with pH lower than 7, which can neutralize bases.
ANSWER: acids [accept tartaric acid before "KHP" is read, or carboxylic acids before "Aluminum trichloride" is read]
One strong acid of this type is condensed in a Glover tower, while a weak acid of this type forms the salts
natron and potash. The simplest carboxylic example is the stain remover oxalic acid, while another, tartaric,
gives a sour flavor to unripe grapes. One of these acids in the Krebs cycle, malic, yields one NADH and one
proton in the final step. Phosphoric acid is not one of these acids, but phosphorous acid is, as demonstrated
by the two equivalence points on its titration curve. Most famously exemplified by sulfuric acid, identify
this type of acid that contains two hydrogen atoms per molecule capable of dissociating in water.
ANSWER: diprotic acid [prompt on polyprotic acid]
In several locations in recent years, this phenomenon has enhanced the ability of bacteria to methylate
mercury. Tree roots are stunted when this condition mobilizes aluminum ions while at the same time
leaching nutrients like calcium and magnesium from the soil. This type of pollution has eliminated all
fish from some Norwegian rivers, and it is responsible for dissolving marble and limestone monuments
on the National Mall. This is caused by nitrogen and sulfur oxides released from fossil fuels, and this
is regulated in the U.S. by emissions trading. Identify this type of pollution named for its low pH.
ANSWER: acid rain [accept acid deposition; do not prompt on "rain"]
Two of these elements can cause a substance to become metamict [meh-tah-MIKT], meaning the
substance loses its crystal structure. Monazite [MAH-nuh-zite] and allanite are two such substances.
Before it became easier to use lithium, one of these elements was used to power several pacemakers.
The majority of these elements were first synthesized during the 1940s and 50s, with much of the
work done by Glenn Seaborg. Two of these elements were the primary fillings in the atomic bombs
used during World War II. Name these elements, most of which are created by adding electrons to
the 5f electron shell, found below the lanthanides on the periodic table.
ANSWER: actinides [prompt on radioactive elements; do not accept "transuranic" or "transuranium" or "transplutonic" or "transplutonium"]
The Vyazovkin MFK technique allows for the calculation of this quantity in terms of the conversion rate. In
the rate process theory for viscosity developed by Eyring, an analogue of this quantity is measures the
formation of "holes" which fluid molecules can occupy. For gas phase reactions, this quantity is equal to the
enthalpy of formation of the transition state minus 2 RT, and the height of a potential barrier in a reaction
profile is analogous to this quantity. It appears in the exponential term of the Arrhenius equation, enzymes
and catalysts lower this quantity of a reaction. For 10 points, identify this energy which the reactants must
overcome before they can proceed to the products of the reaction.
ANSWER: activation energy
This quantity is the first one examined when using the Hammond postulate. The negative of this
quantity divided by the gas constant is the slope of the line formed in a plot named for the same man
who names the equation that calculates this quantity. That expression is the negative product of the
gas constant, temperature, and the natural log of the reaction rate over the pre-exponential factor,
and is named for Arrhenius. Catalysts increase the reaction rate by lowering this quantity. For 10 points,
name this quantity, the minimum amount of energy needed for a reaction to occur.
ANSWER: activation energy
According to one equation, this quantity is proportional to the temperature times the natural
logarithm of the reaction rate. That equation contains a physical constant based off collision
frequency called the pre-exponential factor and is named for (*) Arrhenius (ah-RAY-nee-uhs).
Transition states form when a system overcomes this barrier. Catalysts speed up reactions by lowering this
quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity, the minimum energy needed for a reaction to take place.
ANSWER: activation energy [prompt on energy]
This quantity is often confused with a quantity symbolized delta G double dagger. The Hammond
Postulate bases the structure of an intermediate on the difference in this quantity between the transition
state and that of the reactants or products. It is divided by the product of reaction rate and temperature in
the Arrhenius Equation, which calculates this quantity given a known reaction rate. Catalysts lower, for 10
points, what amount of energy that must be overcome for a reaction to take place?
ANSWER: activation energy [or Ea]
For the folding of the barnase protein at room temperature, this value is negative in accordance
with the funnel model. One method of finding this value involves finding the slope of a line when
plotting the inverse temperature against the natural logarithm of k. This value can be found by
locating the saddle points on a potential energy surface. The rate constant is equal to an expression
including the exponential of this value divided by RT, all times the (*) pre-exponential factor, which is
an expression named for Arrhenius. Catalysts accelerate reactions by lowering this value. For 10 points,
name this quantity, which is the energy required to initiate a chemical reaction.
ANSWER: activation energy [or E-a or E-sub-a; prompt on "transition state" or "transition state energy"]
The 1992 Nobel Prize winner in Chemistry, Rudolph Marcus, added a reorganization parameter,
lambda, to this quantity, which allows for charge conservation. Bligaard et al. showed that volcano
curves result from the fact that this quantity, for many molecules in dissociative chemisorption,
depends linearly on the reaction energy as specified by the Bronsted -Lowry-Polanyi equation. The
Elovich equation gives the rate of adsorption when temperature and this factor are held constant.
Marcus relates the standard free energy of a reaction with this type of free energy. A pre-exponential
(*) steric factor is raised to an exponent of this quantity divided by the gas constant times temperature to
give the reaction rate constant in the Arrhenius equation. For 10 points, name this energy lowered by
catalysts and which reactants must surpass in order to become products.
ANSWER: activation energy
Like the gas constant, this positive variable can be found experimentally by plotting k against the inverse
temperature. This quantity appears in the numerator of the exponent of the Arrhenius equation. Imparting
this quantity to a system creates a namesake complex. This quantity can be reduced by creating an alternate
pathway with a catalyst, allowing the reaction to reach equilibrium faster. Give the term for the energy that
must be supplied to enable a reaction.
ANSWER: activation energy (accept just activation after energy is read; prompt E-subscript-a)
A distributed model of this was developed for treating pyrolysis of biomass. This quantity is represented
using double daggers after delta e. The e is raised to the negative this divided by RT in the Arrhenius
equation. This quantity does not influence the equilibrium constant. This is required to reach the transition
state. This is lowered by a catalyst, allowing the reaction rate to increase. For 10 points, name this energy
needed for a chemical reaction to take place.
ANSWER: activation energy
For gas phase reactions, this quantity is measured as the enthalpy of the transition state minus 2RT. A plot
of the natural log of the rate constant versus the reciprocal of temperature gives a line with slope calculated
to be this quantity divided by the gas constant. The enthalpy of reaction is the difference in this value for the
forward and reverse reactions, and high values of this quantity make reaction rates more temperaturesensitive, as shown by the Arrhenius equation. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic barrier often
symbolized "E sub A," the difference in energy between the reactants and transition state that must be
surmounted for a reaction to occur.
ANSWER: activation energy [or delta G double dagger; or E sub A or EA before mention]
This quantity can be calculated using the Eyring equation. This quantity for a reaction can be determined by
finding the slope of inverse temperature versus the natural logarithm of the rate constant, and it appears in
the numerator of the exponentiated term of the Arrhenius equation. Catalysts increase the rate of a reaction
by lowering this quantity, which is represented by a steep increase on a potential energy curve. For 10
points, name this quantity, the minimum amount of energy input required for a reaction to take place.
ANSWER: Activation Energy
This quantity is the slope of the graph relating the logarithm of the rate constant to the reciprocal of
temperature. It is proportional to the natural logarithm of the frequency factor, and the equation used to
calculate this quantity involves a steric factor; that equation is the Arrhenius equation. Lowered by catalysts
and represented as Ea [E sub A], for 10 points, name this quantity that gives the minimum amount of energy
necessary for a reaction to take place.
ANSWER: activation energy
When analyzing protein folding, a ratio of two versions of this quantity is found in phi value analysis.
The coefficient of diffusion in solids can be modeled with an equation that exponentiates this
quantity. One equation involving this quantity says that the rate constant is equal to the exponent of
this quantity over (*) RT; that is the Arrhenius equation. On a reaction coordinate diagram, this quantity is
the difference between the maximum value and the starting value. Catalysts speed up a reaction by lowering
this quantity for a reaction. For 10 points, name this quantity that measures how much energy you need to
put into a system to start a reaction.
ANSWER: activation energy
This value can be found by subtracting the initial state from the maximum of the transition state
on some diagrams. An equation that sets this value equal to negative R-T times the natural log of the
ratio between the equilibrium constant and the frequency factor is named for (*) Swedish chemist
Svante Arrhenius (SUH-vahn-tuh uh-REE-nee-us). Catalysts lower this value for chemical reactions. It is
usually represented as "E sub a." For 10 points, name this value defined as the minimum energy required
for a chemical reaction to occur.
ANSWER: activation energy [or E sub a until it is read]
When this quantity is added to a system, the system will take the conformation that is closest to the reactants
in free energy, as stated by the Hammond Postulate. It is proportional to the naural log of the ratio of the
rate constant to the frequency factor. The Arrhenius equation also can be plotted, and the negative slope of
the plot is this quantity divided by the ideal gas constant. When this quantity is negative, the rate of a
reaction will decrease when the temperature is increased. Catalysts lower this quantity without affecting the
products or the reactants of the raction. FTP, name this term defined as the energy that must be overcome in
order for a chemical reaction to occur.
ANSWER: Activation energy or threshold energy or midnight energy
Two versions of this quantity are located in the numerator of the protein folding phi value. This
quantity is equal to the square of the sum of the Gibbs free energy and the reorganization energy
divided by 4 times the reorganization energy according to Marcus theory. This quantity can be
computed via synchronous transit methods, which seek to find a saddle point on a potential energy
surface. The inverse of temperature is plotted against the natural log of the (*) rate constant to make a
graph whose slope is equal to minus this quantity over R. It is represented by the distance between a local
minimum and a transition state on a graph of energy vs reaction coordinate. Located in the numerator of the
exponential of the Arrhenius equation, for 10 points, name this quantity lowered by catalysts which
represents the energetic barrier to a chemical reaction.
ANSWER: activation energy [prompt on Gibbs free energy before mention, prompt on Ea, prompt on answers like "energy barrier"]
In electromigration theory, the median failure time is function of this quantity and current density according
to Black's equation. In food processing engineering, it is proportional to the square of the mean temperature
divided by a thermal "resistance constant." This quantity expresses the fact that the rate constant of a
reactant is temperature dependent, since it is proportional to the derivative of the rate constant with respect
to inverse temperature. It is often represented as a hump in a graph plotting the rate of reaction versus time.
Catalysts speed up reactions by reducing this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity that gives the
minimum energy required in a system for a reaction to occur.
ANSWER: activation energy
This quantity can be somewhat overcome in biological systems by hydrogen tunneling. When this
quantity rather than product stability determines which product is formed, the reaction is said to be under
kinetic control. The Arrhenius (ar-REN-ee-us) equation relates it to temperature and reaction rate. This is
the
amount of energy between the reactants and the transition state. For 10 points, identify this energy barrier
that must be overcome for a reaction to take place.
ANSWER: activation energy [or free energy of activation]
This value is often determined experimentally by finding the reaction rate at different temperatures, then
plotting the logarithm of the rate constant against the reciprocal of temperature and finding the slope of the
line of best fit. A relatively low value of this indicates that a greater proportion of colliding reactants will
result in reactions. It appears in the numerator of the exponent of the Arrhenius equation, and catalysts work
by lowering this value for particular reactions. Name this value denoted as E-sub-A, that measures the
minimum energy needed for a reaction to occur.
ANSWER: activation energy [accept E-sub-A before it is mentioned]
Kissinger's method and Ozawa's method are used to calculate this parameter using thermogravimetric data.
For complex reactions such as the pyrolysis of coal, this quantity is assumed to have a probability
distribution. This quantity can be expressed as the negative product of RT times the natural log of the
reaction rate coefficient over the frequency factor, and the difference between the starting point and the
highest point on a reaction coordinate diagram gives this quantity. Catalysts increase the rate of a reaction
by providing a mechanism with a lower value of this quantity. For 10 points, name this energy barrier, the
minimum energy required to start a chemical reaction, which is symbolized Ea.
ANSWER: Activation Energy
The Gibbs-Duhem equation can be written in terms of partial derivatives of the natural log of this
quantity. Excess Gibbs energy models used to calculate this quantity include UNIQUAC and the
relatively simple empirical Margules equation. Another equation used to find this quantity uses a
virial expansion, and is often used when a similar equation's limiting law has been surpassed. When
the liquid mole (*) fraction of a species in a mixture approaches zero this quantity takes on a unique value
in the Henry's law regime. The Pitzer equation can be used to find this quantity, which is one for an ideal
solution as it measures the nonideality of real solutions. For 10 points, name this dimensionless coefficient
symbolized gamma similar to concentration that can sometimes be found for electrolytic solutions via the
Debye-Huckel equation.
ANSWER: activity coefficients
This quantity can be empirically measured by the mean salt method, which relies on the MacInnes
assumption and computes it for a substance as the geometric mean of this quantity for its
components. In one model, this quantity is exponential in the excess Gibbs function; that model is the
Margules model, which extends the (*) Gibbs-Duhem equation. The difference between the standard and
actual chemical potentials is proportional to its logarithm. In dilute solutions of electrolytes, this quantity
can be computed to be proportional to the square root of ionic strength, according to the Debye-Huckel
equation. It is equal to one in mixtures that obey Raoult's law. For 10 points, name this measure of
deviation from ideality, a factor that is multiplied by concentration.
ANSWER: activity coefficient [do accept just activity because it only differs from the coefficient by a trivial factor]
This type of reaction is the rate-determining step of the Monsanto process. This type of reaction
occurs in the first step of the catalytic cycles of Wilkinson's catalyst and the Suzuki coupling in an
oxidative fashion. The reaction between an enolate and an alpha-beta-unsaturated carbonyl is this
type of reaction. Gilman reagents are useful for forming the 1,4 product in this type of reaction.
Performing this type of reaction on a carbonyl forms a tetrahedral intermediate. In this type of
reaction between an (*) alkene and HBr, the bromine becomes bonded to the most substituted carbon
according to Markovnikov's rule. The Diels-Alder reaction is a cyclic variant of this general type of
reaction. For 10 points, name this type of reaction that is the opposite of an elimination, in which two
molecules combine to form one molecule.
ANSWER: addition reaction [prompt on "oxidation" until "oxidative"; accept "oxidative addition"; accept cycloaddition after "Diels-Alder" is read]
Atmospheric chemistry follows a given volume of air rising upward and its corresponding
temperature change, defining a dry and moist lapse rate given this adjective, and adequately gradual
perturbations do not take a system out of its original eigenstate according to a theorem called this
formulated by Fock and Born. In a reversible one of these processes, the product of pressure with volume
raised to gamma is held constant. For 10 points, give this adjective that describes all thermodynamic
processes that do not involve a transfer of heat.
ANSWER: adiabatic [accept adiabatic lapse rate before "this adjective" is read]
One process of this type can explain why processes that occur at the stoichiometric equivalence point
burn the hottest and at the highest temperatures. This type of process lends its name to an effect in
which a changing magnetic field is used to heat or cool a substance; that effect is known as this kind
of demagnetization. In the atmosphere, a descending parcel of air undergoes this kind of process. On
P-V diagrams, processes of this type are represented by decreasing (*), concave up lines. The JouleThompson effect occurs in one process of this type, free expansion. The Carnot cycle includes isothermal
processes along with two processes of this type. For 10 points, name this type of processes, in which a
system exchanges no heat.
ANSWER: Adiabatic Processes
In mass spec, this type of ionization energy creates a molecular ion in its lowest energy level. In
meteorology, potential temperature refers to cooling in this type of process to reach a 100 kPa
pressure. The square of an ideal gas's speed of sound equals the pressure over the density, all times
this type of "index," which is a ratio of specific (*) heats. This type of process forms nearly vertical
tracks
on a PV diagram, and in Carnot cycles, two reversible examples of this process are interspersed with
isothermal processes. The change in internal energy for this kind of process equals the work done on the
system. For 10 points, name this type of process in which heat does not enter or leave a system.
ANSWER: adiabatic [or adiabatic ionization energy; or adiabatic process; or adiabatic index]
This process is governed by a mathematical expression setting mass fraction proportional to partial
pressure raised to the power of one over a constant. A mechanism involving this process explains why
metal-catalyzed hydrogenation reactions occur with syn stereochemistry. This phenomenon commonly
occurs to activated carbon. This process occurs due to the stationary phase in thin-layer chromatography,
where components which allow this to happen can be used as molecular sieves. This phenomenon occurs
best when surface energy and surface area are high, and unlike a similar phenomenon, results in a film, not
complete dissolution. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which molecules adhere to a solid surface.
ANSWER: adsorption [or word forms; do not accept or prompt on "absorption"]
Blood constituents of different mobility undergo this process in successive waves in the Vroman
effect. It's not distillation, but one variety of this process is commonly used in nitrogen generators
and portable oxygen concentrators is called its "pressure-swing" variety. One equation modelling
this process gives its equilibrium as equal to fractional occupancy over one minus fractional
occupancy times pressure; that equation was extended by Brunauer, (*) Emmett, and Teller to multiple
layers. Zeolites and activated charcoal are common beds used for this process, which is also used by
heterogeneous catalysts like palladium on carbon. For 10 points, name this phenomenon modelled by the
Langmuir isotherm, in which dissolved or free molecules bind to a solid surface.
ANSWER: adsorption
One theory of this process calculates a potential equal to negative RT times the natural log of equilibrium
vapor pressure over saturation vapor pressure. That potential is calculated in the Dubinin-Polanyi theory.
Hill's and Lowell's equation contain the namesake C constant of another theory of this process. That theory
of this process is commonly used to calculate the specific surface area for it and is BET theory. For
monolayers, the partitioning between molecules in a gas phase and molecules that have undergone this
process is described by the Freundlich and Langmuir isotherms. An important quantity for it is surface
coverage. Industrially, it typically involves alumina, silica gel or activated carbon because they have a large
surface area per unit weight. For 10 points, name this process in which molecules or particles bind to a
surface, as opposed to filling pores in a solid, like in absorption.
ANSWER: adsorption [prompt on sorption]
Packed beds used to perform this process can be regenerated by sharply reducing the pressure once
the bed hits maximum capacity in the "pressure swing" form of this process. Only one of the
reactants undergoes this process in the Eley-Rideal mechanism, while they both undergo this process
in the Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism. One equation describing this process states that theta is
equal to a constant times the pressure over one plus the same constant times the pressure, where
theta is the fractional coverage. That equation is the (*) Langmuir isotherm. Zeolites are efficient in
performing this process due to their high surface areas. Activated carbon catalyzes reactions by allowing the
reactants to perform this process onto the carbon. For 10 points, name this process in which molecules
adhere onto a solid surface, which is not to be confused with absorption.
ANSWER: adsorption [be sure they are not saying "absorption"!]
Materials of this type made from cadmium selenide quantum dots have a three-dimensional network
structure which allows them to be used as semiconductors. NASA's Stardust spacecraft uses a grid
containing samples of this material in order to capture interstellar dust. Chalcogenic varieties have
applications in absorbing heavy metal pollutants such as mercury and lead from water. When
subjected to large amounts pressure, these materials (*) shatter like glass due to their high friability,
despite possessing an interlocking dendritic microstructure that creates pores on the order of 100
nanometers. Their blue color is caused by Rayleigh scattering and their almost translucent appearance gives
them their nickname of 'solid smokes'. First created by Samuel Kistler in 1931, FTP, identify this type of
material in which the liquid portion of a gel is replaced by gas.
ANSWER: aerogels (prompt on "solid smoke" or "frozen smoke" before mentioned)
This material forms the basis of the Cherenkov counter in the BELLE experiment, and it is used to coat the
electrodes of a supercapacitor. This material is also used to trap particles in NASA's Stardust collector, and
ones made from metal oxides are common catalysts due to their exceptionally high surface area. Most of
these materials are made by supercritical drying, and the kind made from silica still holds the record for the
best thermal insulator. First made by Samuel Kistler to supposedly win a bet and nicknamed "frozen
smoke", name this class of extremely low-density solids made by replacing the liquid component of a
colloid with a gas.
ANSWER: aerogel
Their ability to absorb and scatter solar radiation is measured by their SSA. Black carbon has an
SSA of 0.23, indicating that it very absorbing. According to the IPCC, it is difficult to model the
effect of these on global warming, because of uncertainties regarding their atmospheric burden,
anthropogenic contribution, and their optical parameters. Inhalation of these can cause diseases such
as silicosis and black lung. They are a major source of pollution in industrial cities such as Mexico
City and Beijing. Examples of these include (*) smoke, dust, and smog. They differ from sols in that the
continuous medium is always a gas, usually air. FTP, give this term which in common usage can also refer
to a spray can capable of dispensing it.
ANSWER: aerosols (accept "particulate matter" before "spray can" is read; do not prompt on "sol")
An important early work of this man was History of the Freshwater Fishes of Central Europe, and
he developed the first systematic method for classifying fossil fish. Ezra Pound's The Parable of the
Sunfish is a tribute to this man's notable teaching style, and he founded the Museum of Comparative
Zoology at Harvard. This scientist's eponymous lake formed when the Laurentide ice sheet blocked
drainage into Hudson Bay during the Pleistocene, and the relics of that enormous lake include Lake
of the Woods and Lake Winnipeg. Describing his most significant theory in Study on Glaciers, name
this Swiss-American paleontologist who, after discussions with Jean de Charpentier and a quarrel
with Karl Friedrich Schimper, first proposed the ice age.
ANSWER: Louis Agassiz
Edmond Halley suggested this quantity could be found by measuring the total amount of salt in
the ocean and its rate of increase. George-Louis Leclerc estimated it by heating metal spheres, and
Lord Kelvin used a similar thermodynamic argument when he declared this value was between 20
million and 400 million. Clair Patterson calculated the value by measuring the number of (*) lead
isotopes in meteorites, and his value of 4.55 billion is still used today. For 10 points, name this value, the
age of the third planet from the sun.
ANSWER: age of the Earth [or obvious equivalents; or age of the ocean before "metal spheres"]
These things originate in source regions that are flat and have light surface winds. These things are
designated with a combination of a small c or small m, for continental or marine, and a big P or big T, for
polar and tropical. On surface weather maps, transition zones between them are marked by lines with
equally spaced triangles, semicircles, or a combination of both and are called fronts. For 20 points, name
these large bodies of air that have a consistent temperature and moisture content.
ANSWER: air masses
This functional group can be added to an alkene in a Markovnikov fashion by adding mercuric acetate and
water, followed by sodium borohydride in a sodium hydroxide solution in a process called oxymercuration.
When compounds containing this functional group are of low mass, zinc chloride can be used to classify
them in the Lucas test. Secondary ones can be oxidized into ketones, and when yeast cells undergo
fermentation, they produce carbon dioxide and a compound which contains this functional group. Name this
functional group with general formula R-OH, examples of which include ethanol and methanol.
ANSWER: alcohol [or hydroxyl]
Indium catalyzes a reaction involving alkyl halides and carbonyl groups producing them, and they
take part in the Chugaev elimination with carbon disulfide. Two of them are required for production of
ethers via the Williamson synthesis, and along with water, these are notably not compatible with
Grignard reagents. A reaction named for Fischer produces esters from a reflux of them and carboxylic
acid, and ketones result from oxidation of the secondary type of them. Containing the hydroxyl group,
for 10 points, name this class of compounds including ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
The Nozaki-Hyama reaction and the Barbier reaction form this type of organic compound. The
Fischer Esterfication creates an ester from a carboxylic acid and one of these compounds. When
sulfur replaces the functional group's oxygen, it is known as a (*) thiol. One type of this compound is
used commonly in 70% solutions as a disinfectant, while the most simplest is known as the "wood" variety
of this compound. The most common example of one of these compounds is the primary component of both
biofuel as well as liquor. A hydroxyl group identifies, for ten points, this class of organic compounds whose
most famous member is ethanol.
ANSWER: Alcohols
These compounds are treated first with oxalyl chloride and DMSO and then with triethylamine in a reaction
that is carried out in dichloromethane. The enzyme ALDH acts on these compounds, and the Lucas test can
be used to test for the presence of secondary or tertiary version of these compounds. These compounds can
be oxidized to aldehydes in the Swern oxidation and by PCC, and reacting alkenes with Hg(OAc)2 ("HG
OAC -2") and water and then removing the mercury acetate yields these compounds. These compounds
attack protonated carboxyllic acids in the first step of the Fischer esterification. For 10 points, name these
compounds characterized by the presence of a hydroxyl group, examples of which include ethanol and
methanol.
ANSWER: alcohols [prompt on hydroxyls before mentioned; accept primary or secondary or tertiary alcohols]
One of these compounds is abbreviated IPA. Consumption of the simplest of these compounds can result
in blindness after it is metabolized to formaldehyde and then formic acid. They can come in primary,
secondary and tertiary types and are characterized by a hydroxyl group attached to a hydrocarbon. An
anaerobic fermentation done by yeast produces one of these compounds. For 10 points, identify this group
of compounds who simplest examples are methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
Like amines, this functional group is often protected during organic syntheses by adding trimethylsilyl
chloride. This functional group can result from reducing an ester with lithium aluminum hydride and from
opening an epoxide. This group usually has a pKa between 16 and 19 and can be deprotonated and reacted
with alkyl halides to form ethers. Secondary ones can be oxidized to ketones, whereas primary ones are
oxidized to aldehydes. Ingestion of the simplest molecule containing this group can cause blindness, and
with an ethyl group this group forms a popular intoxicant. For 10 points, name this functional group, which
consists of an oxygen bonded to a hydrogen.
ANSWER: hydroxyl [or alcohol]
The reaction of these compounds with carboxylic acids is known as the Fischer esterification. Oxidation
of the secondary form of these compounds results in ketones. One of these compounds can be formed from
the hydration of ethylene and has chemical formula C2H6O. For 10 points, identify this class of organic
compounds containing a hydroxyl group, the simplest of which include methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols [accept hydroxyls before mention]
Esters are formed from these compounds using the reagents tri-phenyl-phosphine and DEAD in the
Mitsunobu reaction. These compounds are oxidized with a reagent consisting of chromium trioxide in dilute
sulfuric acid and acetone. In the Williamson ether synthesis, an alkyl halide reacts with an alkoxide
prepared from one of these compounds, which have sulfur analogs known as thiols. The secondary type of
these compounds can be oxidized to ketones. For 10 points, name these compounds that have a hydroxyl
group and are exemplified by methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
Long-chain types of these compounds can be obtained from fats and waxes via saponification. These
compounds can also be produced by adding a Grignard reagent to a carbonyl compound and hydrolyzing
the resulting magnesium alkoxide. They are combined with carboxylic acids in the Fischer esterification,
and primary types of these compounds can also undergo intermolecular dehydration to produce ethers. For
10 points, name these organic compounds characterized by an OH hydroxyl group, examples of which
include methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: Alcohols
The oxidation of one of these compounds with a Jones reagent yields carboxylic acid, and they are the
product of the reaction of a ketone with a Grignard reagent. Esters are formed via a reaction of carboxylic
acid and this compound in a process named for Fischer. Consisting of a hydroxyl group bonded to a carbon
atom, they are given the formula R-OH. For 10 points, name this class of compounds exemplified by
methanol and ethanol, the latter of which is found in hand sanitizer and beer.
ANSWER: alcohols
A xanthate intermediate is eliminated to give the syn product in an elimination of this functionality to
alkenes. The synthesis of molecules with two of this functionality can be achieved by reaction with iodate or
via osmium tetroxide. This functionality reacts with triphenylphosphine and DEAD in the to give esters, and
they may be formed without rearrangement from alkenes in a reaction using a boron reagent named for
Brown. Tertiary ones are formed when ketones react with Grignard reagents, and secondary ones form from
the reduction of ketones. For 10 points, name this functionality, whose methyl type will make you go blind
and whose ethyl type is produced in fermentation in plants.
ANSWER: alcohol [or hydroxyl; accept equivalents]
These compounds can be formed by adding an organomagnesium halide to a ketone or an aldehyde
in the Grignard reaction, and the secondary variety of these compounds is oxidized to ketones in the
Jones oxidation. These compounds form (*)esters when combined with carboxylic acids in Fischer
esterification, and aromatic examples of these compounds are known as phenols. The "wood" variety of
these compounds is the simplest one and has formula CH3OH, and ethanol, another of these compounds, is
a product of the fermentation of sugars. Defined by the presence of hydroxyl groups, for 10 points, identify
this sometimes-intoxicating class of organic compounds.
ANSWER: alcohols
Reaction with tri-phenyl-phosphine and carbon tetrachloride converts these compounds into alkyl
chlorides in the Appel reaction. Tetrabutyl ammonium fluoride can be used to remove silyl ether
protecting groups of these compounds. They can be converted to a better leaving group through
reaction with tosyl chloride to form a tosylate. On an IR spectrum, this functional group displays a
strong, broad peak at 3200 to 3500 inverse centimeters. A solution of zinc chloride and hydrochloric
acid is used to determine their presence in the (*) Lucas test. In an E1 mechanism, sulfuric acid
dehydrates it to form alkenes. Primary ones can be oxidized to carboxylic acids with Jones's reagent, and to
aldehydes with PCC. For 10 points, name this functional group characterized by a hydroxyl at the end.
ANSWER: alcohol [or R-OH or R-hydroxyl until "hydroxyl" is read]
These compounds can be formed by nickel/chromium coupling called the Nozaki-Hiyama-Kishi
reaction, and secondary or tertiary forms of these compounds are given when alkenes undergo a
hydration reaction catalysed by sulfuric acid. These compounds can act as weak acids after
undergoing (*) deprotonation, and they are combined with carboxylic acids to form an ester in a reaction
known as Fischer esterification. Hydroxyl groups are characteristic of, for ten points , what organic
compounds, exemplified by methanol and ethanol?
ANSWER: Alcohols
A compound containing this functional group vicinal to an amino group can be synthesized from an alkene
in one reaction named for Sharpless. A reaction which uses triphenylphosphine and DEAD to convert these
compounds to azides or esters is named for Mitsunobu, while serine and threonie contain this functional
group on their beta carbons. One of these reacts with a carboxylic acid to give an ester in the Fischer
synthesis, and these functional groups can be produced by the reduction of aldehydes and ketones into their
primary and tertiary types respectively. For 10 points, identify this functional groups exemplified by
methanol and propanol.
ANSWER: alcohols [or OH; or hydroxyl]
These compounds can be inverted using triphenylphosphine and DEAD [read letters individually] in the
Mitsunobu reaction. These molecules also attack a protonated carbonyl group to form a tetrahedral
intermediate with carboxylic acid in a reaction which produces water and an ester, named for Fischer.
Methods of synthesizing these compounds include hydration of an alkene and the fermentation of glucose
with yeast. This functional group with the general formula CnH2n+1OH consists of a hydroxyl attached to an
R group. For 10 points, name this functional group, examples of which include methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohol
The most highly substituted type of these compounds forms alkyl halides when reacted with
hydrobromic acid. Formed from alkenes by hydroboration and oxidation, these compounds can also be
synthesized by reducing aldehydes and ketones. The simplest variety of these compounds can be
formed from the distillation of wood. Common types include the three-carbon isopropyl and the two
carbon ethyl type produced by fermentation. For 10 points, name this class of compounds, the simplest
of which is methanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
The namesake dehydrogenase of this class of molecules makes molecules with this functional group while
oxidizing NADH. Jones's reagent can be used to convert primary types of these molecules into carboxylic
acids and secondary types into ketones. Grignard reagents produce them by reacting with carbonyl groups,
and yeast can be used to produce the ethyl variety of these substances, excessive consumption of which can
cause cirrhosis of the liver. For ten points, name this class of organic molecules distinguished by a hydroxyl
group.
ANSWER: alcohols
Molecules with this functional group include testosterone and dopamine, and one of these can suppress the
action of antidiuretic hormone. Grignard reagents react with carbonyls to produce these, and they can be
produced from alkenes through hydroboration and oxymercuration. When attached to an alkyl chain, these
usually have a pKa of 16 to 19 and thus are slightly more acidic than water. One of these, which is
sometimes used for fuel, is produced by Saccharomyces cervisiae from sugar. FTP, name this functional
group defined by an oxygen bonded to a hydrogen that is found in chemicals such as ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
One class of these compounds may be transformed into aldehydes via a reaction named for
Swern, and they can be produced without risk of rearrangement through a mercurationdemercuration
reaction. Their deprotonation results in the formation of alkoxide ions, and
reducing agents such as LAH form them from aldehydes and ketones. One of these is a benzene
derivative called phenol. For 10 points, name these compounds that possess one or more
hydroxyl groups and include methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
This type of organic molecule is oxidized in the Swern oxidation. They can also be oxidized by Pyridinium
chlorochromate, which is abbreviated PCC. Tosyl chloride converts these into tosylates, and thionyl
chloride reacts with them to form alkyl chlorides. They react with carboxylic acids in the Fischer
esterification. Reacting aldehydes with an organomagnesium halide reagent creates these. Sulfuric acid can
be used to dehydrate these in elimination reactions governed by Zaitsev's rule. Tertiary ones are reactive
with hydrogen halides in the SN1 reaction. For 10 points, name these organic compounds that have a
hydroxyl group, an example of which is ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
The Fischer esterficiation uses a carboxylic acid and this functional group. One of its simplest
members can be used to produce chloral, and its cellulosic form is found in plants. Characterized by
a terminal hydroxyl group, for ten points, name this class of compounds distinguished by the -OH
functional group, produced via fermentation and includes propanol, methanol, and ethanol.
ANSWER: Alcohols
Xanthane is an intermediate in a reaction in which these compounds are treated with a base and carbon
disulfide, and converted to alkenes. Corey developed the reagent PCC to oxidize these compounds, which
can be formed from the reaction between carbonyl compounds and Grignard reagents. Other methods for
converting these compounds to alkenes include oxymercuration-reduction reactions and hydroboration-
oxidation reactions. Sodium borohydride can be used to reduce aldehydes into the primary type, and they
dissociate into alkoxide ions in aqueous solution. FTP name these compounds in which carbon is bonded to
a hydroxyl group, examples of which include methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
These compounds can react with triphenylphosphine and DEAD to produce esters in the Mitsunobu
reaction. They also react with carboxylic acids in the Fischer esterification. These compounds can be
created by reacting Grignard reagents with carbonyl groups, or by reducing ketones to form secondary ones.
Consumption of the simplest of these compounds, which can be obtained from wood, can lead to permanent
blindness. For 10 points, name these compounds with a hydroxyl group, the simplest of which is methanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
The Nozaki-Hiyama and Barbier reactions produce these compounds, which can also be produced by
reacting Grignard reagents with secondary or tertiary alcohols. Primary alkyl halides reacted with strong
bases in nucleophilic aliphatic substitution result in these compounds. They undergo the E1 elimination
reaction to produce alkenes and they are the reduction product of the Cannizzaro reaction. For 10 points,
name these compounds distinguished by a hydroxyl or -OH group, which notably includes ethanol.
ANSWER: Alcohols
Grignard reagents can react with carbonyl groups to form these compounds. Their primary type can be
oxidized to aldehydes and then to carboxylic acids, but their secondary type normally terminates the process
at the ketone stage. In Fischer esterification, they are reacted with carboxylic acid to form the namesake
compounds. Having a general formula of C-n-H-2n-plus-1-O-H, for 10 points, identify these organic
compounds in which a hydroxyl group is bound to a carbon atom that include methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
These compounds can be chlorinated using S-O-Cl 2 or brominated using P-Br 3. Both PCC and
the Jones reagent oxidize these compounds to ketones. Though not amines (AA-meenz), the number
of carbon atoms attached to their defining functional group determines whether they are (*) primary,
secondary, or tertiary. An example of these compounds is generated along with carbon dioxide when yeast
enzymes consume glucose. These compounds have a hydroxyl group bounded to carbon atom. For 10
points, name these compounds whose examples include methanol, ethanol, and a type of isopropyl.
ANSWER: alcohols
These compounds can be produced by adding water to an alkene in the presence of a strong acid
catalyst. The number of carbons attached to the functional group in these compounds determines
whether it is primary, secondary, or tertiary. One of these compounds is toxic because it oxidizes into
formaldehyde; that is the methyl type of this compound, which is used to denature another type of this
compound to render it unfit for human consumption. For 10 points, name this class of organic compounds
consisting of an O-H group attached to a carbon atom.
ANSWER: alcohols
Tosyl groups are often added to these compounds to give them a better leaving group. These
compounds are protonated by strong acid in an E1 elimination to form alkenes. Grignard reactions
form substituted versions of these compounds. They can be oxidized into aldehydes or ketones using
[*] Jones or Collins reagents, and these compounds are reacted with carboxylic acids in an acid catalyst in
Fischer esterification. These compounds contain a hydroxyl group bound to a carbon. For ten points, name
these organic compounds which result from fermentation, examples of which include butanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
One method of removing this functional group involves reacting it with a potassium xanthate followed
by an elimination. Besides the undergoing the Chugaev elimination, this functional group is protected by
dihydropyran. Zinc chloride is used to test for their presence in the Lucas test. The Collins reagent and
Jones reagent are commonly used to oxidize this functional group, and solutions of a compound of this
element are used in SN1 solvolysis reactions. These compoudns have higher boiling points than their
corresponding thiols, and they exhibit a broad peak around 3300 inverse centimeters on IR spectroscopy.
This functional group contains a carbon and a hydrogen both single bonded to an oxygen. For 10 points,
name this functional group found in ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohol [or hydroxyl]
Tri-phenyl-phosphine and diethyl azo-di-carboxylate are used to transform this class of organic compounds
into other compounds such as esters and various types of ethers via the Mitsunobu reaction. An ester can
also be formed from a carboxylic acid and one of these with the help of an acidic catalyst in a process
known as Fischer esterification, and they must be made into good leaving groups, often with tosylate or
mesylate, before they can undergo nucleophilic substitution. For 10 points, identify this class of organic
compounds, represented by the general formula R-OH.
ANSWER: alcohols
Allylic examples are formed after workup of a sulfone formed by the pericyclic rearrangment of an allylic
oxysulfide in the Evans-Mislow rearrangement. Chlorotrimethylsilane, or TMS-Cl [tee em ess chloride], is
generally used to protect these types of compounds. A compound containing two of these groups, such as
propylene glycol, can be used itself to protect aldehydes and ketones. Futhermore, these compounds are
formed by the reduction of ketones and aldehydes by sodium borohydride. For ten points, name these
compounds characterized by a hydroxyl functionality, examples of which are methanol and isopropanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
One method of creating these compounds involves hydroboration and oxidation of alkenes. The Jones
reagent converts these into carboxylic acids, and two of these are needed for the creation of an ether in the
Williamson synthesis. Oxidation of the secondary type of these creates ketones, and they include one that is
produced during petroleum refining or by fermentation of sugars and has formula C2H6O, the "ethyl"
variety. For 10 points, name this class of organic compound that contains a hydroxyl group, the simplest of
which is methanol.
ANSWER: alcohols
A chemical from this functional group is combined with a carboxylic acid in Fischer esterification. While
secondary ones can be oxidized to make ketones, primary ones are oxidized to create aldehydes or
carboxylic acids. They are often combined with water to create antifreeze, and are sometimes used before
iodine as an antiseptic. Structurally, these contain a hydroxyl group bonded to a saturated carbon, and the
simplest one has formula CH3OH. Including menthol and ethanol, name these compounds known for their
use in adult beverages.
ANSWER: alcohols
Pyridinium chlorochromate cannot fully oxidize these substances, unlike a Jones reagent which uses
chromium trioxide to oxidize them. Grignard reagents use ethylene oxide to create one type and also
react with ketones to form the (*) "tertiary" variant. The oxidizing of their "primary" type forms
aldehydes. One of these substances has formula C2H60 and is produced by fermentation and is called the
"ethyl" type. For 10 points, name these substances that end with an OH group and include methanol and
ethanol.
ANSWER: Alcohols
In transaminases that use PLP as a cofactor, the amine attacks one of these functional groups before
being transferred to the product. A common substrate analogue in enzyme inhibition replaces the
C-terminus with one of these functional groups. Hydration of these compounds produces hemiacetals, and
they produce a chemical shift from 9.5 to 10.5 ppm on proton NMR. Reacting these compounds with
ammoniacal silver nitrate produces a silver mirror in the Tollens test. The simplest member of this group is
often used as a preservative, and this functional group features a carbon atom double bonded to an oxygen
atom and single bonded to an atom of hydrogen. For 10 points, name this functional group that is similar to
a ketone.
ANSWER: aldehydes
One forms an alcohol when coupled with a vinyl halide in the Nozaki-Hiyma-Kishi reaction, and the Nef
reaction forms one via the acid hydrolysis of a nitroalkane salt. Their Zincke variety forms when the
terminal imine group of a pyridine ring is hydrolyzed, while Meyers and Stephen synthesis yields them from
oxazines and nitriles. The Tollens reagent forms a silver mirror in their presence, differentiating them from
ketones. For 10 points, name these compounds with terminal carbonyl groups, whose simplest member is
commonly used for embalming.
ANSWER: aldehydes
One method of synthesizing these substances involves quenching an iminium salt in
water, while another method produces these compounds from the reduction of an acid
halide using hydrogen gas via a poisoned palladium-on-carbon catalyst. Their baseinduced disproportionation occurs to yield an alcohol and the salt of a carboxylic
acid in the Cannizzaro reaction. Accounting for the pleasant odor of vanillin and
cilantro, these non-ketones form a(*) silver mirror on the wall of a test tube in the presence
of the Tollens' reagent. For ten points, name these compounds containing a terminal carbonyl
group whose simplest member, with formula CH2O, is often used as a preservative.
ANSWER: aldehydes
The Vilsmeier-Haack reaction is used to synthesize aryl compounds with these functional groups, while the
ones formed by the ring opening of pyridines with secondary amines are known as the Zincke variety. They
are transformed into alkynes in the Corey-Fuchs reaction and yield primary alcohols when attacked by
LAH. Their oxidization by the Tollen's reagent results in the formation of a silver mirror. For 10 points,
identify these compounds characterized by a carbon double-bonded to an oxygen and single bonded to
hydrogen, whose simplest example is methanal.
ANSWER: aldehydes
One method of synthesizing these compounds involves reacting carbon monoxide, hydrochloric acid, and a
Lewis acid with a benzene ring. Reacting primary alcohols with PCC yields these compounds, which are
made in the Gatterman-Koch reaction. Copper II is reduced to copper oxide in the presence of these
compounds in Fehling's test. The presence of a silver mirror distinguishes them from a similar type of
compound in Tollen's test. Unlike ketones, these compounds have a terminal carbonyl carbon. For 10
points, name these compounds with general formula R-CHO, whose simplest member is formaldehyde.
ANSWER: aldehydes
Although not a primary alcohol, only one of these compounds with a methyl group undergoes the iodoform
reaction. Their simplest example is mixed with sulfuric acid to form Marquis' reagent, which can be used to
identify alkaloids. LDA usually cannot be used to deprotonate these compounds to form enolates because
self-condensation is too fast. These compounds are transformed into an alkyne by the Corey-Fuchs reaction.
When these compounds lack an alpha-hydrogen, they can undergo disproportionation to yield an alcohol
and a salt of a carboxylic acid in the Cannizzaro reaction. Unlike a similar organic compound, they have
reducing properties, which results in their oxidation in Tollens' reagent, creating a silver mirror. That mirror
distinguishes them from ketones. For 10 points, identify these compounds that contain a formyl group and
whose simplest example has chemical formula CH2O.
ANSWER: aldehydes
Bouveault synthesis creates compounds in this functional group from an alkyl halide, and BodrouxChichibabin synthesis creates this from a Grignard reagent. These compounds are similar to ketones, and
one thing they have in common is that manganese dioxide can oxidize an alcohol into one of these. These
compounds are part of the carbonyl group, ending with a carbon double bonded to an oxygen and single
bonded to a hydrogen. Name this group whose simplest example is used for embalming and preserving
tissues.
ANSWER: aldehydes (prompt formyl (group), carbonyl (group), or formaldehyde)
One variety of them formed from secondary imines such as pyrimidine are named for Zincke. Two
equivalents of these compounds yield a carboxylic acid and a primary alcohol in a disproportion reaction
named for Cannizaro. They are characterized by an NMR shift of about 9 to 10 ppm, and their oxidation in
the presence of a diamine-silver complex yields a "silver mirror" in the Tollens test. For 10 points, identify
this functional group which features a carbon double bonded to an oxygen atom and single bonded to a
hydrogen atom, exemplified by methanal and ethanal.
ANSWER: aldehyde
These compounds can be formed in the McFadyen-Stevens reaction from the decomposition of acylsulfonyl-hydrazides, while asymmetric ones are formed in the Meyers synthesis from the hydrolysis of an
oxazine. Reactions in which their defining functional group is introduced, such as the Sommelet reaction
that uses water and hexamine, are known as formylation reactions. They can also be formed in the
Rosemund reduction of an acid chloride or through oxidation of a primary alcohol. For 10 points, name
these compounds detected via the formation of a silver mirror in the Tollens test, defined by the presence of
a terminal carbonyl group.
ANSWER: aldehydes
They can be synthesized by the McFadyen-Stevens reaction and the Nef reaction, and aromatic examples of
them are created by the Gattermann-Koch reaction. Reacting an ester or a nitrile with DIBAL-H and hexane
will produce them, and they can be detected by the formation of a "silver mirror" when exposed to Tollen's
reagent. They can also be prepared by oxidizing a primary alcohol with potassium dichromate and sulfuric
acid, though using a secondary alcohol will give a ketone instead. Such properties are characteristic of,
FTP, what class of organic compounds with a terminal carbonyl group, whose simplest member has formula
CH2O?
ANSWER: Aldehydes
A polymerization reaction between phenol and one of these compounds is used to synthesize Bakelite.
Ozonolysis of an alkene followed by reductive workup can only produce these compounds if at least
one of the four substituents is a hydrogen. The liver metabolizes ethanol by converting it to one of
these compounds via alcohol dehydrogenase. The harsh conditions of the Jones oxidation will
undesirably react with these compounds, necessitating the use of reagents such as (*) PCC to generate
these compounds by oxidation of primary alcohols. The presence of one of these compounds generates a
"silver mirror" in the Tollens test. For 10 points, name these terminal carbonyl compounds with general
formula R-CHO that have similar chemistry to ketones.
ANSWER: aldehydes [prompt on "carbonyl" until mention]
These chemicals are the major product when iminium salts are heated, then quenched with water.
One subclass of these compounds is the 5-amino-2,4-pentadienals, which can be formed by ring
opening of pyridinium salts when secondary amines are substituted for primary ones in a certain
reaction. Terminal z-alkenes result from the reaction of one of these compounds with a triphenyl
phosphonium ylide. An alcohol and a carboxylic acid are the products in the base-catalyzed (*)
disproportionation of these compounds. These reactants in the Cannizzaro reaction can be produced by the
Stephen synthesis, and can be identified by the formation of a precipitate in a Tollens' test. Including the
aforementioned Zincke variety, FTP, identify these compounds which contain a terminal carbon bonded to a
hydrogen atom and double bonded to an oxygen atom - a terminal carbonyl group - and which can be
distinguished via the silver mirror test from ketones.
ANSWER: aldehydes [prompt on carbonyls]
Dess-Martin periodinane can be reacted with primary alcohols to produce this functionality. One
compound containing this functional group can be produced by reacting ethylene with oxygen in
water in the presence of a palladium catalyst, which is known as the Wacker process; although not an
alcohol, that compound is believed to cause hangovers. This functionality is treated with a base to
produce a (*) carboxylic acid and an alcohol in the Cannizarro reaction. By not oxidizing all the way to a
carboxylic acid, the Parikh-Doering and Swern oxidations can also be used to produce this moiety from
primary alcohols. It is a carbonyl bonded to a hydrogen and a R group. A silver mirror can be used to
distinguish this functionality from, for 10 points, what functional group that isn't a ketone whose simplest
example is formaldehyde?
ANSWER: aldehydes
A disproportionation reaction using this type of compounds in the presence of alcoxides to yield
esters is named for Tischenko, while another type can be formed by reacting a secondary amine with
a pyridinium salt. In the presence of a strong base, two equivalents of these yield an alcohol and a
carboxylic acid in the Cannizzaro reaction. They can be reduced to primary alcohols, and they react with a
set of alkyl ammonium compounds to form a silver mirror in the Tollens test. For 10 points, identify these
compounds which feature a carbon double bonded to an oxygen and single bonded to an alkyl group and a
hydrogen, exemplified by etha-nal and propa-nal.
ANSWER: aldehyde
The action of hexamine and water convert a benzyl halide to this functional group in the Sommelet
reaction. This functional group can be formed by reaction with the Jones reagent only if it does not
form a hydrate, and this functional group is created via palladium catalysis from ethene in the
Wacker process. These can be created by the three-three sigmatropic rearrangement of allyl vinyl
ethers in a rearrangement named for (*) Claisen. This functional group is converted first to a
dibromoalkene and then alkyne in the Corey Fuchs reaction, and two of these functional groups react in a
disproportionation that competes with the aldol condensation named for Cannizaro. For 10 points, name
this functional group that produces a silver mirror in the Tollen's test and, similar to a ketone, consists of a
terminal carbonyl.
ANSWER: Aldehydes [prompt on "carbonyl" before mentioned]
One of these organic compounds is converted to an alkene by a diorganochromium compound in the Takai
olefination. Compounds may be reduced to this functionality via the use of DIBAL-H (die-bahl aitch), and
alkynes are formed by a reaction of these compounds with tetrabromomethane and triphenylphosphine
named for Corey and Fuchs. When these organic compounds lack a hydrogen atom in the alpha position,
their disproportionation can be induced by a base in the Cannizzaro reaction. These organic compounds are
oxidized to carboxylic acids by a diamminesilver (I) complex, leading to the precipitation of metal onto the
inside of the vessel, giving the positive "silver mirror" result of the Tollens test. For 10 points, name this
special class of ketones with one R group being just hydrogen.
ANSWER: aldehydes
This type of compound, common examples of which include the immunosuppressant FK506 and the antitumor agent discodermolide, can be synthesized by reacting a ketone enolate with an aldehyde, a process
independently discovered by Charles Wurtz and Alexander Borodin. When the product of that
ketone/enolate reaction is dehydrated to form an enone, an especially useful synthesis reaction, it is this
compound's eponymous condensation.For 10 points name this type of chemical compound, which is also
the common name of 3-hydroxybutanal, and can be alternately called a beta-hydroxy ketone.
ANSWER: Aldol adduct (accept beta-hydroxy ketone before "eponymous")
Chalcones are produced via this reaction between benzaldehyde and derivatives of acetophenone. One
mode for controlling selectivity in this reaction is the avoidance of syn-pentane forms in its transition state
according to a model proposed by Zimmerman and Traxler. That model is not followed by a reaction using
silyl enol ethers to add to aldehydes in this type of reaction named for Mukaiyama. The product of this
reaction readily dehydrates to form an alpha-beta unsaturated carbonyl, an enone or enal. This reaction
follows a Michael addition in the Robinson annulation. Its first step under basic conditions is the abstraction
of the alpha hydrogen from an aldehyde to form an enolate. For 10 points, name this condensation reaction
whose product has characteristics of both aldehydes and alcohols.
ANSWER: aldol condensation [accept aldol reaction]
Water is removed through nucleophilic displacement in the Japp-Maitland reaction of this type.
Variations of this reaction have a stereoselectivity that is explained through the Zimmerman- Traxler
model. An enone is produced in another variant of this reaction, named for Knoevenagel (NOY ven
ahh gull). This reaction produces (*) beta-hydroxy aldehydes. The co-discovery with Charles Wurtz of
this reaction was the pinnacle of Alexander Borodin's chemistry career. This reaction follows a Michael
addition in the Robinson annulation. For 10 points, name this type of reaction that occurs between two
aldehydes containing alpha carbons, a type of condensation reaction.
ANSWER: aldol condensation [or aldol reaction; prompt on condensation]
In prelude to the Cannizzaro Reaction, one must make sure the aldehyde has no alpha hydrogens, or
it will undergo one of these reactions instead. Mukaiyama names a variation involving silyl enol
ethers and is an exception to the rule that these reactions have six-membered transition states in a
chair confirmation. In addition to being described by the Zimmerman-Traxler model, these reactions
feature a carbonyl oxygen that is protonated in their first step if they are acid-catalyzed, though they
can be catalyzed by both acids and bases. A cyclohexenone ring results from this class of reactions
after a (*) Michael addition in the Robinson annulation. In these reactions, a newly formed enol attacks
another carbonyl to create the namesake product. For ten points, name this class of condensation reaction
whose products are reminiscent of both aldehydes and alcohols.
ANSWER: Aldol Condensation Reaction
One modification of this reaction uses an active hydrogen compound with two strong electron-withdrawing
groups in order to synthesize a conjugated enone and is named for Knoevanagel, and Evans used a chiral
oxazolidinone auxiliary to make it stereoselective. Many of its derivatives follow the Zimmerman-Traxler
mechanism, with the exception of the version using a silyl enol ether known as the Mukiyama variation. It
also follows a Michael addition in the two-step Robinson annulation, and its base catalyzed variant creates
an enolate nucleophile which then attacks a carbonyl. FTP, name this condensation reaction whose
namesake product is a beta-hydroxy ketone.
ANSWER: aldol Condensation
The Guerbet reaction uses one of these reactions as the intermediated linking step, while one
variation of this reaction uses an enamine catalyst and is named for Hajos and Parrish. Crimmins'
thiazolium is an update to one common auxillary catalyst used in this reaction known as the Evans
oxazolidinone, while most variations of it have a stereoselectivity that can be explained by invoking a
six-member chair configuration transition state in the Zimmerman-Traxler model. It begins with a
deprotonation on the alpha carbon of a carbonyl compound, with the resulting enolate then attacking
another carbonyl to create a namesake product. For 10 points, name this condensation reaction from organic
chemistry that creates beta-hydroxycarbonyls.
ANSWER: Aldol condensation
The 87-isotope of one member of this group was used in 1995 to create the first Bose-Einstein Condensate.
Another member of this group is used in atomic clocks and its 133-isotope was used in the definition of a
second. This group includes the least electronegative element as well as the lightest and least dense solid
metal. Rubidium, cesium, and francium are, for 10 points, members of what elemental group composed of
metals that all form a plus one charge, whose other members are lithium, sodium and potassium?
ANSWER: Alkali metals (do not accept alkaline earth metals)
Ammonia turns blue when it dissolves elements of this group, which form ions that act as hard acids.
Atomic clocks are usually made with elements of this group. When mixed with water, these elements
may produce their hydroxides, all of which are soluble strong bases. They have low first (*) ionization
energies, and the element with the lowest electronegativity, francium, is a member of this group. For 10
points, name this group which includes potassium and sodium and occupies the first column on the
periodic table.
ANSWER: alkali metals [or Group 1; do not accept or prompt on alkaline earth metals]
Cationic compounds containing members of this group are easily bonded to crown ethers. Bose-Einstein
condensates were first discovered in one element of this group. Another member of this atomic group is
used to treat bipolar disorder. Its most commonly found member violently reacts with water, and forms an
ionic bond with chloride in table salt. It is the leftmost group on the periodic table. For 10 points, name this
group of elements including rubidium, cesium, lithium, and sodium, which is found next to a similar group
of "earth metals."
ANSWER: alkali metals [or alkalis or other word forms; or Group 1; do not accept "alkaline metals" or "alkaline earth metals"]
Calibration of gamma-ray detectors often utilizes the 133 isotope of one member of this family, and
Rutherford's gold foil experiment used a member of this family of elements as an alpha emitter. The
hydroxide of one member of this family is also known as lime water, and two of its members are the
primary ingredient of hard water. The aforementioned lime water is insoluble in water, but most members
are always soluble and several appear crimson red under the flame test, including strontium. For 10 points,
name this periodic table group, whose ionic members carry a plus two charge, the first of which is
beryllium, which is above barium and calcium in this group.
ANSWER: Group IIA elements [accept barium until "family" in the first clue; accept alkaline earth elements/metals until "alkaline"; do not accept "alkali elements"]
Many textbooks give this group's elements' electron affinities as extremely endothermic, but recent
research revealed that their ions are stable and that the correct electron affinities for this group are quite
low. These elements are soluble in ammonia, and act as reducing agents. Their affinity for water is so strong
that many of their salts crystallize into hydrates, such as Epsom salt and gypsum, their sulfates. Because of
their high electropositivity, this group's elements generally form plus-two ions. Name this group of silvery,
soft metals that includes radium, strontium, barium, calcium, magnesium, and beryllium; group IIa on the
periodic table.
ANSWER: alkaline earth metals [or alkaline earth elements; do not accept or prompt on answers mentioning "alkali"; do not accept or prompt on partial answers; accept Group IIa elements before mentioned]
Lithopone is a pigment containing zinc sulfide as well as a sulfide of one of these, which can be
isolated from the rare gem benitoite. Two of them form the durable AJ62 alloy. The lightest one is
often used to increase the thermal conductivity of uranium dioxide nuclear fuel pellets, while quicklime
is the oxide of another of these elements. Including one whose sulfate is used in Epsom salts, for 10
points, name this family of elements containing strontium, barium, calcium, and magnesium.
ANSWER: alkaline earth metals [accept barium or Ba until "another"]
These functional groups can have gauche conformations and can be viewed using Newman projections.
This functional group can be created from alkenes though a reaction using a palladium catalyst. Aldehydes
and ketones can be reduced to this functional group in the Wolff-Kishner reaction. One halogenation
reaction involves turning this functional group into a radical in the propagation step. For 10 points, name
this functional group, which consists of a carbon-carbon single bond and whose members include methane
and propane.
ANSWER: alkanes
One reaction used to create this type of molecule begins by converting an alcohol into a xanthate and
is named for Barton and McCombie. These molecules can react with water steam in the presence of a
nickel catalyst to form hydrogen and they can also be formed from ketones in a zinc and
hydrochloric acid solution in the (*) Clemmenson reduction. Linear conformations of these molecules
generally possess the formula CnH2n+2 and one specific type is produced by a namesake type of Archaea.
Also called paraffins, FTP, identify this class of hydrocarbons classified by a carbon-carbon single bond;
the smallest of which is methane.
ANSWER: alkanes or alkyl group (accept paraffins before mentioned)
Symmetric examples of these compounds are formed under anhydrous conditions in a coupling
reaction using sodium metal. Methods of preparing these compounds include reacting thioacetals
with hydrogen gas and Raney Nickel, and reacting ketones with hydrazine under basic conditions. In
IR spec, due to stretching and scissoring of bonds, these compounds have peaks in the 3000 to 2850
inverse centimeter and 1470 to 1450 inverse centimeter range. These compounds are produced when
reacting Grignard reagents with water. Conformational isomers of these molecules, such as gauche and
eclipsed, can be visualized with Newman projections. These compounds have general formula C sub n H
sub two n plus two. For 10 points, name these hydrocarbons that only have single bonds, as exemplified by
methane.
ANSWER: alkanes [or paraffins; prompt on saturated hydrocarbons until it is read; do not accept "alkenes" or "alkynes"]
Ketones and aldehydes are reduced to these by the Clemmensen reduction and similar Wolff-Kishner
reduction. The presence of torsional strain and van der Waals strain can be determined by their
conformations shown in Newman projections. Other methods of synthesis include the reduction of alkyl
halides and hydrogenation of alkenes, and all of their carbons are sp3 hybridized, leading to their general
formula of CnH2n+2 [C en H two en]. FTP, name these saturated hydrocarbons, the simplest of which is
methane.
ANSWER: Alkanes (do not accept cycloalkanes)
Complete reduction of a ketone results in one of these compounds. A molecule of one of these
compounds has 2n + 2 hydrogen atoms, where n is the number of atoms of carbon. Because they contain
the maximum possible hydrogen atoms, these organic compounds are said to be "saturated." For 10 points,
name these hydrocarbons containing only single bonds, examples of which include methane and propane.
ANSWER: alkanes [do not accept "alkenes" or "alkynes", prompt on "hydrocarbons"]
These are produced in bulk from syngas through the Fischer-Tropsch process, and in another
reaction, a nickel catalyst helps them react with steam to produce hydrogen. Typically viewed using the
sawhorse and Newman projections, they undergo free radical halogenation in three steps. When long
forms of these molecules are cracked, double bonds are introduced. For 10 points, name this type of
hydrocarbon consisting only of single bonds.
ANSWER: alkanes
The high-temperature breakdown of these molecules is known as cracking, and a "cyclo" one can
alternate between "chair" and "boat" conformations. Markovnikov's rule states that the more
substituted type of these molecules will form, and they are often used as fuels due to their high
combustibility. These compounds have formula CnH2n+2, so the simplest one has formula CH4. For 10
points, name this class of hydrocarbons whose carbons are all singly bonded to each other, which
includes methane.
ANSWER: alkanes
The Pauson-Khand reaction takes these compounds, alkynes, and carbon monoxide to cyclopentenones, and
he Woodward cis-hydroxylation reacts these molecules with iodine and silver acetate in wet acetic acid.
One method of reducing them involves a catalyst with three PPh3 groups around an Iridium atom, named
for Wilkinson. A more popular method of synthesizing them creates a certain reagent by reacting an alkyl
halide with triphenylphosphine, then reacting that ylide with a carbonyl. Additions to them are governed by
Markovnikov's rule, and they have E- and Z- or cis- and trans-isomers. FTP, name this functional group
created in the Wittig reaction, which is characterized by the presence of at least one carbon-carbon double
bond.
ANSWER: alkene [accept olefin before mention]
This functional group reacts with a peroxyacid to form an epoxide in the Prilazhaev reaction. One way to
form this functional group is by reacting an alkyne with a quinolone-poisoned palladium catalyst named for
Lindlar. Another way to synthesize this functional group is to react an alkyl halide with a base in a
bimolecular elimination mechanism. The simplest straight-chain versions of these hydrocarbons contain n
carbons and 2n hydrogens. For 10 points, name this functional group, exemplified by ethylene, that contains
a carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkene [or olefin; accept either E alkene or Z alkene; prompt on carbon-carbon doublebond; do not accept "alkane" or "alkyne"]
Adding potassium tert-butoxide to ethyl bromide will form the simplest example of these compounds.
A compound with two of this functional group reacts in the Diels-Alder reaction. The most
substituted ones will form in elimination reactions according to Zaitsev's Rule. When these
compounds contain three or more substitutents, they can be classified as E or Z. The (*) Wittig
reaction is a useful synthetic tool for producing these compounds, which have at least one sp2-hybridized
carbon atom. The simplest of these compounds is ethene. For ten points, name these organic compounds
which have at least one carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes (or olefins)
Performing hydroboration on these compounds results in anti-Markovnikov addition of a hydroxyl group.
Reacting mCPBA with this functional group produces epoxides in the Prilezhaev reaction. When
compounds with this functional group also possess an adjacent hydroxyl group, they can tautomerize into
ketones. Ziegler-Natta catalysts are used to polymerize these compounds, and a cyclic variety of one of
these compounds is produced in the Birch reduction. Hydrogen gas and Lindlar's catalyst form the cis
version of these compounds from alkynes. They exhibit sp2 hybridization, and the general formula for these
compounds is CnH2n. The simplest example of these compounds is ethylene. Name these compounds which
contain a carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes [or olefins]
Reaction of osmium tetroxide with one of these functional groups produces a vicinal diol, whereas reaction
with mCPBA forms an epoxide. Vitamin A contains 6 of these functional groups linked by conjugation.
Orientation of substituents around these functional groups is described using E/Z or cis/trans notation.
Additions to these compounds typically occur at the most substituted carbon. Saturated fats contain none of
these functional groups, while unsaturated fats do. These compounds can be formed in elimination
reactions. For 10 points, name this functional group characterized by a carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes [or olefins, prompt on double bonds before mentioned, accept carbon-carbon double bond before mentioned]
A hydrazone is an intermediate in the Shapiro reaction, in which ketones are converted into these
compounds and iodo-methyl-zinc iodide reacts with these compounds to make cyclo-propanes in the
Simmons-Smith reaction. The Criegee mechanism describes the ozonolysis of these compounds, which are
catalyzed by osmium tetraoxide to make vicinal diols. They are created by the addition of an aldehyde and
ylide in the Wittig reaction, and a ruthenium complex known as Grubbs' catalyst is used in their metathesis.
For 10 points, name these hydrocarbons with a double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes [AL-KEENS] [do NOT accept "alkanes" or alkynes"; accept olefins]
These compounds are formed from beta-halo-ethers in the Boord synthesis. Grubbs catalysts facilitate a
reaction used for ring closure, their metathesis. Ones with hydroxyl groups are called enols. Hydroboration
reactions violate a rule regarding their protonation, Markovnikoff's rule, and they are produced from an
aldehyde and a phosphonium ylide ["ILL-ide"] in the Wittig reaction. With cis and trans isomers, the
simplest one is C2H4, or ethylene. They are unsaturated, unlike alkanes. For 10 points, name these organic
compounds with carbon-carbon double bonds.
ANSWER: alkenes or olefins [do not accept "alkane" or "alkyne"]
Quaternary ammonium salt may be used to create amides and these compounds in a reaction named for
Hoffmann. Eliminations following Zaitsev's rule also create these compounds, the Z-type of which are
created in a Wittig reaction. These compounds may be synthesized by reacting a ketone or aldehyde with a
phosphorus ylide. The bond in these compounds consists of a pi bond and a sigma bond and they are
sometimes referred to as olefins. Examples of these include butene and ethylene. For 10 points, name these
compounds characterized by the presence of a carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes
These compounds are the reactants of the reaction whose mechanism was determined by Yves
Chauvin. A reaction of these compounds that proceeds via a metallocyclobutane is catalyzed by a
compound named for Grubbs. Alcohols can be made by the alcoxymercuration-demercuration of
these compounds, and the reduction of these compounds is governed by (*) Markovnikov's rules. When
these compounds are generated in Hoffman eliminations, the loss of the beta hydrogen occurs at the least
substituted carbon, which is contradictory to Zaitsev's rule. The rearrangement of these molecules is called
their "metathesis," and they are sometimes called olefins. For 10 points, name these compounds that have
carbon-carbon double bonds.
ANSWER: alkenes [accept olefins until mentioned]
One method of producing this functional group involves an elimination and then expulsion of sulfur dioxide
from an alpha-halo sulfone in the Ramberg-Backlund reaction. Also produced form the treatment of
tosylhydrazones with strong base in the Bamford-Stevens reaction, this functional group changes positions
in the Cope rearrangement. Shrock carbenes and Fischer carbenes catalyze a reaction switching the
substituents of two of these compounds, and Lindlar's catalyst is used to produce their cis examples
stereoselectively. They are most easily produced in Zaitsev elimination of alkyl halides, and two of them are
crossed in a namesake metathesis. For 10 points, name these compounds with formula CnH2n, the simplest
example of which is ethylene.
ANSWER: alkenes [or olefins]
Chiral alcohols can be synthesized by performing Fleming-Tamao oxidation on a hydrosylilated version of
these molecules. Grubbs' Catalyst catalyzes the Cross Metathesis, which joins two of these molecules.
They can be used instead of alkyl halides in Friedel-Crafts. Both the Julia Reaction and the Schlosser
Modification of the Wittig Reaction produce only the E isomer of these molecules, which are the products
of both E1 and E2 reactions. For 10 points, name these aliphatic organic compounds that contain at least
one carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes or olefins
Prochiral version of these compounds are changed to 1,2-diols with a oxidant like NMO and an
osmium tetroxide catalyst in a reaction named for Sharpless. A zinc-copper catalyst is used in a
reaction where a carbene and this type of compound form cyclopropane. Another reaction that uses
them has a step where hydrogen peroxide oxidizes the compound formed after the addition of
another substance dissolved in THF; that reaction results in alcohol. They are used in the SimmonsSmith reaction and alkyl halides react with triphenylphosphine to form an (*) ylide reagent that is
combined with a carbonyl to create these compounds. Their simplest form is a hormone in plants and they
undergo hydroboration, which is an anti-Markovnikov process. The E-Z notation extends cis-tran isomerism
in them. For 10 points, name this functional group created in the Wittig reaction that have at least one
carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes [accept olefines]
These compounds can be synthesized from phosphonate carbanions in the Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons
synthesis, which is another form of a reaction using phosphonium ylides to synthesize them. The Z product
predominates in that latter reaction, the Wittig reaction. The vinyl group present in PVC, is characterized by
this type of hydrocarbon, which possesses sp2 hybridization and thus keeps its four attached elements
planar. Produced from the dehydrogenation of alkanes, for 10 points, name these hydrocarbons possessing a
single pi bond, which have formula CnH2n and contain carbon-carbon double bonds.
ANSWER: alkenes [accept olefins; also accept alkenyl after "vinyl"; do not accept "alkynes" or "alkanes"]
A common method of reducing these compounds involves using a catalyst containing 3 P-Ph-3 groups
and one chlorine atom bound to ruthenium, a method which has largely been replaced by Crabtree's
catalyst. Reacting them with carbenes is a common method of producing cyclopropanes. A series of these
compounds alternating on a long side chain serves as a chromophore in retinal. When they are reacted with
osmium tetraoxide, diols are formed. Acid halides add to these compounds such that the halide adds to the
more substituted carbon, a rule named for Markovnikov. For 10 points, identify this class of compounds
that can be either cis or trans and are characterized by carbon-carbon double bonds.
ANSWER: alkenes [or olefins]
Zaitsev's rule holds that if elimination reactions can form various examples of these substances, then
the more stable one is the major product. Their hydrohalogenation is expressed in Markovnikov's
rule. "E" and "Z" denote two (*) isomers that they possess, while ketones and aldehydes can be used to
form these substances in Wittig reactions. Unlike a similar substance, they are not saturated and can be
referred to as olefins. With general formula CnH2n, name, for 10 points, these substances that have carboncarbon double bonds and include butene and ethylene.
ANSWER: alkene [accept olefin before mentioned; do not accept "alkane" or "alkyne"; if need be, ask the player to spell it]
One of these organic molecules forms a coordination complex with platinum in Zeise's [rhymes
with "mice's"] salt, and peroxyacids are used to convert this class of compounds to
epoxides [ee-PAHK-"sides"]. The addition of halogens to these compounds is described by Markovnikov's rule.
Natural rubber is a polymer of one of these molecules, which show sp2 [S P "two"]
hybridization and whose substituent positions are described with cis-trans notation. These
compounds are found in unsaturated fats like vegetable oils, and simple examples have twice as
many hydrogen atoms as carbon atoms. Name this group of organic compounds with at least one
carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes [or olefins; prompt on hydrocarbons; do not accept "alkane(s)" or "alkyne(s)"]
These react with carbenoids to form cyclopropane in the Simmons-Smith reaction. The alpha type can be
polymerized by Ziegler-Natta catalysts, and their hydrohalogenation is governed by Markovnikov's rule.
Highly substituted ones have Z and E isomers. Functional groups derived from compounds of this type
include allyl and vinyl. Because the type of bond they have restricts rotation, these organic compounds have
cis and trans isomers. Their general formula, the same as that of cycloalkanes, is CnH2n [cee en aitch two
en]. Sometimes called olefins, for 10 points, name these unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one carboncarbon double bond, the simplest of which is ethylene.
ANSWER: alkenes (do not accept "alkane" or "alkyne", accept "olefins" before mentioned)
One of these molecules containing two geminal acceptor groups is the product of the Knoevenagel reaction.
Ethers can be formed by alkoxy-mercuration between an alcohol and one of these, or by reacting a peroxyacid with one of these. In the process of hydrogenation, some of its bonds are broken by reacting them with
protons, and Lindlar's catalyst is often used to yield the cis-variety from an alkyne. Markovnikov's rules
state that when hydrogen halides are added to them, the acid hydrogen attatches to the carbon with the
greatest bonded hydrogens and the halide attaches to carbon with the fewest bonded hydrogens. Ethylene is
the simplest member of, for 10 points, what group of unsaturated organic compounds that have at least one
carbon-carbon double bond?
ANSWER: alkene or olefine
The butterfly mechanism describes how peroxyacids react with these compounds to form epoxides, and they
can be cleaved to form ketones in ozonolysis. The polymerization of polystyrene works because polystyrene
is one of these compounds. Like their sp-hybridized counterparts, they add substituents to the more
substituted carbon according to Markovnikov's rule. They cannot be rotated around their identifying bond
because it is formed by the overlap of nonhybridized p orbitals. Examples of them include ethylene and
butene. For 10 points, name this class of hydrocarbons with formula CnH2n (read spelled out),
distinguished by having at least one carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: alkenes [or olefins]
An alpha-halo sulfone is converted to one of these molecules in the Ramberg-Backlund reaction.
Markovnikov's rule describe the reaction of a protic acid with one of these molecules. The E-isomer
of one of these molecules can be produced by applying the Schlosser Modification to a reaction of a
carbonyl compound and a ylide. Produced in the (*) Wittig Reaction, for 10 points, name these
hydrocarbons with carbon-carbon double bonds, also known as olefins.
ANSWER: alkenes [or olefins before mentioned]
1,3-diaminopropane accelerates the isomerization of one type of these compounds in a zipper-like fashion.
The Glaser Coupling results in the joining of two of these compounds, and they can be synthesized through
the Corey-Fuchs reaction. Potassium permanganate oxides these compounds to two carboxylic acids, and
they can be selectively reduced to a similar functional group in the presence of a palladium catalyst named
for Lindlar. The central carbon atoms in these groups have sp hybridization, and the two unhybridized p
orbitals form the two pi bonds in these groups. For 10 points, name these compounds containing a carboncarbon triple bond.
ANSWER: alkynes [prompt on triple bond before it is mentioned]
Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of these compounds yields keto-enol tautomers. Oxidative cleavage of these
compounds with potassium permanganate yields carboxylic acids. These compounds can be synthesized
from aldehydes using an ylide ("ee-lide") reagent in the Corey-Fuchs reaction, and can react with Lindlar's
catalyst to become more saturated. When these compounds react with dienes in the Diels-Alder reaction, the
resulting cyclic structure has two double bonds. For 10 points, name this class of hydrocarbons which
feature a carbon-carbon triple bond, whose simplest member, acetylene, is also known as ethyne.
ANSWER: alkynes
One of these compounds participates in a cycloaddition with an alkene and carbon monoxide in the PausonKhand reaction. Metal acetylides are obtained by reacting a strong base with terminal ones of these. The
Fritsch-Buttenburg-Wiechell rearrangement is the second step of a process that forms these compounds
from aldehydes called the Corey-Fuchs reaction. Quinoline can be used to enhance the selectivity of the
Lindlar catalyst that reduces these compounds to alkenes. For 10 points, name this class of organic
compounds containing a triple bond between two carbon atoms, the simplest example of which is acetylene.
ANSWER: Alkynes [prompt on Hydrocarbons before "triple"]
They are formed from an aryl halide and an organocopper reagent in the Castro Stephens reaction,
and the addition of azides to one of them is an example of a "click chemistry" reaction studied by
Sharpless. The products of the Corey-Fuchs reaction also have these groups, and they can be
produced via an E2 elimination of vicinal dihalides. In the presence of Mercury sulfate and a catalytic
amount of acid, water is added across these functional groups to yield ketones, and the terminal types have a
pKa of about 25. For 10 points, identify these functional groups which contain carbon-carbon triple bonds,
whose best known example is acetylene or ethyne.
ANSWER: alkynes
In the presence of a strong base, this functionality is changed from internal to external in a namesake
zipper reaction. Substituted forms of this functional group can be created from aryl ketones in the
Seyferth-Gilbert homologation. This functional group can be created from aldehydes in the CoreyFuchs reaction. In the presence of palladium deposited on calcium carbonate and (*) poisoned with
lead, a compound known as Lindlar's catalyst, this functional group can be hydrogenated to an alkene. For
10 points, identify this functional group, the simplest of which is acetylene, characterized by a carboncarbon triple bond.
ANSWER: alkynes
One reaction used to produce these compounds has a modification that uses Bestmann's reagent, and
which classically uses dimethyl diazomethyl phosphonate, named for Seyferth and Gilbert, while more
common methods include the Corey-Fuchs reaction. Terminal ones have a pKA around 25, and this
functional group is hydrogenated by sodium metal in liquid ammonia into trans-alkenes. This functional
group has a bond angle of 180 degrees because the carbons involved in it are sp-hybridized. For 10 points,
name this functional group which has a carbon-carbon triple bond.
ANSWER: alkynes
One method of forming these compounds involves applying a sodium amide catalyst to 1,2-dihalides, and
the Corey-Fuchs reaction converts aldehydes into these compounds. Hydrating compounds containing these
compounds produce a ketone after the tautomerization of an enol intermediate, while Lindlar's catalyst is
used in a hydrogenation reaction to reduce these compounds to cis-alkenes. Having a molecular formula
CnH2n-2, the simplest molecule containing this functional group is acetylene, for 10 points, name this class of
aliphatic hydrocarbons that contain at least one carbon-carbon triple bond.
ANSWER: alkynes
The active site of the cytotoxic drug Calicheamicin is made from two of this functional group. One
method for synthesizing these compounds uses potassium tert-butoxide and is also used to form 1,3dipolar addition products and cyclopropanes and can produce higher yields with the Bestmann
modification. Another way to synthesize these is not the Wittig reaction but does form an ylide using
triphenylphosphine and carbon tetrabromide from an inputted aldehyde. Those synthesis reactions
are the Seyferth-Gilbert and (*) Cory-Fuchs reaction. Treating a palladium catalyst with quinoline and
lead acetate produces Lindlar's catalyst, which is useful in partially reducing these compounds. For 10
points, name this functional group consisting of a hydrocarbon with a triple bond between the carbon atoms.
ANSWER: Alkynes [rhymes with "sweet wines"--do not accpet "alkene" or "alkane", accept acetylene]
One of these compounds participates in a cycloaddition with an alkene and carbon monoxide in the PausonKhand reaction. Metal acetylides are obtained by reacting a strong base with terminal ones of these. The
Fritsch-Buttenburg-Wiechell rearrangement is the second step of a process that forms these compounds
from aldehydes called the Corey-Fuchs reaction. Quinoline can be used to enhance the selectivity of the
Lindlar catalyst that reduces these compounds to alkenes. For 10 points, name this class of organic
compounds containing a triple bond between two carbon atoms, the simplest example of which is acetylene.
ANSWER: Alkynes [prompt on Hydrocarbons before "triple"]
This functional group is found on the other side of the molecule from a phenyl in parglyine.
Disiamylboranes undergo addition reactions with compounds containing this structure. Sodium amide is
used to deprotonate these compounds. A 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition between an azide and this functional
group yields a 1,2,3-triazole in a reaction named for Huisgen. The Sonogashira coupling uses a palladium
catalyst in order to link this to a vinyl halide. This functional group is synthesized from aldehydes in the
Corey-Fuchs reaction. A "poisoned catalyst" consisting of palladium and quinoline called Lindlar's catalyst
can be used to reduce this to alkenes. For 10 points, name this class of compounds characterized by a
carbon-hydrogen triple bond.
ANSWER: alkynes
These compounds and ketones are given in a fragmentation of alpha, beta epoxyketones. This
functional group can be installed on a pseudohalide by a palladium catalyst in the Sonogashira
reaction, and they are synthesized from aldehydes in the Corey-Fuchs reaction. Reacting these
compounds with a lead-poisoned palladium catalyst named for (*) Lindlar reduces them to alkenes. The
smallest stable cyclic example of these compounds has eight carbons, and the simplest example of these
compounds is acetylene. For 10 points, name these compounds characterized by a triple bond between two
carbons.
ANSWER: alkynes
When treated with mercury (II) cations in water, these compounds produce ketones after a tautomerization.
Hot potassium permanganate cleaves this functional group into two carboxylic acids. Sodium amide can be
used to deprotonate these compounds, because they contain the most acidic hybridization of carbon.
Hydrogenation of this functional group can produce a trans product through a radical mechanism or a cis
product using Lindlar's catalyst. Compounds with this functional group contain carbons with sp
hybridization, and the simplest one is acetylene, which has formula C2H2. For 10 points, name these
hydrocarbons, which have a carbon-carbon triple bond.
ANSWER: alkynes
In the Fritsch-Buttenburg-Wiechell rearrangement, one of these is synthesized from a vinyl bromide.
Cadiot-Chodkiewicz coupling results in a molecule with two of these functional groups. Addition of water
to these compounds in the presence of sulfuric acid results in the formation of an enol, while catalytic
hydrogenation with Lindlar's catalyst stereoselectively forms a syn product. Their functional carbon atoms
are sp hybridized. They are inherently unstable, and terminal ones can be deprotonated to yield acetylide
ions. For 10 points, identify these hydrocarbons with at least one triple carbon-carbon bond, the simplest
example of which is ethyne.
ANSWER: alkynes
One modification of a reaction used to synthesize this functionality uses dimethyl 1-diazo-2oxopropylphosphonate, also known as the Ohira-Bestmann reagent, and an aldehyde. The original reaction
uses a ketone and is a low temperature, base-promoted homologation named for Seyferth and Gilbert. Two
molecules containing this functionality can be coupled end-to-end in another reaction named for Eglinton.
That reaction relies on the terminal variety of this functionality, which can be synthesized by reacting an
aldehyde with triphenylphosphine and a geminal dihalide on an alkenyl carbon. Created by the Corey-Fuchs
reaction, for 10 points, name this functional group containing two pi and one sigma bonds between carbon
atoms.
ANSWER: alkynes
Molecules with this functionality can react with carbonyls in the Conia-Ene reaction in the presence of a
gold catalyst. Two equivalents of their terminal variety can be joined in the Eglinton reaction or CadiotChodkiewicz coupling, and vinyl and aryl halides can join to them in Sonogashira coupling. They can form
cyclopentenones with alkenes and carbon monoxide in the Pauson-Khand reaction, and butyllithium and
triphenylphosphine can be used to create them in the Corey-Fuchs reaction. A palladium catalyst doped with
quinoline can be used to reduce them to alkenes, and that catalyst is named after Lindlar. For 10 points,
name this class of compounds that feature a linear, carbon-carbon triple bond.
ANSWER: alkynes
The copper-catalyzed reaction between an azide and this group is fundamental to click chemistry and is
called the Huisgen cyclo-addition. The formation of a di-bromo-alkene is an intermediate step in the
preparation of this functional group from an aldehyde in the Cory-Fuchs reaction. A lead-poisoned
palladium catalyst named for Lindlar can be used in the partial hydrogenation of this functional group.
"Terminal" examples of these functional groups are sp hybridized, have one sigma and two pi bonds, and
are sometimes named for the simplest one, acetylene. For 10 points, name this functional group containing a
carbon-carbon triple bond.
ANSWER: alkyne [accept acetylenes until mentioned]
Diamminesilver(I) hydroxide can react with the simplest of compounds to produce a dianion used in
Reppe Chemistry. One type of cycloaddition occurs when these compounds react with alkenes and
carbon monoxide in the Pauson-Khand reaction. One type of compound containing this functional
group has a pKa of 25, and can be deprotonated using sodamide; that is its (*) terminal variety.
Reacting excess Br2 with these compounds yields geminal dihalides, while a poisoned palladium catalyst is
often used to prevent these compounds from completely hydrogenating to form alkanes. For 10 points,
name this class of organic compounds containing sp-hybridized carbons characterized by a triple bond, and
whose simplest member is acetylene.
ANSWER: alkynes
The Sonogashira coupling uses a palladium catalyst to join one of these compounds to a vinyl halide.
Alkylated ones are formed in the Nicholas reaction, and other substituted ones can be formed in the
Seyferth-Gilbert homologation. In the Corey-Fuchs reaction, they are synthesized from aldehydes, while
reacting them with dicyclohexyl borane can create aldehydes or ketones if their functional group is terminal.
They can also be synthesized from dihalides by dehydro-halogenation, and they react with Lindlar's catalyst
to reduce to alkenes. For 10 points, name this class of compounds defined by a triple bond between two
carbon atoms.
ANSWER: alkynes
The Cadiot- Chodkiewicz coupling links two of these in the presence of copper (I) chloride catalyst and a
base, while in a namesake homologation. The Cory-Fuchs reaction generates these from aldehydes, while
reacting them with mercury salt in water yields enols. They can be synthesized by the dehydrohalogenation
of vicinal dihalides, and hydrogenating one of these in the presence of palladium on calcium carbonate
"poisoned" with quinilone, also known as Lindlar's catalyst. For 10 points, identify this class of
compounds, the simplest example of which is acetylene, characterized by a carbon-carbon triple bond.
ANSWER: alkynes [grudgingly accept acetylenes until mentioned]
For a substance having this property, the terms enantiotropic and monotropic are used to state whether one
form of that substance is more stable than the others under all conditions. Phosphorus has this property
because it can occur in either a volatile white form or a more stable red form. Name this property of an
element that allows it to exist in two different forms with different physical properties, such as carbon being
in graphite, coal, and diamond.
ANSWER: allotropy (accept word forms)
One of the primary driving forces behind this phenomenon is the high number of coordination
numbers an element can have. This process can be seen when two elements are above and below the
transition temperature, which feature two different crystal systems. One example of this property is
exhibited by (*) iron becoming austenite at higher temperatures, but ferrite at lower. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon exemplified by coal, graphite, and diamond, in which an element comes in multiple forms.
ANSWER: allotropy [accept word forms]
One example of these substances' existence is through the autocatalytic transformation of the element tin,
often called tin pest. Other metal examples include austenite and ferrite, but they are more common among
non-metals due to varied crystalline structures. One subset of these reverts to the P4 form upon melting and
is classified as red or white, while many are given the prefix di-. The ones classified as S8 are named by
Greek letters, and other sulfur examples have different numbers of atoms in their rings. Carbon's examples
include fullerene, graphite, and diamond. Identify these variants of elements based on molecular structure
sometimes contrasted with isotopes.
ANSWER: allotropes [accept word forms]
Carl Benedicks published a theory of the four types of this phenomenon, and its enantiotropic variety is
visible during temperature and pressure changes. Examples of this phenomenon always occur in the same
phase and are systematically named using greek letters. Examples of these substances used in incendiary
devices are red and white phosphorous. Soot and coal are amorphous examples of these substances, which
include fullerenes and nanotubes. For ten points, name this phenomenon in which elements exist in multiple
physical forms, examples of which for carbon include diamonds and graphite.
ANSWER: allotropy or allotropes
A substance predicted by Gilbert Lewis nicknamed "red" and a blue gas with a melting point of -112
Celsius exhibit this property, which is also responsible for the difficulty in machining nuclear
warheads because of its effects on plutonium's physical properties when heated. One example of this
property is seen with (*) thiozone and the more common S8 molecule. This chemical property of
phosphorus is exploited in matches, when it changes colours, whereas a more common example is that
carbon is able to be exhibited as buckyballs, nanotubes, graphite, and diamond. For ten points, name this
property of elements that allows them to have different molecular forms.
ANSWER: Allotropy
One of these compounds alternates between martensite and austenite phases and is the most widely
used of the "shape-memory" variety. The Hume-Rothery rules state that these compounds can only
form if its constituent elements are of similar size and electronegativity, though one involving cesium
and aluminum was formed in violation of those rules. For 10 points, name these compounds that
include Nitinol, pewter, brass, and bronze, which are all mixtures of multiple metals.
ANSWER: alloys [accept early shape-memory alloys; accept Nitinol or Nickel-Titanium Nava Ordnance Laboratory before "Hume-Rothery"]
Removal of one of this kind of material's non-gold components is the subject of surface enrichment. This
kind of material is necessary for diffusion to induce heating in the Kirkendall Effect. Precipitation heating
can be used to strengthen these materials. A major class of these compounds governed by the double
exchange mechanism features components that are not ferromagnetic, even though these as a whole are.
Two major classes of these compounds are substitutional and interstitial, the latter of which features a
structure of alternating small and large molecules. Examples of these materials include ferromagnetic ones
named after Heusler, electrum, amalgam and bronze. For 10 points, identify these solid metallic solutions of
two or more metals.
ANSWER: alloys [accept Heusler alloys; prompt on "semiconductors"]
The trained memory class of these substances are used in stents to strengthen blood vessels. In one type
of these substances, solute particles are found in gaps in the crystal lattice of the solvent. That type, the
interstitial one, is contrasted with the substitutional type of this kind of substance. Common examples of
these substances include pewter, brass, bronze, and steel. For 10 points, name these substances, metallic
solutions of two or more elements.
ANSWER: alloys
The natural log of a decay constant is related to the energy of these particles in the Geiger-Nuttall law. In
one process, these particles are combined to form carbon after undergoing a beryllium intermediate. In an
experiment which disproved the plum-pudding model, Geiger and Marsden fired these particles at a gold
foil which allowed them to determine the composition of the nucleus. Uranium-238 is converted to
Thorium-234 with the release of one of these particles in their namesake decay. For 10 points, name this
particle with a +2 charge and a mass of 4 amu, equivalent to a helium nucleus.
ANSWER: alpha particles [prompt on nucleus of helium or equivalents]
Most lenses with a negative index of refraction are made from the oxides of this element, and the
satellites known as LAGEOS are covered with this element. The earliest Ziegler-Natta catalyst was a
combination of titanium chloride and alkyl halides consisting of this element, whose chloride is often
used in the Friedel-Crafts reaction. Found in feldspars along with silicates, this element is also found in
corundum along with oxygen. For 10 points, name this element whose chief ore is bauxite, and which is
produced in the Hall-Heroult process.
ANSWER: aluminum [or aluminium]
The oldest solids formed in the solar system are inclusions enriched in calcium and this metal in
chondrite meteorites. It's not magnesium, but one isotope of it has a 0.73-million-year half-life and is
used as a clock for early solar system events. With clay and iron, this metal is leached from the E
horizon. Except for quartz, all tectosilicates contain this element. Corundum is a crystalline form of
this element's oxide. Along with silicon, oxygen, calcium, and alkalis, this metal is found in a mineral
that comes in orthoclase and plagioclase types and is the (*) most common rock-forming mineral in the
crust; that mineral is feldspar. Cryolite is used to extract this metal in the Hall-Heroult process from
bauxite. For 10 points, name this most abundant metal in the Earth's crust.
ANSWER: aluminium [or aluminum or Al]
This element was once isolated via reduction by potassium in the Wohler process, while its hydroxide was
found in the second stage of the Deville process. Alkoxides of this element are used in the MPV reduction
and Oppenauer oxidation. Processing ores of this element can produce cryolite. Modern techniques for its
isolation include using the Bayer process followed by the electrolytic procedure developed by Hall and
Heroult, and its oxide is found in nature as corundum. For 10 points, name this ductile metal extracted from
bauxite ore.
ANSWER: aluminum
The oxide of this element is found in rubies and sapphires as corundum. Charles Hall, Paul Heroult
(huh-ROO), and Karl Bayer all developed methods to extract and purify this element from its main ore,
bauxite. Though it is found along the Zintl (ZIN-tel) line, it is considered a metal and not a semimetal. For
10 points, name this element with atomic number thirteen, that is used in soda cans and abbreviated Al.
ANSWER: aluminum [or Al before it is read]
The Wohler process was originally used to obtain this element. The current method for obtaining
this element is an electrolytic (ee-leck-troh-LIH-tick) process in which an ore of this element is
dissolved in a mixture of calcium fluoride and cryolite (CRY-yoh-lite). The Bayer process followed by
the (*) Hall-Heroult process can be used to obtain this element industrially. It is the most abundant metal in
the Earth's crust, and it is mainly found in bauxite (BOX-ite). For 10 points, name this element with atomic
number 13 often found in foil.
ANSWER: aluminum [or Al; or aluminium]
When sandwiched between lithium and a hydride group, this element is part of a powerful
reducing agent. Ziegler-Natta catalysts typically consist of a mixture of titanium compounds and
compounds of this element. It was first isolated by Hans Christian (*) Oersted, and commercial
production of this element uses the Bayer process followed by the Hall-Heroult process to refine this
element's principle ore, bauxite. For 10 points, name this most abundant metal in the earth's crust with
atomic number 13 and symbol Al.
ANSWER: aluminum [or aluminium; or Al before mention]
This element is complexed to two isobutyl groups, then dimerizes, to form a reducing agent that converts
nitriles to aldehydes. Carboxylic acids can be reduced to primary alcohols using a much stronger reducing
agent containing lithium, this element, and four hydrides. This element is produced at the cathode when its
oxide is dissolved in cryolite and electrolyzed. In that oxide, this element has a +3 oxidation state and forms
corundum. In the Bayer process, this element is extracted from bauxite, and it is then refined in the HallHeroult process. For 10 points, name this metal located directly below boron on the Periodic Table, with
atomic number 13 and symbol Al.
ANSWER: aluminum [accept Al before mention]
The chloride of this element is used in Friedel-Crafts reactions. The first method of inexpensively purifying
this element was discovered independently by Charles Hall and Paul Heroult. Later, Karl Bayer developed a
method to extract this metal directly from its chief ore, bauxite. It is the only element along the Zintl line
that is not considered a semimetal. For 10 points, name this most common metal in the Earth's crust, whose
light weight makes it ideal for use in foil and cans.
ANSWER: aluminum [or Al; or aluminium]
A di-iso-butyl hydride of this element is used to transform acid chlorides into aldehydes. Like iron,
a Lewis acid of this element is often used in Friedel-Crafts reactions. One method for extracting this
element uses an aqueous sodium hydroxide and works because this element is soluble in strong bases,
but iron oxide is not. That process is supplemented by a cathodic deposition of this element through
the use of (*) molten cryolite and the oxide of this element. This element is produced by the Bayer and
Hall-Heroult processes. It is the most abundant metal in the Earth's crust and extracted from bauxite. For
10 points, name this lightweight element with atomic number 13, a metal often used in soda cans.
ANSWER: Aluminum [or Al]
A powdered form of this element is extracted via the Wohler process. This element's oxide is usually
extracted from bauxite via the Bayer process, and occurs naturally as corundum. Industrially, the
Hall-Heroult process produces this most abundant metal in the Earth's crust. For 10 points, name this
element with atomic number thirteen that is used to make soda cans.
ANSWER: aluminum [or aluminium; or Al]
This element was once isolated via reduction by potassium in the Wohler process, while its hydroxide was
found in the second stage of the Deville process. Alkoxides of this element are used in the MPV reduction
and Oppenauer oxidation. Processing ores of this element can produce cryolite. Modern techniques for its
isolation include using the Bayer process followed by the electrolytic procedure developed by Hall and
Heroult, and its oxide is found in nature as corundum. For 10 points, name this ductile metal extracted from
bauxite ore.
ANSWER: aluminum
The isolation of this element was cheapened significantly by Henri Deville, who used sodium instead of the
potassium that had been used by Friedrich Wohler [VOH-lur]. In addition to stainless steel and alloys of
copper, alloys of this element are susceptible to stress corrosion cracking but not hydrogen embrittlement.
An oxide of this element is used in the Verneuil [vair-nool] process to create several gemstones, turning
corundum into ruby or sapphire. It is commonly separated using electrolysis from the sodium and fluorine
in cryolite with the Hall-Heroult [air-ohl] process, and the Bayer process is used to get an oxide of this
metal from bauxite. Name this silvery white metal often used in soft drink cans.
ANSWER: aluminum
This element's oxide was once produced by calcinating sodium carbonate and this element's
hydroxide; that Deville process has now been replaced. A reduction agent consisting of a hydride,
lithium, and this element is used to reduce carboxylic acid. This element's organometallic compound
is found along with compounds of titanium in Ziegler-Natta catalysts. The (*) Bayer process precedes
the electrolysis involved in the Hall-Heroult process to form this element's ore, bauxite. For 10 points,
name this metal with atomic number 13 and symbol Al.
ANSWER: Aluminum [accept Al before mentioned]
This substance consists of copal that has lost the chemical that is the main ingredient in turpentine. The
process that creates this typically begins with the Hymenaea genus of trees in tropical climates or with
certain conifers in other climates, and much of it is near the Baltic Sea. Its color can vary widely, though it
is often yellowish, and it consists of fossilized tree resin. Name this substance which often preserves
organisms for over one hundred million years.
ANSWER: amber (prompt on "fossil resin")
The addition of an organometallic reagent to an example of these compounds, with a methoxy moiety,
results in a stable tetrahedral intermediate because that example of these compounds chelates the
metal, so an aqueous workup is required before a ketone is formed; that example is named for
Weinreb. A four-component condensation reaction used to create two of this functional group
bonded together is named for Ivar Ugi. A class of antimicrobials named for this functional group is
structurally similar to PABA, contains aniline, and is called sulfa. A carbonyl moiety is removed from
this functional group in the Hofmann rearrangement. Nylon is made of repeating units linked by the bond
named for this functional group, which is alternately called a peptide bond. For 10 points, name this
functional group with a nitrogen bound to the carbon of a carbonyl, a moiety that a related functional group,
amines, lack.
ANSWER: amides [do not accept "amines"]
One multi-component reaction to create them combines a ketone or aldehyde, a carboxylic acid, and an
isocyanide in a reaction named for Passerini. Oximes can be converted to them by heating with sulfuric acid
or phosphorus pentachloride in the Beckmann rearrangement, and these can be converted into carbamic
acid via attempted halogenation of primary versions of these by the Hofmann rearrangement. These can also
by synthesized by a reaction that uses a base to absorb the acidic proton on the nitrogen atom in an
intermediate, after the addition of the carbonyl group of a acid chloride to an amine, the Schotten-Baumann
reaction. For 10 points, name this class of molecules that contains an acyl group bound to a nitrogen atom.
ANSWER: amides
The Bodroux reaction forms them from a Grignard reagent, an aniline derivative, and a carboxylic acid, and
the Beckmann rearrangement produces cyclic ones, called lactams, from oximes. Their IR shift is the
furthest downfield of any saturated carbonyl, between 1630 and 1695, reflecting the fact that they are the
least reactive derivative. a This term is sometimes used to describe deprotonated ammonia, and peptide
bonds are also called these linkages. FTP, identify this functional group, which may be described as an
amine with an acyl group for one substituent, or as a nitrogen analogue of carboxylic acids.
ANSWER: amides
They can be formed by reacting ketones with hydrazoic acid in the Schmidt reaction, or from the Willgerodt
Rearrangement by reacting an aryl alkyl ketone with an ammonium polysulfide. Cyclic ones are formed in
the Beckmann rearrangement, and their hydrolysis is made more difficult due to contributions from a
secondary resonance form. The Hoffman rearrangement converts a primary one of these into a primary
amine with one fewer carbon atoms, and they are formed by reacting a carboxylic acid with an amine, as in
protein synthesis. For 10 points, name these compounds with a carbonyl group bonded to a nitrogen atom.
ANSWER: amide
This class of compounds includes poison dart frog batrachotoxin, and the presence of molecules in this class
can be detected by the Hinsberg reaction. Using potassium phthalimide, alkyl halides can be transformed
into this class by the Gabriel synthesis, and famous biochemical examples include vitamin B-1 and the
molecule that triggers the inflammatory response. The industrial production of urea relies on a primary
member of this class reacting with phosgene, while an aromatic example of this class, the indigo dye
precursor aniline, has the class' characteristic fishy odor. Commonly formed by the reaction of ammonia
with alcohols, name this class of compounds that contains a nitrogen atom bonded to one or more organic
groups.
ANSWER: amines
Drug discovery research employs a synthesis that produces alpha-phosphonate examples of this
functionality from a carbonyl, a hydrophosphoryl compound, and a primary one of these. A test for this
functionality, which can discern between their degrees of substitution, employs aqueous sodium hydroxide
and benzenesulfonyl chloride and is named for Hinsburg. CO2 is released upon the addition of hydrazoic
acid through an isocyanate intermediate in one reaction to form them. PPh3 is used to reduce azides to this
functionality in the Staudinger ligation. The best known synthesis of these compounds reacts primary alkyl
halides with potassium phthalimide, and is named for Gabriel. For 10 points, name this functionality whose
members possess a nitrogen with three single bonds to substituents.
ANSWER: amines
An example of this functionality used in buffers includes a methyl group trisubstituted with
hydroxymethyl units and is commonly called "tris". The APUD system is used to create biogenic types of
these compounds, which include substance P and epinephrine. A test for these compounds performed with
sulfonyl chloride is named for Hinsberg. The exhaustive methylation of this functionality results in an
elimination reaction and is named for Hofmann. Aromatic examples of this functional group include
aniline, and alkyl versions often smell like fish. For 10 points, name this functionality that features three
single bonds from nitrogen.
ANSWER: amines
These compounds can be coupled with aryl halides in the Buchwald-Hartwig reaction. One of these
compounds reacts with formaldehyde to form a strongly electrophilic species in the first step of a
reaction whose product contains this functional group beta to a carbonyl. Common protecting groups
for these compounds include t-BOC and Fmoc. A useful base in organic synthesis is the (*) triethyl
variety of this class of compounds. The reaction of an alkyl halide with potassium phthalimide is one of the
most useful ways to synthesize primary ones. These compounds synthesized in a reaction named for Gabriel
can also be synthesized by full reduction of nitriles, azides, or imines. For 10 points, name these compounds
characterized by a carbon single-bonded to a nitrogen atom.
ANSWER: amines [prompt on "amino acids" until "triethyl" since the clues could plausibly refer to them, the other named reactions referenced are the Mannich and the Gabriel]
The allylic form of this class of molecules is produced from an electron-deficient alkene in the
presence of a nucleophile in the aza-Baylis-Hillman reaction. Triphenylphosphine is commonly used
as a reducing agent in the production of this class of molecule in the Staudinger reaction. Molecules
containing this functional group have IR spectra characterized by a broad trough punctuated with
spikes in the (*) 3300 inverse centimeter region. Quaternary salts of these compounds may be used as
phase transfer catalysts. Potassium phthalimide is a reagent used to create them from primary alkyl halides
in the Gabriel synthesis. For 10 points, name this functional group with a nitrogen single bonded to alkyl or
aryl groups, derived from ammonia.
ANSWER: amines
Both methyl orange and methyl red contain a diazo bridge para to one of these functional groups.
Benzenesulfonyl chloride is used in a chemical test to detect this functional group named for
Hinsburg, and a method of removing this functional group involves adding excess methyl iodide and
heat. A popular method of synthesizing them involves the addition of an alkyl halide to potassium
phthalamide. Adding one of them to formaldehyde is the first step of the Mannich reaction, and the
previous reactions are the Hofmann elimination and Gabriel synthesis. Quaternary ones carry a positive
charge, and aniline is a simple aromatic one. Primary, secondary, and tertiary ones have a lone pair. For 10
points, name this functional group which contains a nitrogen atom single bonded to carbon chains.
ANSWER: Amines
This functional group is found attached to a deoxyketose in Amadori compounds. One test detects them
with sodium hydroxide and benzenesulfonyl chloride. A methylation with iodide produces an alkene and
one of these compounds, which are exemplified by epinephrine. Potassium phthalimide tranforms alkyl
halides into this functional group in one synthesis. Detected by the Hinsberg Reaction, they are produced
by the Zincke Reaction, Hoffman Elimination, and Gabriel Synthesis. Exemplified by aniline, they have a
fishy smell. For 10 points, name this functional group consisting of three groups singly bonded to a
nitrogen atom.
ANSWER: amines
Reacting these compounds with benzenesulfonyl chloride in an aqueous base can help distinguish between
different varieties of them in a process known as the Hinsberg test. Primary ones can be formed in the
presence of formic acid via the Leuckart reaction, and the related Eschweiler-Clarke procedure can
methylate them. Reacting these compounds with hydrogen peroxide is the first step in converting them to
alkenes via the Cope Elimination. They can be prepared by reacting an alkyl halide with potassium
phthalimide in the Gabriel synthesis. For 10 points, identify this class of organic compounds containing a
singly bonded nitrogen atom.
ANSWER: amines
DCCI and BOP-Cl are common reagents in reactions involving carboxylic acids and these compounds. A
common protective group for these compounds is Cbz, or a benzyloxycarbonyl group. Because sodium
cyanoborohydride is unreactive toward carbonyl groups, it can be used to form these compounds in a
"reductive" reaction. Secondary ones can be formed in a variant of hydroboration that takes place between
trisubstituted boranes and alkyl or aryl azides. They can be formed from carboxylic acids in Hoffman
rearrangement. These compounds can catalyze Knoevenagel condensations, as can a buffer solution of these
compounds and their conjugate acids. These compounds are formed from phthalamide in the Gabriel
synthesis. For 10 points, name these compounds that contain an -NH2 group.
ANSWER: amines
A particularly bulky example of this functional group is found in Hunig's base. They're not hydroxyl
groups, but the buffers Tris and HEPES contain this functional group. Aromatic examples of this
functional group can be synthesized using the Buchwald-Hartwig cross-coupling reaction. One
method of synthesizing these compounds reacts an alkyl halide with potassium phthalimide, then
cleaves the product with hydrazine. This functional group undergoes exhaustive methylation in a
reaction which produces the (*) less-substituted alkene; that elimination is named for Hofmann and
violates Zaitsev's rule. The Gabriel synthesis produces this functional group, which has a pKa of around 36,
though their protonated forms have pKa around 10. For 10 points, name this functional group which
contains a nitrogen single bonded to one or more carbon chains.
ANSWER: amine
This functional group replaces chloride in the second step of a reaction that forms a pyridinium salt.
One of these is frequently used in a soft oxidation of alcohols to ketones following reaction with
oxalyl chloride and DMSO. Exhaustive methylation will produce one of these and an alkene in an
elimination reaction. A common synthesis of this functional group, which has roles in the aforementioned
Zincke reaction, Swern oxidation, and Hoffman elimination, uses potassium phthalimide and is named for
Gabriel, and a phenyl-substituted example of this functionality is aniline. For 10 points, name this functional
group with three groups single-bonded to nitrogen.
ANSWER: amines
These compounds are the major product in a reaction in which carbon dioxide is liberated by the
hydrolysis of an isocyanate intermediate; that reaction produces one of these from a primary nitroacyl with one more carbon. Another reaction that produces these compounds fails for secondary
alkyl halides, but succeeds in reacting primary alkyl halides with potassium pthalimide. Under acid
catalysis, these compounds will nucleophilically attack carbonyls to form (*) imines. Compounds with
this functional group are the major products in the aforementioned Hoffman degradation and Gabriel
synthesis. The simplest one can be made more directly through the Haber processes. For 10 points, name
these organic compounds containing a nitrogen atom with a lone electron pair, the simplest of which is
ammonia.
ANSWER: primary amines [accept permutations of NH2 before "nitrogen"]
Trichloroacetonitrile catalyzes a [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement to give an allylic one, while reductive
elimination from a copper (II) and (III) chelate produces aryl ones in the Chan-Lam coupling. The Von
Braun reaction cleaves tertiary ones with cyanogen bromide, while they can react with pyridine salts in the
Zincke reaction. Alkyl halides react with potassium phthalimide with a hydrazine work-up to form primary
ones in the Gabriel reaction. Usually seen with zero, one, or two peaks from 3300 to 3600 on an IR
spectrum, for 10 points, identify this group of organic compounds that contain alkyl groups bonded to a
nitrogen atom.
ANSWER: amine
These compounds react with pyridine and 2,4-dinitro-chlorobenzene in the Zincke reaction. The first step of
the Mannich reaction reacts formaldehyde with one of them, and the degree of these compounds is
determined by reacting them with benzyl sulfonyl chloride in the Hinsberg test. The Ing-Manske reaction is
one variant on a method for producing them which generally uses potassium phthalamide and alkyl halides;
that is the Gabriel synthesis. Biological examples of them include alkaloids and norepinephrine, as well as
aniline. For ten points, name these functional groups which contain a basic nitrogen atom with a lone pair
of electrons, generally derived from ammonia.
ANSWER: amines
This compound is toxic to the human body and is thus converted by the ornithine cycle to urea. The
main process for synthesizing this compound was the first industrial process to use high pressure for
a chemical reaction. That process uses an iron or ruthenium catalyst. This compound is converted to
(*) nitric acid in the Ostwald process. Mixing this an aqueous solution of this compound with bleach
releases toxic chemicals. For 10 points, name this compound that is synthesized in the Haber-Bosch process
and that has chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or azane; accept NH3 before it is read; do not accept "ammonium"]
One option for hydrogenating alkynes is to react them with a solution of sodium dissolved in this
compound. Townes, Gordon and Zeiger applied a non-uniform electric field to this compound, causing a
difference in dipole moments and stimulated emission. Iron-molybdenum protein complexes are found in
diazotrophs that produce this compound, such as rhizobia. Terrestrial animals convert this compound to
either urea or uric acid. It is the canonical molecule with trigonal pyramidal molecular geometry. Industrial
production of it uses an iron catalyst in a modification first made by Carl Bosch. For 10 points, name this
compound produced in the Haber process and which has formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia (accept NH3 before mentioned)
In 1828, Friedrich Wohler reacted this compound with cyanic (sigh-YAN-ick) acid to synthesize urea.
The primary process for manufacturing this compound originally used an osmium catalyst, but today an
iron catalyst is more common. That process uses high pressure to drive synthesis of this compound and is
known as the Haber-Bosch process. This compound has a strong odor and is used to make many fertilizers.
For 10 points, name this basic, colorless gas with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 before it is mentioned]
The liquid form of this compound in the presence of lithium and ethanol is central to the catalysis of the
Birch reduction. Reaction of this compound with alkyl halides yields amines, and this compound is oxidized
with a platinum and rhodium catalyst in the Ostwald process, which is important for nitric acid production.
The process that produces it occurs at high temperature and pressure through nitrogen fixation in the
presence of an iron catalyst. For 10 points, identify this compound with chemical formula NH3 that is
produced in the Haber-Bosch process.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 before given; do not accept ammonium]
This compound catalyzes a reaction between table salt, carbon dioxide, and water in the Solvay
process, while Tollens' reagent is composed of an aqueous solution of this compound with silver (I)
nitrate. This compound turns yellow in the presence of Nessler's reagent. This compound is reacted
with oxygen gas in the (*) Ostwald process, and an iron catalyst is used in a reaction between nitrogen and
hydrogen gas to produce this compound, a process pioneered by Fritz Haber. Accumulation of this
compound in cells can cause a rise in pH, so many organisms convert it into urea before excretion. The
simplest amine is, for ten points, what weak base with chemical formula NH3?
ANSWER: ammonia (accept NH3 before read)
In the Birch reaction, alkali metals like sodium or lithium are dissolved in this substance to create a
powerful reducing agent, transforming benzene into cyclohexadiene. In inorganic chemistry, this compound
is a monodentate ligand which forms hexacoordinate complexes with copper in Schweizer's Reagent and
bicoordinate complexes with silver in the Tollens Reagent. A fundamental reactant in the Ostwald
production of nitric acid, it boils at -33 degrees Celsius and is synthesized, using an iron catalyst, in the
Haber process. For ten points, name this trigonal pyramidal compound with a central nitrogen atom and
three hydrogen atoms, and formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia (Accept NH3 early.)
This molecule is ligated to silver in a substance that is used to identify aldehydes, known as Tollens'
reagent. It is most commonly produced in a reaction that uses a magnetite or ruthenium catalyst to combine
two diatomic gases; that is the Haber-Bosch process. This trigonal pyramidal molecule produces toxic
vapors when mixed with hypochlorites, commonly found in bleach. For 10 points, identify this basic,
foul-smelling gas with formula NH3 (N-H-three).
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 before it is read]
Nessler's solution turns bright yellow in the presence of this chemical, which was used as a
refrigerant before the discovery of freons. This chemical is reacted with oxygen over a platinum
catalyst to produce nitric acid in the Ostwald process, and two gases are reacted at high temperature
and pressure with an iron or osmium catalyst to create this compound in a process named for Carl
Bosch and Fritz (*) Haber. In mammals, it reacts to form urea before excretion, and like hydrogen
flouride this chemical forms hydrogen bonds. For 10 points name this pyramidal Bronsted base that reacts
toxically with bleach and has formula NH3.
ANSWER: Ammonia [accept NH3 before end]
The hydrogenation of alkynes to trans alkenes adds lithium in this substance, which solvates alkali
metals' electrons. Wohler added two molar equivalents of this compound to carbon dioxide,
disproving vitalism by synthesizing urea. This compound has the highest specific heat of any known
substance and is oxidized with a platinum-rhodium catalyst to synthesize nitric acid in the (*) Ostwald
Process. This simplest amine has trigonal pyramidal molecular geometry and a lone pair, making it a
common Lewis base, and it is synthesized in the Haber process. For ten points, name this compound with
formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia (or NH3 before mention)
Metals dissolved in this substance create a bright blue solution by solvating electrons, and
tetraiodomercurate is used to detect trace amounts of this substance. One method of producing it was
studied by Gerhard Ertl and uses an iron catalyst. Rhizobia breaking a superstrong triple bond
forms this substance in (*) nitrogen fixation. Combining it with oxygen in the Ostwald process produces
nitric acid, and it is produced in the Haber process. For 10 points, name this chemical with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia
This substance, along with carbon dioxide, is bubbled through brine in the Solvay process, where it is
regenerated after the formation of calcium chloride. The chlorination of this compound upon reaction with
sodium hypochlorite yields toxic chloramines. Though it was historically synthesized with ruthenium or
osmium catalysis, the most common modern method of synthesizing it uses multiple beds of a porous iron
catalyst at high temperature and pressure to treat a methane feedstock; that method is the Haber-Bosch
process. For 10 points, name this compound which yields the aforementioned chloramines upon reaction
with bleach, a clear, toxic liquid with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 before it is read]
This compound is oxidized in the presence of a platinum catalyst during the first step of the Ostwald
process for nitric acid synthesis. This compound is the canonical example of a trigonal pyramidal molecular
geometry in VSEPR (VES-per) theory, since it contains three bonds and one lone pair. An iron oxide
catalyst is used to synthesize this compound from hydrogen and nitrogen gas in a reaction known as the
Haber-Bosch (HAW-bur BOSH) process. For 10 points, name this base that is often used as a cleaner and
has formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 before it is read]
The liquid form of this substance provides the medium for the reduction of aromatic rings in the Birch
reduction. A reagent composed of two ligands of this molecule creates a silver mirror in a test for aldehydes
and is named for Tollens. This compound is oxidized to produce nitric acid in the Ostwald process.
Nitrogen is artificially fixed with an iron catalyst to produce this compound in the Haber-Bosch process,
which is responsible for creating much of the world's fertilizer. For 10 points, identify this simplest amine,
commonly found in cleaning products, with chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 until mentioned]
The first major application of the Third Law of Thermodynamics was for the generation of this
compound, which was originally synthesized using calcium carbide in the cyanamide process. BASF
originally monopolized production of this substance by running an (+) exothermic reaction at seven
hundred degrees Celsius with an iron-based catalyst. Blockades of Chilean (*) nitrate deposits during
World War I forced the Germans to manufacture fertilizers with this compound using the Haber-Bosch
process. For 10 points, name this compound with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3]
Inversion in this molecule gives a 1.26 cm absorption line in microwave spectra, which is how this
molecule was first detected in the hydrogen-dominated interstellar medium. Phenylacetate and
benzoate are used to clear this compound from the blood in patients with ornithine
transcarbamoylase deficiency, and sodium metal is dissolved in the liquid form of this compound in
order to perform the Birch reduction. Its liquid form glows blue due to electron salvation, and a
common method of producing it uses an iron catalyst to adsorb diatomic nitrogen; that process is the Haber
process. For 10 points, name this trigonal pyramidal molecule found in stuff like fertilizer and window
cleaner, with formula NH3.
ANSWER: Ammonia or NH3
The mechanisms of catalytic converters and the synthesis of this compound were included in Gerhard
Ertl's citation for the 2007 Nobel in Chemistry. This compound is converted to a less toxic compound
by the Ornithine cycle. Organisms in the genus Frankia are known for their ability to synthesize this
compound. Plants in the Fabaceae family contribute to global cycling of this compound because their
associated (*) rhizobia use molybdenum based catalysts to "fix" a certain atmospheric gas. An iron-based
catalyst is used in the industrial production of this compound, which has trigonal pyramidal VSEPR
geometry. For 10 points, name this product of the Haber-Bosch process, which has chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 before mentioned]
Unlike Lindlar's catalyst, a solution of sodium in this substance reduces alkynes to trans-alkenes. A
complex of this molecule with silver is known as Tollens' reagent. It is converted using a platinum and
rhodium catalyst to a strong acid in the Ostwald process. This compound has bond angles of 107 degrees,
which is less than the tetrahedral angle because it has a lone pair. It is produced in the Haber process from
hydrogen and nitrogen gas. For 10 points, name this compound used in fertilizers and commercial cleaning
products, with chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 before it is read]
A complex of this compound and silver constitutes a reagent used to distinguish between aldehydes
and ketones that is named for Tollens. The original industrial process for the production of this
compound used an osmium catalyst, which was later replaced with an iron catalyst. It is oxidized to
nitric acid in the Ostwald process. That production process for this compound is named for Bosch
and (*) Haber. Toxic chloramines are created when this compound is mixed with bleach. For ten points,
identify this weak base with chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 until it is read; do not accept or prompt on "ammonium"]
Rhizobia, a type of bacteria, need to live symbiotically with legumes in order to produce this compound.
Industrial synthesis of this compound is often carried out using an iron-potassium hydroxide catalyst. It is
then used as a reactant in another process that uses a platinum catalyst. Through the Ostwald process, this
compound is converted into nitric acid. This compound, which is produced in the Haber process, is
biologically formed through nitrogen fixation. For 10 points, name this toxic compound with formula NH3.
ANSWER: Ammonia [also accept Nitrogen Trihydride; accept NH3 before mentioned; do not accept "ammonium"]
The deprotonated form of this compound is an extremely strong base which can remove a proton from
terminal alkynes. Its bond angle is predicted by VSEPR to be 107.5 degrees as a result of electron-electron
repulsions caused by this compound's nonbonding pair of electrons. Many weak bases are alkyl substituents
of this compound, itself a weak base in solution. For 10 points, name this simplest amine, a gas commonly
used in cleaning products, which has formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 before mentioned]
This compound reacts with the substrate in the first step of the Mannich reaction,
and it serves as a nucleophile in its reaction with esters to form amides. This
compound reacts with carbon dioxide in a process that eventually produces sodium
carbonate and is used to produce nitric oxide in another process. In addition to its
use in the Ostwald and Solvay processes, this compound is produced using an iron
catalyst at high temperatures and pressures. For 10 points, name this compound
produced in the Haber process that has formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 before mention]
Rh antigens regulate the movement of both carbon dioxide and this substance in and out of red blood
cells. Production of this compound in some bacteria requires the proteins molybdoferredoxin and
azoferredoxin. The anhydrous form of this substance is often stolen, as it is a critical ingredient for the
production of methamphetamines, and it is often used in fertilizers. This input to the Ostwald process is
industrially produced by the Haber-Bosch process. For 10 points, name this compound with formula NH3
that reacts violently with bleach.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept early NH3]
In the presence of this compound, Nessler's reagent turns yellow. A solution of sodium in this
compound is used in the Birch reduction. Its liquid form notably has a specific heat capacity higher than
that of water. The reaction used to synthesize it most commonly employs an iron catalyst. It is oxidated in
the Ostwald process for producing nitric acid, and this compound itself is produced by the Haber-Bosch
process. For 10 points, name this trigonal pyramidal compound with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia
A potassium-mercury reagent used to detect this compound in solution is named for Nessler. The
presence of aldehydes in an organic mixture is indicated by a reagent containing a silver atom
complexed to this molecule's derivatives. It is converted to an oxidized product via the Ostwald process.
Iron oxide is currently used as a catalyst in the industrial synthesis of this compound, in a modification
proposed by Bosch. This weak base is produced by the Haber process. For 10 points, identify this
compound with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 until mentioned]
Termed "alkaline air" by Joseph Priestley, this molecule reacts with carbon dioxide to form urea. It is
combusted at the beginning of a reaction to produce nitric acid, the Ostwald process. Its trigonal pyramidal
structure has bond angles of 107o, and it accepts a proton to form an unusual positive molecular ion. It is
commonly produced by a reaction which uses hydrogen isolated from methane and an iron oxide catalyst
which was modified by Carl Bosch, the Haber process. FTP, name this simplest amine known for its use in
fertilizers with formula NH3.
ANSWER: Ammonia [Accept NH3 before mentioned]
Along with sodium and carbon dioxide, this compound is used in the Solvay process, and this compound is
used as a catalyst for manufacturing Bakelite. The industrial process that produces this compound uses an
iron catalyst, and this molecule is then used as a reactant for the Ostwald process. The result of nitrogen
fixation and an important fertilizer, for 10 points, name this product of the Haber-Bosch process with
chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 until mentioned]
This compound combines with chloramine [KLOR-uh-meen] to create hydrazine ("HIGH"-druh-zeen)
and hydrochloric acid. Passing sodium chloride through this compound and then carbon dioxide to
get sodium bicarbonate is the beginning of the Solvay process, which is sometimes named for this
compound and soda. Replacing a hydrogen atom from a molecule of this compound with an organic
group gives an amine [uh-MEEN], and this compound is combined with oxygen and then water in
the Ostwald process to create nitric acid. Name this compound produced industrially by the Haber
process and naturally by nitrogen fixation, a combination of nitrogen and hydrogen.
ANSWER: ammonia [prompt on NH3; do not accept "ammonium"]
Removing a hydrogen atom from this compound forms a functional group that differentiates aniline from
benzene. It is oxidized to form nitric acid and is produced by bacteria like rhizobia (rie-ZOH-bee-ah). Carl
Bosch scaled up a process used to make this compound. Derivatives of this compound are called amines
and it is mainly used a fertilizer. For 10 points, name this compounds that is produced by reacting nitrogen
gas with hydrogen gas in the Haber process, with chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 before mentioned]
The reaction used to synthesize this compound works best with an osmium catalyst, but iron is used
because it is more cost-effective. This material is oxidized in a reaction that uses a platinum-rhodium metal
gauze. That reaction, the Ostwald Process, is used to turn this compound into nitric acid. The industrial
process used to create this compound uses high pressure and heat to break the triple bond of its primary
ingredient, nitrogen gas. For 10 points, name this compound that is formed via the Haber-Bosch process, a
chemical with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or hydrogen nitride; or Spirit of Hartshorn; or Nitro-Sil; or Vaporole; accep NH3 before it is read]
Andrussov oxidation requires oxygen, methane, and this compound as reactants. A sulfur recovery unit is
necessary for the oxidation of this compound in the Claus process. The Solvay process is only economically
viable because, like carbon dioxide, this compound is recycled in it. A dilute solution of silver oxide in an
aqueous solution of this substance constitutes the Tollens reagent. The synthesis of this compound can be
catalyzed with finely distributed osmium, or uranium, but is most typically catalyzed with iron oxide; that
reaction is an exothermic reduction of nitrogen gas with three equivalents of hydrogen. For 10 points name
this base synthesized in the Haber-Bosch process, and which has chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia
This substance is added to copper (II) salts in Schweizer's reagent, and this molecule or one of its
substituted derivatives nucleophilically attacks formaldehyde in the first step of the Mannich
reaction. Nonconjugated cyclohexadienes are (*) produced from alkali metals dissolved in the liquid
form of this substance in the Birch reaction. It reacts with bicarbonate and ATP to give carbamoyl
phosphate in the first step of the urea cycle and is commonly used as a starting material in the Ostwald
process. For 10 points, name this compound that is produced from its elements in the presence of an iron
oxide catalyst in the Haber process.
ANSWER: ammonia or NH3 [accept ammonium before "formaldehyde" but do not accept or prompt on "ammonium thereafter]
Aromatic compounds found in the liquid form of this substance can undergo the Birch reduction, and
a reagent named containing two ligands of this molecule creates a "silver mirror" in the presence of
aldehydes and is named for Tollens. This substance is combusted to form an oxidized [*] product in
the Ostwald process, and it is synthesized with an iron catalyst at high temperatures in the Haber-Bosch
process. For 10 points, identify this simplest amine, a weak base with chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 until read]
Ninhydrin forms a Schiff base with this chemical, resulting in a hue known as Ruhemann's purple. The
Birch reduction takes place in a liquid substrate of it, the reason it is common in methamphetamine labs.
The Kjeldahl method uses this molecule as an end-product to measure the amount of nitrogen in a sample,
and it is oxidized in the first step of a nitric acid forming procedure, the Ostwald process. For 10 points,
name this weak base found in fertilizers, formed by combining hydrogen and nitrogen in a three-to-one ratio
in the Haber process.
ANSWER: ammonia
In 1953, the first maser passed a beam of these molecules through a nonuniform electric field. Alkali
metals dropped in a solution of this chemical produces solvated electrons, which turn a deep blue
color. The Tollens reagent is a solution of silver nitrate and this chemical. The human body converts
this chemical into (*) urea. This chemical, which is oxidized into nitric acid via the Ostwald process, is
produced through the direct combination of three hydrogen molecules and one nitrogen molecule in the
Haber-Bosch process. For 10 points, name this chemical with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia
Werner's complex contains 3 atoms of chlorine and 3 molecules of this compound as ligands, and this
compound is produced by a molybdenum-iron-copper complex-containing enzyme in some organisms. Pure
solutions of this molecule contain large quantities of solvated electrons, which is why it is used as a solvent
in the trans-hydrogenation of alkynes and the reduction of benzene to cyclohexadienes in the Birch
reduction. This molecule is industrially produced by using an iron oxide catalyst that was modified by
Bosch. FTP, name this molecule produced by the Haber process, with formula NH3.
ANSWER: NH3 or Ammonia (Accept NH4 or ammonium until "alkynes")
Dissolving sodium in this compound creates the donor electrons that drive the reduction of benzene in the
Birch reduction. Dissolving a precipitate in this compound is the final step in producing the Tollens reagent,
which displays a "silver mirror" in the presence of aldehydes. This molecule is oxidized to form nitric acid
in the industrial Ostwald process. Iron or ruthenium typically catalyzes the reaction that forms this
compound from hydrogen gas and nitrogen found in the air. For 10 points, name this molecule produced in
the Haber-Bosch process, with chemical formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 before mentioned]
Schweizer's reagent is prepared by dissolving a copper hydroxide precipitate in a solution of this substance,
while the addition of silver nitrate to an aqueous solution of this substance produces Tollens' reagent. A
rhodium-platinum catalyst is employed to convert it to a strong acid in the Ostwald process, and the
synthesis of this compound typically requires a ruthenium or iron catalyst. Its hydroxide is commonly used
in cleaning agents, and this compound is often used in the production of fertilizers. For 10 points, name this
trigonal pyramidal compound most often synthesized through the Haber-Bosch process, with chemical
formula NH3.
ANSWER: Ammonia [accept NH3 before the end]
This substance's ability to form metal ligands is exemplified in the coordination complex it forms with
copper and water, Schweitzer's reagent. This substance is bubbled into a solution of sodium chloride in one
implementation of the Solvay process, and is converted to nitric acid in the Ostwald process. One process
that produces it uses an iron catalyst at high temperature. That process, known as the Haber-Bosch process,
is used to create this chemical commonly used in fertilizers. For 10 points, identify this compound with
chemical formula NH3 which is commonly used as a household cleaner.
ANSWER: Ammonia [accept NH3 before mentioned]
Using this substance as a solvent for a solution of alkali metals results in the solvation of electrons.
Quantum tunneling is used to explain the low barrier for the flip transition of this compound. One method
of synthesizing this compound uses magnetite exposed to feedstock as a catalyst, and that process uses high
pressure to create two atoms of it from N2 and H2. This compound is created in the Haber process. For 10
points, name this compound with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 until it is read; do not accept "ammonium"]
It's not water, but this compound undergoes auto-ionization with a dissociation constant of
approximately ten to the negative thirty. Four molecules of it are ligands in Schweizer's reagent, and
it lies between pyridine and ethylenediamine in the spectrochemical series. The rotational and
vibrational energy levels of this molecule are split due to a quantum tunneling effect in which this
molecule flips configuration; that transition occurs at 24 gigahertz, is the basis of Gordon and
Townes' (*) MASER, and is called this molecule's
namesake "inversion". Liquid solutions of alkali metals and this compound appear blue due to solvated
electrons. This compound is produced in a reaction in which three equivalents of hydrogen gas are mixed
with one equivalent of nitrogen at very high pressure. For 10 points, name this compound produced by the
Haber-Bosch process, with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [or NH3 before mention]
The Birch reduction takes place in a solution of sodium in this substance. This compound has a pKb almost
equal to the pKa of acetic acid. Arginase catalyzes its biological conversion to urea. It is the ligand in a
reagent that reacts with aldehydes to form a "silver mirror," Tollens' reagent. Its oxidation is catalyzed by
platinum and rhodium in the Ostwald process, producing nitric acid. This weak base produced via the ironcatalyzed Haber-Bosch process is often found in fertilizers and cleaning solutions. For 10 points, name this
simplest amine with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia [accept NH3 before the end; do not accept "ammonium"]
Detecting this compound is the primary use of potassium tetraiodomercurate(II), or Nessler's reagent. In the
Kjeldahl method, the liberation of two equivalents of this compound takes place after adding sulfuric acid to
a sample. Two molecules of this bind to a silver ligand in Tollens' reagent. It is the primary reactant in the
Ostwald process. Ruthenium eventually replaced osmium as a catalyst in the primary industrial process used
to produce this compound. Fish excrete this compound instead of uric acid as a waste product. Name this
compound created in the Haber-Bosch process and often found in fertilizers, with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia (accept NH3 until mentioned)
The radial distribution functions for these substances lack sharp peaks at large distances, and metallic
examples can be made via the splat technique. W. H. Zachariasen first diagrammed the random-network
model of these substances that are often produced by laser glazing, melt spinning, or another rapid-quench
method. Beryllium diflouride can become a rare ionic example of one of these solids, and the thin films in
solar cells consist of silicon in this form. Showing no long-range order at the atomic level, identify this term
for solids like polystyrene and window glass that do not have a crystalline lattice structure.
ANSWER: amorphous solid/substance [accept noncrystalline solid/substance before "crystalline"]
Examples of this type of molecule include many opioid antagonists such as Naltrexone in addition to
examples such as aluminum oxide, beryllium hydroxide, and amino acids, the last of which are also
classified as zwitterions. Surfactants with this property always contain nitrogen, and this property does not
require a molecule to contain hydrogen, unlike a property closely related to it. The behavior of molecules
with this property depends on the medium they are placed in, and they have more than one functional group.
Name this property often confused with amphiprotic that describes molecules which can behave as an acid
or a base.
ANSWER: amphoteric
The magnitudes of constructs of this type are related to J-coupling constants in proton NMR
spectroscopy, according to the Karplus equations. One construct of this type is also known as the
"dihedral" type, and applies when four or more atoms are bonded in a straight chain. For a central
molecule with two sigma bonds, the magnitude of a construct of this type (*) decreases by one-third
when a lone pair is present, which is the major difference between a linear and a bent molecule. For 10
points, name these figures important in molecular geometry, which come in "bond" and "torsional"
varieties, and are typically measured in degrees.
ANSWER: angles [or torsional angles; or bond angles; or dihedral angles]
This compound is reacted with aldehydes and pyruvic acid in the Doebner reaction to create cinchoninic
acids and it is used in the one pot Gassman synthesis reaction to produce indoles. It can be fluorinated in the
Balz-Schiemann reaction or undergo nucleophilic substitution via the Sandmeyer reaction, which first
converts its characteristic functional group into a nitrile. It is utilized in the Nissl stain to stain neural RNA
blue and it is critical in the production of polyurethane and dyes. For 10 points, name this simplest aromatic
amine, a benzene ring with an NH2 substitutient.
ANSWER: Aniline [or aminobenzene; or phenylamine]
Nomenclature for oxygen-containing examples of these entities dictates that the most prevalent species
receives the suffix -ate, and the species with one fewer oxygen than that receives the suffix -ite. Oxygen-free
examples of them include ferricyanide. Monatomic ones are typically referred to by the name of the atom
and the suffix -ide, as in sulfide and fluoride. These chemical species carry an extra electron, resulting in a
negative charge. For 10 points, identify these chemical species, which form ionic bonds with cations.
ANSWER: anions [accept polyatomic anions before "monatomic" is read; prompt on ions before "electron" is read]
In a process named for these objects, a thick oxide layer is applied to a metal to make it more durable. That
process is most commonly applied to aluminum. To prevent corrosion, especially in marine environments,
zinc coatings often are used as a "sacrificial" sort of this device. Chlorine gas is formed at this device when
salt water is electrolysed. Electrons flow into a galvanic cell at this terminal, which is negatively charged,
and which is where oxidation occurs. For 10 points, name this electrode which, when coupled with a
cathode, forms an electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: anode [accept anodization or word forms; prompt on "electrode"]
The perched type of this is smaller but otherwise similar to the unconfined type. The discharge rate of these
objects depends on the materials inside them according to Darcy's Law. Examples of these include Edwards
in Texas, Guarani in South America, and Ogallala in Nebraska and seven other states. The confined type of
this is covered with an impermeable layer, while these objects primarily consist of silt or permeable rock
containing fluids such as groundwater. Name these objects which are typically the sites of Artesian wells.
ANSWER: aquifers (prompt on "water tables")
Recharge" and "Storage and Recovery" are two ways of saving these features from overuse. Over
Frank Ford's fears nuclear waste could harm one of these features, Yucca Mountain was chosen over
(DEEF) Deaf Smith County as a nuclear waste repository. These features are called "unconfined" if the
upper boundary of them is level with the water table. The Edwards is an artesian example in Texas which
allowed development of cities such as San Antonio, and the Great Plains are underlaid by the large Oglalla
one. For 10 points, name this layer of underground permeable rock that contains water.
ANSWER: aquifer
The Ghyben-Herzberg model can be used when dealing with these on ocean islands, and in general the
defining characteristics of one can be related by Darcy's Law. Chalk, the most important one in Britain,
relies primarily on the fissure type of transport, while others are dominated by intergranular flow. In the
confined type, if the piezometric surface exceeds the ground, an artesian feature may result. Important ones
in the US include the Edwards in Texas, the Floridan, and the Ogallala. For 10 points, identify these waterbearing layers of rock and other material, from which groundwater is extracted.
ANSWER: aquifer
One statement governing these entities, which equates the negative specific weight with the vertical pressure
gradient, is the Dupuit assumption. That law applies to the phreatic type of these structures, contrasted with
the "confined" type found in vadose zones. Saline intrusion disrupts human usage of these formations, and
arsenic contamination is another problem for the largest of these formations in the United States, named
Ogallala. Hydrostatic pressure within permeable rock strata may cause these subterranean structures to form
artesian wells. For 10 points, name these porous layers of rock that hold groundwater.
ANSWER: aquifers
These things are commonly formed in vadose zones. Their cross-sectional area can be found using
Darcy's Equation. Two notable ones in the United States are called the Mahomet and Ogallala. Pressure
causes water to flow from them in an artesian well. For 10 points, name these porous rock formations that
store ground water.
ANSWER: aquifers
The transient Theis solution is a way to analyze tests of these formations and includes an equation
that equates drawdown to distance squared times storativity over four times transmissivity times
time. When one of these lies above another, it is perched; those types of these formations usually
occur in the vadose zone. They are confined or unconfined based on whether a layer prevents direct
local recharge from the surface. (*) Flow rate in these is proportional to pressure drop over viscosity
according to Darcy's law. These formations are rarely formed of schist and granite because of those rocks'
low porosity and when they breach the surface, they form artesian wells. For 10 points, name these
underground layers of rock which are full of water.
ANSWER: aquifers
Unconfined structures of this type occur when they terminate at the phreatic surface, while confined
ones lie below an impermeable layer. A flow equation in these structures can be solved using the
MODFLOW computer program, and is also governed by Darcy's law, which is dependent on porosity.
These entities consist of permeable rock below the water table, and artesian wells are drilled into
them. For 10 points, name these underground rock layers that contain water.
ANSWER: aquifers
Saline intrusion in these formations can occur in coastal areas when these structures are over-accessed.
Artesian wells occur when these structures meet the surface. In the United States, the Mahomet one lies in
Illinois, and the Ogallala one, which lies in the Great Plains, provides thirty percent of the nation's irrigation
water. For 10 points, name these areas of permeable rock that store groundwater.
ANSWER: aquifer
The Ghyben-Herzberg equation is applied to these entities that are near the coast, and these entities
are found in the phreatic zone. They can be found in karst areas, and most of them are separated
from the atmosphere by permeable layers of rock. A well-known one of these entities is the Ogallala
and the top of these entities is marked by the water table. For 10 points, name this wet underground layer
from which groundwater can be extracted, often used for irrigation.
ANSWER: aquifer
The Ghyben-Herzberg relation models one important threat to these things, and in the absence of certain
formations they will rise to the potentiometric surface. Normally found within the phreatic zone, perched
examples of these are instead found in the vadose zone. These formations which can naturally suffer from
arsenic contamination and saline intrusion often see their recharge hindered by the impervious surface of
human development, and their behavior is described using Darcy's Law. They are generally not formed
from clay soils, which form confining layers instead, but are instead formed from sand or fractured
bedrock. For 10 points, name these porous geological formations which store ground water.
ANSWER: aquifers
One of these entities in Africa is being 3D modeled by the International Atomic Energy Agency using
krypton-81 isotopes. The USGS suggests that in North America there are five types of these entities,
including a "carbonate-rock" type found in the Ozarks and one that contaminates easily in regions of
karst topography. Fractures and bedding planes provide most of the flow paths in the (*) sandstone
type of these entities, whereas intergranular porosity is more common in their alluvial type. They often
exhibit anisotropic hydraulic conductivity. Those that hold their contents for thousands or millions of years
are said to contain "fossil water." For 10 points, name these entities that hold water underground.
ANSWER: aquifer [or fossil water aquifer or sandstone aquifer until "five" is read]
A 2012 study due to scientists at Georgia Tech linked this process to an increase in a certain jet stream
being stuck in a "blocking pattern." The dipole anomaly and AO, as well as the weakening of the Beaufort
Gyre, exacerbate this process, which causes the NSTM to increase. Submarine data from the Cold War is
used to map historical trajectories of this process, which is affected by the Northern Annular Mode.
Increased shoreline erosion due to loss of buffer zones in the Chukchi Sea has been attributed to this
process. This process occurs most rapidly in September, contributing to poor first year survival. The
positive feedback loop associated with this process is exacerbated by an albedo of point zero-seven for the
surrounding ocean. This process has created a navigable Northwest Passage. For 10 points, name this
process in which floating, frozen water north of 66 degrees latitude melts.
ANSWER: loss of sea ice coverage in Arctic seas [or reasonable equivalents, but do not take "melting glaciers" or anything about land ice, because the clues are strictly related to sea ice in northern latitudes]
This element forms a cage compound with hydroquinone, as well as a Van der Waals molecule with
diatomic hydrogen. Scientists have managed to create an excimer with this element and fluorine, and this
element forms ionic compounds with hydrogen, krypton and xenon. It is generally retrieved by fractionating
liquid air, and the Earth's atmosphere is composed of .94% of it. Frequently used in fluorescent lighting and
lamps, this element has eight isotopes, five of which are radioactive. Right below neon on the periodic
table, for 10 points, name this colorless, tasteless noble gas with atomic number 18 and symbol Ar.
ANSWER: argon
These compounds are substituted through aluminum-trichloride-catalyzed alkylation and acylation
reactions. Cyclooctatetraene is not one of these compounds, because it is tub-shaped rather than planar.
Characterized by sp2 ("s p two") hybridization and a small carbon-to-hydrogen ratio, these compounds must
have a number of pi electrons that is 2 more than a multiple of 4, according to Huckel's rule. Characterized
by a cyclic cloud of delocalized pi electrons, they are relatively unreactive despite being highly unsaturated.
For 10 points, name these compounds, exemplified by pyridine and benzene, whose name suggests a
pleasant odor.
ANSWER: aromatic compounds [accept word forms]
A protein that confers this characteristic to androgens is inhibited by the drug Exemestane, which is used to
treat breast cancer. An aluminum chloride catalyst is used in a set of reactions which substitutes these
compounds, and one of those reactions is often followed up with a Clemmensen reduction. Cyclopentadiene
is highly acidic because losing a proton would make it into one of these compounds, and cyclo-octa-tetraene would be expected to have the opposite form of this property. This property is governed by Huckel's
rule, and adding a hydroxyl group to one of these compounds produces phenol. For 10 points, name this
class of compounds exemplified by benzene.
ANSWER: aromatic [accept word forms like aromaticity]
In NMR, the nucleus independent chemical shift is used as a reference when working with molecules that
exhibit this property. Also in NMR, molecules with this property exhibit a diamagnetic ring current. If half
the vertices of a molecule's structure lie fully in the lower half of a Frost circle, it will have this property,
which corresponds to no occupation of antibonding molecular orbitals. Molecules with this property
generally show a high degree of unsaturation, but prefer substitution reactions to addition reactions. A
molecule is said to have this property if it contains a fully-conjugated cyclic system. Four n plus two pi
electrons is one criteria for this property put forth by Huckel. For 10 points, name this property of
molecules like benzene, which exhibit unusual stability.
ANSWER: aromaticity [or word forms]
Ring current occurs when deshielding takes place in this type of molecule. Compounds exhibiting this
property tend to have 4n + 2 pi electrons, according to a rule named for Huckel. Specific compounds that
exhibit this property include coronene and naphthalenes. Compounds with the homo- variety of this
property exhibit it despite an sp2 carbon that interrupts electron delocalization across a ring. For 10 points,
name this property in which systems of pi bonds are stabilized by bond conjugation, seen in benzene and the
namesake smelly compounds.
ANSWER: aromaticity
Molecules with this property have a value of 1 in their namesake harmonic oscillator model, which
has a normalization constant of 257.7. Chorismate undergoes a Claisen rearrangement in the
bacterial pathway for creating amino acids with this property. Molecules with this property have an
even number of doubly degenerate orbitals as plotted on Frost's circle, and molecules with this
property have a negative diamagnetic susceptibility exaltation. The final deprotonation in the
Friedel-Crafts acylation regenerates this (*) property of the substrate. Molecules with this property show
diatropic current on NMR, and hydrogens of molecules with this property show chemical shifts between 6
and 9.5 ppm. This property is exhibited by planar molecules that have four n plus two pi electrons
according to Huckel's rule. For 10 points, name this property of a molecule
ANSWER: aromaticity [accept word forms of "aromatic"]
Heilbronner proposed an extremely unusual form of this property which may be present in
the cyclotetraenyl anion. Molecules with this property are depicted in the Frost circle, which
describes the energy levels of the highest occupied and lowest occupied molecular orbitals.
Fluorescent spectroscopy of proteins yielding a strong absorptivity at 280 nanometers
corresponds to an amino acid with this property, which is tryptophan. While the
cyclopentadienyl ion has this property, cyclopentadiene does not. Molecules that contain a
multiple of four pi electrons have the "anti" form of this property, while molecules that contain
two plus a multiple of four pi electrons have this property according to Huckel's rule. For 10
points, identify this property which grants unusual stability due to conjugation around a ring,
typified by benzene.
ANSWER: Mobius aromaticity [or aromatic compounds; or word forms; prompt on conjugation]
A general class of reactions for compounds with this property includes the Bamberger rearrangement and
the Smiles rearrangement, while substituents to systems with this property can be modified using a copper
salt in the Sandmeyer reaction. Theoretical calculations of this property can be done using the Pariser-ParrPople method, and it can be verified experimentally by observing a ring current. Coronene displays this
property, while cyclo-butadiene does not, despite both of them violating the 4 n plus 2 rule of it named for
Huckel. For 10 points, name this property seen when a planar pi system is stabilized by extensive
conjugation, as in certain odiferous compounds.
ANSWER: aromaticity
In 2004, scientists synthesized bimetallic compounds with aluminum anions exhibiting this property.
Compounds possessing it can be nitrated in the presence of sulfuric acid by electrophilic substitution or
alkylated in the presence of aluminum chloride catalyst. It is not possessed by all alkenes exhibiting
delocalization, as they may not possess a ring with 4n plus 2 pi electrons, and thus disobey Huckel's rule.
For 10 points, identify this property, which confers extraordinary stability to compounds that possess it,
such as benzene, and is perhaps named after the distinct smell of such compounds.
ANSWER: aromaticity [accept aromatic or other word forms]
This man contested Paul Ehrlich's side chain theory of immunology, and he showed that air
temperature varies arithmetically with a geometric increase in the amount of carbon dioxide in the
air. The modern form of a function named for this man is represented in transition state theory by
the Eyring-Polanyi equation and includes a constant equal to the product of the (*) steric factor and
collision rate; that factor is called the "pre-exponential factor" and is denoted with a capital A. For 10
points, name this Swedish scientist whose namesake equation computes the reaction rate for a given
temperature and activation energy.
ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius
In the late 1800's, this scientist claimed that the geometric rise of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere was
directly proportional to a linear rise of the Earth's temperature. This man developed an equation that can be
extended to transition state theory with the Eyring-Polanyi (EYE-RING POLE-ahn-YEE) equation. That
equation based on collision theory contains a term called the pre-exponential factor and relates the rate
constant to the activation energy and temperature in chemical kinetics. For 10 points, name this Swedish
chemist who names an acid-base theory in which an acid is an electron acceptor.
ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius
This man's paper "On the Influence of Carbonic Acid in the Air Upon the Temperature on the
Ground" is considered an early formulation of the greenhouse effect. He used the example of cane
sugar in a paper deriving his namesake equation from the van't Hoff equation. This man defined an acid
as a substance that increases the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution. For 10 points, name this
Swedish chemist, whose namesake equation includes a pre-exponential factor and gives the reaction
rate constant as a function of temperature and activation energy.
ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius
In the late 1800's, this scientist claimed that the geometric rise of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere was directly proportional to a linear rise of the Earth's temperature. This man
developed an equation that can be extended to transition state theory with the Eyring-Polanyi
(EYE-RING POLE-ahn-YEE) equation. That equation based on collision theory contains a term
called the pre-exponential factor and relates the rate constant to the (*) activation energy and
temperature in chemical kinetics. For 10 points, name this Swedish chemist who names an acid-base theory
in which an acid is an electron acceptor.
ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius
This scientist was the first recorded man to predict global warming due to human fossil-fuel burning and he
received the Nobel prize for discovering the mechanism of electricity conduction through electrolytes by
ions in solution. He further believed that ions existed in electrolytic solutions independent of current. This
man was one of the founders of physical chemistry, and an equation relating activation energy and rate
constants is named for him. This scientist also has a namesake definition of acids and bases where acids
donate H+, whereas bases donate OH-. For 10 points, name this contemporary of van't Hoff and Ostwald, a
Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Svante (August) Arrhenius
This scientist formulated a law relating an increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide to an increase in
temperature, and the Eyring equation is a more general form of this man's equation relating
temperature and activation energy to a rate constant. He also names a classification based on whether a
substance increases the concentration of hydronium ions or hydroxide ions in a solution. For 10 points,
name this Swedish chemist with an eponymous acid-base definition.
ANSWER: Svante August Arrhenius
The equation named for this scientist has been modified to account for the temperature dependence of liquid
viscosity, though that rule seems to break down for glass-forming materials. One form of his equation takes
the derivative of a so-called constant with respect to temperature and sets it equal to a fraction with the gas
law constant times temperature squared in the denominator. He showed the exponential relationship
between activation energy and rate constant. Name this chemist who defined acids within aqueous solutions
as substances that increase the hydrogen ion concentration.
ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius [ar-AY-nee-us]
On of his discoveries states that if atmospheric carbonic acid increases geomtrically, then the
temperature will increase at a nearly arithmetic rate. In addition to his Greenhouse Law, he is the
namesake of an equation that can be graphed yielding a straight line for 1 over Time versus the
natural log of [*] a constant k; it includes a pre-exponential factor and relates that constant k, the rate
constant of a reaction, to temperature and activation energy. For 10 points, name this chemist who has a
namesake acid-base theory and hails from Sweden.
ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius
This man related radiative forcing to the natural log of a ratio of carbon dioxide concentrations in his
namesake greenhouse law. He originated the idea that life was carried between planets by spores, which is
called panspermia. Inverse temperature can be found on the x-axis of one of his namesake plots. The
Eyring-Polyani equation is closely related to an equation named for this man, which relates the rate constant
of a reaction to a pre-exponential factor and activation energy. Name this man who created an acid-base
theory that states that bases dissociate in solution to form hydroxide ions.
ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius
To explain the ice ages, this scientist proposed that the geometric increase of CO2 ["C-O-two"] caused
atmospheric temperature to increase arithmetically [air-ith-MET-ik-lee], his namesake greenhouse
theorem. Taking the natural logarithm of this man's namesake equation and plotting it against
1/T ["one over T"] gives a plot whose slope is a certain quantity times the ideal gas constant. This
man's namesake equation contains a pre-exponential factor, and he defined acids as substances that
form hydronium ["high"-DROH-nee-um] ions. Identify this namesake of an equation that relates the
rate constant to e to the power of negative activation energy over RT, a Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Svante (August) Arrhenius [uh-RAY-nee-uss]
This man discovered that a geometric increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels leads to an arithmetic
increase in temperature. The Eyring equation is equivalent to his namesake equation, which includes a
constant equal to the steric factor times the collision rate, called the pre-exponential factor. That equation
states that "k equals A times e to the negative E sub a over RT," which relates the rate of a reaction to its
activation energy. His definition of acids and bases as H+ and OH- donors was superseded by the BronstedLowry and Lewis definitions. For 10 points, name this Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Svante August Arrhenius
He came up with a theory that correlates the amount of carbon dioxide to the arithmetic growth in
global temperatures. Another of his statements was revisited by Michael Polyani and M.G. Evans,
who dubbed it the Eyring equation. In that revisited statement, the product of the steric factor and
(*) collision rate form the "pre-exponential factor." Another of his theories that was improved upon by the
Bronsted-Lowry model defines an acid as a substance that dissociates to form hydrogen ions. For 10 points,
name this Swedish chemist whose namesake "equation" relates the activation energy to the equilibrium
constant.
ANSWER: Svante August Arrhenius
A cruder form of it was proposed by Wilhelmy in 1858, and its namesake observed the implications of this
statement when equilibrium of reactive and unreactive molecules is considered in the van't Hoff equation. A
T to m term is sometimes introduced to it, as a quantity in it is approximated to be independent of
temperature. That quantity accounts for the rate and orientation of collisions is called the pre exponential
factor. One form of it states that the natural log of the equilibrium constant has a inverse relationship with
one over T, and it allows one to relate the equilibrium constant with activation energy. For 10 points,
identify this equation named for the Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
Novikov and Solokov showed a surprising relationship between glass's Poisson ratio and its deviation from
behavior described in this equation. A similar equation named for Neel and this equation's namesake allows
calculation of magnetic relaxation time. The Williams-Landel-Ferry model is applicable above the glass
transition temperature because then the system has behaviour following this equation, and it is used to
predict the lifespans of paper in accelerated aging techniques. A similar equation which has a factor of
Boltzmann's over Planck's constant times temperature outside the exponential is based on transition state
theory and is named for Eyring and Polanyi. The steric factor gives the ratio between this equation's preexponential factor and collision frequency. For 10 points, name this equation that gives reaction rate as a
function of activation energy.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
This equation is closely related to one based on transition state theory, the Eyring-Polanyi equation. One
term found in this equation assumes a constant collision frequency and is the pre-exponential factor, which
is symbolized A. It relates the rate constant, k, to an exponential term containing the temperature and
activation energy. For 10 points, identify this equation used in chemical kinetics named after a Swedish
chemist.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
A correction to this equation includes a constant Q, a function of mass and the barrier width,
when quantum tunneling is possible. The concentration of crystal defects is modelled by this
equation. A microscopic version of this equation uses a transmission coefficient, multiplied by
Boltzmann's constant times temperature over Planck's constant. On a linear plot generated from this
equation, the x-axis is one over temperature, and the y-intercept is the log of the product of the (*)
collision frequency and the steric factor. An increase of temperature of 10 degrees causes the left side of
this equation to approximately double. For 10 points, name this equation which gives the reaction rate
constant as a function of temperature, named for a Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
When the glass transition temperature equals f-sub-g over alpha-sub-f, the VFTH equation reduces
to this equation. One quantity in this equation is equal to the the square root of 8 kT over the product
of pi and the reduced mass times Avogadro's number times the cross-section. The temperature
dependence of the diffusion coefficient in a solid can be modeled using this equation. Another (*)
quantity in this equation is equal to the product of the steric factor and the collision frequency, and has units
of frequency for a first-order reaction. This equation states that the exponential of minus activation energy
over RT times the pre-exponential factor is equal to the rate constant. For 10 points, name this equation
which gives the temperature dependence of a reaction rate.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
A stretched exponential form of this equation is useful in cases involving variable range hopping, and one
theoretical basis for it comes from the Trautz-Lewis theory. A modification of this equation has a constant
of proportionality equal to Boltzmann's constant divided by Planck's constant and is based on the transition
state theory of Eyring and Polyani. One quantity in this equation is equal to the product of the collision
frequency and steric factor, which multiplies an exponent of activation energy. For 10 points, name this
equation developed by a Swedish chemist that gives the rate of a reaction based on the activation energy.
ANSWER: Arrhenius Equation
The Williams-Landel-Ferry model provides more accurate predictions for viscosity at higher temperatures
than this related equation. This equation is similar in form to an equation based on transition state theory
named after Polanyi and Eyring. Derived largely from collision theory, it includes one term based partially
on the number of collisions in the system, as well as a term equal to e to the negative capital E-sub-a over
RT. Preceded by a pre-exponential or steric factor typically symbolized A and used to compute the rate
constant in terms of activation energy, for 10 points, name this equation of chemical kinetics, named after a
Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Arrhenius Equation
This equation is the basis of a test in which a piece of paper is exposed to high temperature in order
to measure its shelf life. Its derivation relies on substituting for the value of delta-G double-dagger.
One value in this equation is proportional to e-squared times k sub B times T all over Planck's
constant, though it is more often defined as the product of the steric factor times the collision
frequency. This equation can be replaced by one that uses a transmission coefficient and was derived
by Evans, Polyani and Eyring. This equation is often states as the pre-exponential factor, A, times e to the
power of negative E sub A over RT. For 10 points, name this equation which gives the rate constant of a
reaction from the activation energy, named for a Swede.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
An alternative to this equation contains a factor of Boltzmann's constant times temperature over
Planck's constant and is known as the Eyring equation. The Eyring equation uses free energy as an
independent variable, whereas this equation divides (*) activation energy by the product of temperature
and the ideal gas constant; in addition, this equation's pre-exponential factor is not temperature-dependent.
For 10 points, name this equation that is used to find the rate of a reaction and is named after a Swedish
chemist.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
Applying transition state theory gives the Eyring-Polanyi equation, which is an alternative to this
equation. Max Trautz and William Louis' collision theory may be used to derive an equation similar
to this one. In that theory, the pre-exponential factor in this equation is found by finding the
frequency of collisions. Proposed by (*) Van't Hoff in 1889, its namesake provided the physical
justification for it. It states that A times e to the power of negative E sub A over RT equals k. For 10 points,
name this equation which gives the rate constant from the activation energy, named for a Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
A term originating from this equation can be derived as the reference concentration times
Boltzmann's constant temperature over Planck's constant all times the exponential of activation
entropy over gas constant. For similar reasons as the van't Hoff equation, when a form of this
equation is differentiated with respect to temperature, the factor R T squared appears in the
denominator. An alternative to this equation was derived using transition-state theory by Henry
Eyring. The equation for the diffusion coefficient derived from Fick's laws takes its form. Plotting this
equation on a plot of the natural log of k versus one over temperature gives a straight line. It sets the preexponential factor times the exponential of activation energy over the gas constant times temperature equal
to the rate constant. For 10 points, identify this equation named for a Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
One model that describes how viscosity changes with temperature in amorphous materials takes the
form of this equation. The Eyring-Polanyi equation is an alternative to this equation based on
transition state theory. One term in this equation is sometimes referred to as the steric factor and is
derived from collision theory. This equation contains the negative exponential of the activation energy
divided by the product of the universal gas constant and temperature, along with a term called the preexponential factor. For 10 points, name this equation of chemical kinetics that calculates a reaction's rate
constant, developed by a Swedish chemist.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
An expression similar to this empirical relationship uses Boltzmann's constant divided by Planck's constant
and is used in Transition State Theory. In addition to being related to the Erying equation, this equation can
be rearranged in a form that gives that the partial derivative of the natural logarithm of the rate constant with
respect to the inverse of temperature is the activation energy. Its modified form introduces a temperature
dependence on the pre-exponential factor. For ten points, name this equation of chemical kinetics named for
a Nobel Laureate in Chemistry from Sweden.
ANSWER: Arrhenius Equation
A paper by Whlean et al. found that it can be used more effectively than the Lopatin method with fastreacting kerogens in defining the oil or gas production windows in sediments. A similar equation that
produces the same output can generate concave, convex, or linear like this equation, but has the advantage
of being able to be applied to all mixed phase reactions and is known as the Eyring equation. One
component in it is related to the frequency of molecular collisions. It can be modified in the case where the
pre-exponential factor is proportional to T raised to a constant, an equation also modified by B, a
temperature independent constant. Originally discovered experimentally by J. J. Hood, FTP, identify this
equation that relates how temperature affects the velocity of a chemical reaction, named for its Swedish
formulator.
ANSWER: Arrhenius Equation
Unlike the theoretical Eyring one, this model is empirical in nature. Plots of natural log of k vs 1 over the
temperature can be used to figure out the activation energy of the system from the slope. A modified version
of this compares the current temperature of the system to a baseline temperature to show the independence
of that activation energy to the pre-exponential factor A, which represents the number of collisions that
occur every second. FTP, provide this equation named for a Swedish chemist and used to describe the effect
of temperature on the rate constant of a reaction.
ANSWER: Arrhenius equation
In polymer chemistry, an equation that includes the free volume fraction, the Doolittle Equation, better
describes the temperature dependence of viscosity than this equation. The development of transition state
theory led to the creation of an equation for more complex situations than this equation can handle; that
equation is named for Polanyi and Eyring. In collision theory, the leading coefficient of this equation is
replaced with the collision frequency, Z, and the steric factor, p. The right hand side of this equation more
commonly contains a pre-exponential factor labeled A. For 10 points, name this equation that relates
temperature and the rate constant.
ANSWER: Arrhenius Equation
This element is coordinated to thiol groups after reacting a protein with the FLASH-REASH reagent.
It's not silver, but heating this element with carbon forms a black namesake "mirror". A compound
of this element with molybdenum is used in the Nelson-Somogyi method of determining blood sugar.
With all-trans-retinoic acid, an oxide of this element is used to treat acute promyelocytic leukemia.
One method of testing for the presence of this element involves forming hydrogen by reacting zinc
and (*) nitric acid, then reacting it with the sample; that is the Marsh test. This element is often used to
dope gallium to form a direct-bandgap semiconductor. Paul Erlich's syphilis drug, Salvarsan, contains this
element, and it also inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase and succinate dehydrogenase. For 10 points, name this
poisonous element with atomic number 33 and symbol As.
ANSWER: arsenic [or As until it is read]
In 2008, Kulp, et al. discovered bacteria using a compound of this element as an electron donor in
photosynthesis. Unlike those of silicon, gallium semiconductors doped with this element exhibit direct
bandgap and can be used in laser diodes to directly convert electricity into light. It is also a notable
component of Fowler's solution. The pentavalent oxide of this element can replace inorganic phosphorus in
glycolysis, allowing glycolysis to proceed, but preventing ATP generation by uncoupling glycolysis. A
qualitative assay for it trioxide is known as the Marsh test, which utilizes sulfuric acid and the oxidation of
zinc. Also notably used in neosalversan, for 10 points, name this toxic metalloid with the symbol As.
ANSWER: arsenic
Upon heating, this element sublimes from its most common ore, mispickel. This element reacts with zinc
metal and sulphuric acid to produce a gas which is then passed along a heated glass tube in the Marsh test
for its presence. The yellow allotrope of this element resembles white phosphorus in adopting an unstable
tetrahedral arrangement. In the body, this element can accumulate in the mitochondria and react with lipoic
acid, inhibiting the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase. Forming a III-V [three-five] semiconductor with
gallium, for ten points, name this element which also appears in salvarsan, Erlich's "magic bullet" for
syphilis, despite its extreme toxicity, a non-metal with symbol As.
ANSWER: Arsenic or As
Along with lead and belladonna, it is used to make Aqua Tofana. It is poisonous because it disrupts
ATP production by inhibiting NAD+ in the citric acid cycle. During the Bronze Age, it was included
in bronze to make the alloy harder. The Grainger challenge is to find an economical way to remove it
from contaminated groundwater in countries such as Bangladesh. Some of it was found in Otzi's (*)
hair and Napoleon's wallpaper and could've caused their deaths. FTP, name this metalloid with atomic
number 33 and symbol As.
ANSWER: arsenic
The Bechamp reaction is an electrophillic aromatic substitution performed on an acid of this element.
Cacodylic acid contains this element as the central atom, and its buffer was used in Agent blue. An
alloy of this element, whose allotropes include yellow, black, and the most stable grey, with gallium
are used as a semiconductor more potent than silicon. The bacterium GFAJ-1 was falsely discovered to
thrive solely on this pyruvate dehydrogenase inhibitor toxic element as a replacement for phosphorus, which
is one row above it in column 15 of the periodic table. With atomic number 33, for ten points, name this
metalloid with atomic symbol As.
ANSWER: Arsenic
This element can be detected in a test that uses strips of paper sensitized with mercuric chloride placed in a
bottle containing granulated zinc, water, and hydrochloric acid. Another test for this element precipitates
metallic silver out of a silver nitrate solution after a compound containing this element is reacted with
nascent hydrogen. Those tests, named respectively for Gutzeit and Marsh, are used to distinguish this
element from antimony. Paul Erlich developed syphilis-treating drugs containing this element, such as
atoxyl and Salvarsan. More modern drugs containing it include Mel B, which is used to treat
trypanosomiasis, or sleeping sickness. People who were given it tended to have brick red-colored mucosa
on the post-mortem. For 10 points, name this element famed as a poison.
ANSWER: arsenic [or As]
Cacodylic acid contains a central atom of this element. One drug that contains this element has a central
ring of this element with phenamine groups hanging off, while its trioxide is used alongside ATRA to treat
some leukemias. Besides being the central atom of Fowler's solution, it was use to treat syphilis and
trypanosomiasis as part of Salversan. When combined with chlorine, it forms the chemical weapon lewisite,
while when combined with gallium it can be used as a semiconductor. For 10 points, name this element
with atomic number 33, a notable poison.
ANSWER: arsenic [or As]
According to the heat piracy model, the northern part of this region removes heat from its southern half.
The TAG mound field can be found near the center of this area of the Earth. Particular layers of debris here
define Heinrich Events. A popular explanation for the Younger Dryas is that this body received an infusion
of extra material, decreasing heat transport here. Its formation began with the Late Triassic-Jurassic rifting.
Its Deep Water is formed by the thermohaline circulation. Its northern component has a namesake Drift
Current as well as the Labrador Current. It is also home to the Gulf Stream. For 10 points, name this body
of water whose namesake mid-ocean ridge contains Iceland.
ANSWER: Atlantic Ocean [accept North Atlantic Ocean]
There are two formulas for calculating this quantity, which are used depending on whether the
lapse rate is zero. When density depends on both it and temperature, a type of instability occurs that
can form cyclones. Most aircraft altimeters measure height based on (*) changes in this value as the
craft ascends. On a weather map, this quantity is constant on lines called isobars. Extremely low values of
this quantity define tropical cyclones. For 10 points, name this quantity that is typically 760 torr at sea level,
and which is measured with a barometer.
ANSWER: atmospheric pressure [prompt on pressure; prompt on air pressure; accept barometric pressure before "barometer" is read]
This value is set proportional to the derivative of n with respect to r in Kato's theorem. This
quantity is related to the square root of the frequency of an emitted K-alpha line by Moseley's Law.
According to the semi-empirical mass formula, binding energy is greatest when this quantity
approximately equals twenty-six. A screening constant is subtracted from this value in order to
determine effective nuclear charge in Slater's rules. For hydrogen-like atoms, the (*) square of this
quantity appears in the numerator of the Rydberg formula. Fission occurs when this quantity is greater than
about seventy. Mendeleev ordered elements by this parameter in the Periodic Table. For 10 points, name
this quantity symbolized Z, the number of protons an element has.
ANSWER: atomic number [or Z before mention; accept nuclear charge or effective nuclear charge before mention]
The splitting of sets of one type of these objects is the subject of ligand field theory, and that type being
partially filled defines the properties of the transition metals. The linear combination of these entities can
generate molecular ones. By the Pauli Exclusion Principle, these entities can contain at most two electrons.
For 10 points, name these mathematical descriptions of the loocation of electrons in an atom, examples of
which include the s, three p ones, and five d ones.
ANSWER: atomic orbital [prompt on orbital; do not accept or prompt on "molecular orbital"]
According to the Hume-Rothery rules, solid solutions only form when this quantity differs by less than 15%
for solute and solvent. The lattice constant for BCC crystals is four over root three times this quantity. This
quantity is smaller for cations than their corresponding neutral atoms. Because f electrons are very poor at
shielding, this quantity does not change significantly across the lanthanide series. In general, this quantity
decreases from left to right across a period and increases down a group. It equals 0.7 angstroms for carbon,
half the length of a carbon-carbon bond. For 10 points, name this quantity measuring the "size" of an atom.
ANSWER: atomic radius [or ionic radius; or van der Waals radius; prompt on atomic "volume"; prompt on atomic "size"]
This quantity is equal to the reduced Planck's constant divided by the product of rest mass, speed of
light, and fine structure constant in the Bohr model. Lanthanides defy the expected trend in this quantity
because their atomic number outsrips the shielding ability of the 4f electrons. Helium has the smallest
known value for this quantity, which increases down a column and decreases across a row in the periodic
table. For 10 points, name this quantity, a measure of the size of an atom.
ANSWER: atomic radius [or Bohr radius]
This value is responsible for steric ["STAIR"-ik] effects, which is why alkanes prefer staggered
conformations over eclipsed ones. One trend in this value occurs due to 4f orbitals being quite
penetrable. This value, which has a larger-than-expected drop along the lanthanide [LAAN-thuh-nyde]
series, is often measured in angstroms. Due to the attraction between electrons and the nucleus, the
addition of electrons tends to decrease this quantity. Shielding effects cause this quantity to increase
as you go down the columns of the periodic table. Name this quantity related to how much space an
atom takes up.
ANSWER: atomic radius [accept anything referring to the size or volume of an atom]
The value of this quantity can be predicted by Fajans' Rules, and Bohr's model can be used to
approximate it for single-electron systems. One form of this quantity is equal to one-half the bond
length in diatomic molecules, and poor shielding of nuclear charge by electrons in the 4f orbital
causes a "contraction" of this quantity in lanthanides. This quantity increases as one goes (*) left
across the periodic table, as valence electrons are not as attracted to the nucleus. For ten points, name this
quantity, similar in magnitude to the angstrom, that measures the average distance from the nucleus of an
atom to the electron cloud.
ANSWER: atomic radius (do not accept or prompt on "Bohr radius")
Electronegativity, as measured by both the Luo-Benson and Sanderson methods, depends on the reciprocal
of this quantity, and the chemical similarity of zirconium and hafnium is explained by a steady change in
this quantity across the lanthanides. The abundance of aluminum in the Earth's crust can be explained by
that metal having a slightly larger value for this quantity than silicon, allowing it to easily form crystals with
oxygen. Under the Bohr model, this quantity depends on the position of the lowest-energy electron shell and
it is usually measured to be less than 3 angstroms. Largest in caesium, name this quantity that decreases
from left to right across a period and is commonly defined as half the distance between identical
neighboring atoms.
ANSWER: atomic radius [prompt on radius; accept answers logically equivalent to radius of atoms]
Roger Boscovich's "impenetrability" concept was an attempt to explain this theory in terms of
Leibnizian monads. This theory was originally proposed by Leucippus and Democritus in the fifth century
BCE. Joseph Proust's law of definite proportions was a contribution to this theory, which was extended
with the law of multiple proportions by John Dalton. For ten points, identify this theory proposing that
matter is made up of small, indivisible particles.
ANSWER: atomic theory [or theory of atoms]
Due to violations of special relativity, this concept fails around atomic number 173. In 1990, the IUPAC
changed the numbering of groups to better reflect this concept, which explains the increased shielding of
nuclear charge across a period. Madelung's (mah-DEH-loongz) rule determines order in this concept, while
copper and chromium are notable exceptions to it, since both lack full s orbitals in their electron
configurations. Forcing three-d orbitals to be filled after four-s orbitals, name this principle whose name
comes from the German for "building up", and which requires electrons to enter atomic orbitals in a pattern
that minimizes the total potential energy.
ANSWER: Aufbau principle [accept building-up principle before it is mentioned]
The Madelung rule can generally describe the same behavior that this predicts. A version of it can be used
to predict the configuration of protons and neutrons in various atomic nuclei. The periodicity of ionization
energy in relation to atomic number is a result of shielding from previously filled orbitals and a
consequence of it. It is the result of the combination of Hund's Rules and the Pauli Exclusion Principle, and
it is used to determine electron configurations. For 10 points, name this principle that governs orbital
designations which is German for "to build up."
ANSWER: Aufbau principle
A model developed by Kitaigorodskii that is used to predict the packing behavior of crystals is know by this
term. Applying the more well known statement by this name to the Dirac-Fock has helped calculate the
ionization potential of superheavy elements with 7p orbitals, and it is analogous to Maedlung's rule.
Introduced by Bohr when only two quantum numbers were hypothesized, the shifting of a 4s electron to a
3d electron in copper is a notable violation of this rule. For 10 points, identify this principle which states
that electrons fill in lower orbitals before they can use the higher orbitals, German for "building up" or
"construction".
ANSWER: aufbau principle
This phenomenon is the namesake of a type of intense kilometric radiation that was studied by the Cluster
missions. The THEMIS spacecraft is currently studying this phenomenon, and the Visible Imaging System
is part of the POLAR spacecraft designed to study these events. These events were named by Pierre
Gassendi, and their most common variants involve oxygen and nitrogen emissions. Their intensity
increases during geomagnetic storms, and they are caused by the interactions of charged particles in the
upper atmosphere. For ten points, name these colorful phenomena which come in australis and borealis
varieties.
ANSWER: aurorae or auroras (accept more specific answers like aurora borealis or aurora australis)
A method of forecasting associated with these phenomena is known as the Rutschblock test. These
phenomena can be caused by the rapid diffusion of warm air from the ground, which creates unstable layers
of depth hoar. One type of this phenomenon is facilitated by the presence of a lubricating layer, and a
majority of deaths are caused by the slab type. Most of them occur on slopes between thirty and forty-five
degrees and their speeds can reach over two hundred miles per hour. FTP name these phenomena in which
large masses of snow rapidly slide down a mountain.
ANSWER: avalanches
This chemist was the first to determine the molecular formula of ethanol and derived an equation relating
the specific heat of a gas to those of its constituent elements. A quantity named for him is equal to the
quotient of the ideal gas constant and Boltzmann's constant as well as the quotient of the Faraday constant
and elementary charge. That value was approximated using Einstein's work on Brownian motion by Jean
Perrin, improving on the work of Johann Lochsmidt. Also the namesake of a law that states that at fixed
temperature and pressure, equal volumes of an ideal gas contain equal numbers of particles, name this
namesake of the number of molecules in a mole, approximately 6.022 x 1023.
ANSWER: Amedeo Avogadro
In order to discover the law named after him, this scientist needed to recognize that most gas molecules
were not composed of atoms, which this man referred to as elementary molecules. His work
explained Gay-Lussac's Law of Combining Volumes and allowed the calculation of molecular masses for
gases. This person's name is now associated with a value discovered by Johann Loschmidt which equals the
gas constant divided by the Boltzmann constant. Name this Italian scientist whose namesake constant gives
the number of molecules in a mole of substance.
ANSWER: Amedeo Avogadro
This scientist's findings about atomic weights and molecular formulas were popularized by Stanislao
Cannizzaro. This scientist's gas law states that, at a constant pressure and temperature, the volume of a gas
is directly proportional to the amount of gas present. This man's number gives the amount of molecules in a
mole of a given substance. For 10 points, identify this scientist who names the number 6.022 times 10 to
the 23rd power.
ANSWER: Lorenzo Romano Amedeo Carlo Avogadro
The law named for this scientist was popularized by Stanislao Cannizzaro. His law was proposed soon after
Gay-Lussac's Law, allowing scientists to use volume measurements to find chemical formulas. This
person's law was an early step towards the Ideal Gas Law, but it assumed constant pressure and volume.
Because of the importance of his law, this scientist's name is used for the number of particles in a mole of
substance. Name this early 19th century Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Amedeo Avogadro
He's not Boltzmann, but the value of one quantity named after this scientist was verified using the
diffusion coefficient of Brownian motion by Jean Perrin. One of his laws can be used to calculate
atomic weights and states that under constant temperature and pressure, equal volumes of gases
contain the same (*) number of molecules. His namesake constant is equal to the ideal gas constant divided
by Boltzmann's constant and is the number of particles in a mole. For ten points, identify this scientist
whose constant equals approximately 6.022 times ten to the twenty-third.
ANSWER: Lorenzo Romano Amedeo Carlo Avogadro di Quaregna e di Cerreto
The Stark-Einstein photochemical equivalence law uses this value to relate mass to the quanta of
radiation it absorbs. The first attempt to calculate this value resulted in the similar Loschmidt constant,
and it is multiplied by the elementary charge to produce the Faraday constant. The Boltzmann constant
is a ratio of the universal gas constant to this other value, and inverting this number yields the atomic
mass unit. For 10 points, name this number that represents the number of atoms or molecules present
in a mole of a substance.
ANSWER: Avogadro's constant [prompt on mole before mentioned]
Recent studies to obtain a more accurate value for this constant have used the silicon crystal structure,
taking into account the various isotopes of the element. Another method for determining it involved a
constant that used the fine structure constant and Rydberg constant, known as the rest mass of the electron.
The earliest value for this constant was measured using the Kinetic Molecular Theory and known as *
Lochshmidt's constant. Boltzmann's constant is equal to the universal gas constant divided by this number
and Faraday's number is equal to the charge of an electron multiplied by this number. FTP, identify this
constant that is defined as the number of atoms in 12 grams of Carbon-12, typically given as 6.02 times
1023.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number/constant (accept atomic mass unit before *)
X-ray crystallography can be used to determine this value based on unit cell length, and the
namesake of a value similar to it, Josef Loschmidt, expounded the "irreversibility paradox". It is
obtained by dividing the Faraday constant by the electron charge, and its namesake hypothesized that
equal volumes of ideal gases have the same number of particles. The number of atoms in a mole, for 10
points, name this constant named after an Italian chemist equal to 6.02 x 1023.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [or Avogadro's constant; or Avogadro's value, etc]
This number is multiplied by Boltzmann's constant to give the ideal gas constant. The namesake of this
number proposed a law stating that the molar volume of a gas is a constant under a given temperature and
pressure. This value is equal to the number of atoms found in exactly twelve grams of carbon-12, and thus is
considered the number of particles in a mole. For 10, points name this number approximated as 6.022 times
ten to the twenty-third.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [or Avogadro's constant; do not accept or prompt on "mole"]
Jean Perrin estimated this value by measuring the rate of decrease of mastic particles placed at different
heights in water. The gas constant divided by this value equals the Boltzmann constant, and the elementary
charge times this value equals the Faraday constant. The namesake of this value developed a law that states
the volume of a gas is proportional to the number of moles of gas present. For 10 points, name this
eponymous value that is defined as the number of atoms or molecules in one mole of a substance, and is
equal to 6.02 times 10 to the 23rd power.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number or constant
Finding several methods to obtain this quantity earned Jean Perrin the 1926 Nobel Prize, and a
modern method of finding this value is by using X-ray crystallography on silicon spheres. This
quantity is equal to the Faraday constant divided by elementary charge, and the Loschmidt constant,
found by taking pressure divided by the product of the Boltzmann constant and temperature, was an
early approximation for this value. Multiplying this quantity by the Boltzmann constant yields the (*)
ideal gas constant, while the atomic mass unit is equivalent to the molar mass constant divided by this
number. For ten points, identify this constant named after an Italian scientist which is approximately 6.02 x
10^23 and is equal to the number of atoms in a mole.
ANSWER: Avogadro constant (accept Avogadro's number; prompt on "6.02 x 10^23" before read)
The value of this constant was originally calculated by Johann Josef Loschmidt, so this constant is
sometimes represented by a capital L. It is the Faraday constant divided by the elementary charge, and is
also the conversion factor from microscopic to macroscopic units, such as grams. It is defined as the ratio
of the number of entities to the amount of a substance, or the number of entities in one mole of a substance.
For 10 points, name this chemistry constant which is equal to 6.022 times ten to the twenty-third.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number
A more accurate value of this quantity was determined in a 2011 experiment that used x-ray
crystallography on a sample of silicon. The average kinetic energy of a particle is three halves times the
ideal gas constant times temperature divided by this constant. This quantity is the number of atoms in
twelve grams of carbon-12. For 10 points, name this number of particles in a mole of a substance,
approximately equal to 6.022 x 10^23.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [or the Avogadro constant]
The predecessor to this quantity was named for Loschmidt, and measurements of this quantity are based on
an x-ray diffraction of a crystal silicon lattice. When this quantity is multiplied by the elementary charge, it
results in the Faraday constant, and the product of this quantity and Boltzmann's constant results in the ideal
gas constant. One definition of this quantity is that at standard temperature and pressure, it is equal to the
number of particles in 22.4 liters of gas, and this constant approximately equals 6.02 times ten to the
twenty-third. For 10 points, name this number named for an Italian scientist, which represents the number of
atoms in a mole.
ANSWER: Avogadro's Number [accept Avogadro's Constant]
This value was first calculated by Johann Josef Loschmidt, though Jean Baptiste Perrin improved
the approximation and named it after the man who claimed that molecules were composed of atoms.
That man also realized that gases at equal temperature, pressure, and volume have the (*) same
number of molecules, the proportion of which is equal to this constant, the number of atoms in 12 grams of
Carbon-12. Equal to 6.02 times 10 to the 23rd, for ten points, what is this number of units in a mole?
ANSWER: Avogadro's Number
This constant equals the Faraday constant divided by the elementary charge. Boltzmann's constant is equal
to the ideal gas constant divided by this number. The number of molecules of a solute in one liter of
solution can be represented by a capital M, which is closely related to the unit that is defined as this number
of atoms. Defined as the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon, it roughly equals 6.022 to the 23rd power.
For 10 points, name the number that corresponds to the number of atoms in a mole.
ANSWER: Avogadro's constant [or Avogadro's number]
This number is the quotient of the gas constant and Boltzmann's constant, as well as Faraday's constant
divided by elementary charge. It is formally defined as the number of constituents in twelve grams of
carbon-12. This number's namesake discovered that equal volumes of gases at the same temperature
contain the same number of particles. For 10 points, name this constant equal to the number of particles in a
mole, or about 6.02 times ten to the twenty-third power.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number
First measured using coulometry, modern measurements of this quantity use X-ray crystallography on
silicon crystals. Calculated by CODATA using the electron rest mass, it equals the Faraday constant divided
by the elementary charge, or the gas constant divided by the Boltzmann constant. Jan Loschmidt first
measured this constant, defined as the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon-12. With a value of about
6.02 times 10 to the 23rd power, for 10 points, name this constant, the number of molecules in a mole.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number or constant [prompt on 6.02 * 10^23]
A project that uses high-purity silicon spheres to measure this quantity is attempting to free the
definition of the kilogram from Le Gran K. This quantity can be calculated by dividing the Faraday
constant by the charge of the electron. The number density of an ideal gas is given by pressure times
this quantity over the gas constant times temperature, and the gas constant is equal to it times (*)
Boltzmann's constant. It is used to find the molar mass. For 10 points, identify this constant equal to 6.02
times 10 to the 23rd, the number of atoms in a mole.
ANSWER: Avogadro's constant [or N-sub-A; or obvious equivalent for "constant", such as "number"; prompt on 6.022 times 10 to the 23 until it is read]
This quantity equals the ideal gas constant divided by Boltzmann's constant. This quantity is also equal to
the value of Faraday's constant divided by the charge of an electron. By definition, a twelve gram mass of
carbon 12 will have this number of carbon atoms. Identify this quantity, the number of elementary units in
one mole of a substance, approximately equal to 6.02 times ten to the twenty-third power.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number (or Avogadro's constant; prompt N-sub-a)
The unit cell volume of a single silicon crystal figures into a popular calculation to determine the
value of this constant. This constant was originally discovered by Johann Loschmidt, who, for his
efforts, names the number density of particles instead. This constant's namesake also proposed (*) a
law stating that the number of molecules in an ideal gas depends on the volume of the gas. This constant
once figured into the equivalent of 32 grams of oxygen, which is one mole. For 10 points, name this
constant, 6.02 x 1023 molecules, named after an Italian chemist.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number
Modern methods of calculating this number use x-ray crystallography, and this number is equal to the
Loschmidt constant times RT and divided by pressure. This number is equal to Faraday's constant divided
by the electric charge, and Jean-Baptiste Perrin used a study of Brownian motion to calculate this number.
Its reciprocal is the atomic mass unit, and carbon-twelve is used to define this constant. For 10 points, name
this constant equal to 6.022 x 1023 [six point zero two two times ten to the twenty-third], the number of
atoms of molecules in one mole?
ANSWER: Avogadro constant [or Avogadro's number; or N; or NA]
This number, which is equal to the amount of gas that occupies twenty-two point four liters at STP, is
defined in terms of twelve grams of carbon-twelve. Dividing the ideal gas constant by this number gives
Boltzmann's constant, and dividing the Faraday constant by this number gives the fundamental charge. For
10 points, name this number equal to the number of particles in a mole, or approximately 6.022 times ten to
the twenty-third.
ANSWER: Avogadro's constant
Like Planck's constant, the modern value of this quantity can be determined with X-ray crystallography, and
it was experimentally determined by Jean Perrin. This quantity is equal to the Faraday constant divided by
elementary charge, and it is also equal to the ideal gas constant over the Boltzmann constant. This constant
is defined as the number of atoms in twelve grams of carbon-12, and at standard temperature and pressure,
this number of particles of gas occupies 22.4 liters. For 10 points, name this constant equal to 6.02 times ten
to the twenty-third, the number of particles in a mole.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [accept Avogadro's constant]
One method to determine this constant uses x-ray diffraction in crystal silicon lattices in the shape of
a sphere, which defines it as the molar volume divided by the atomic volume. It has been suggested
that this number be defined as 84,446,888 to the third, and multiplying Boltzmann's constant by this
number yields the ideal gas constant. For 10 points, name this constant equal to one mole, which has a value
of 6.022 times 10 to the 23rd power.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number (or Avogadro's constant; prompt on "N-sub-A")
An early method of calculating this quantity consisted of determining the Faraday constant and dividing by
elementary charge, and it equals the ideal gas constant divided by the Boltzmann constant. This constant
can be defined as the number of atoms in 12 grams of Carbon-12, because it gives the number of entities in
one mole. For 10 points, give this constant named for an Italian scientist, equal to approximately 6.022
times 10 to the 23rd power.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number
This quantity equals the relative atomic mass of an electron divided its rest mass, and also is
Faraday's constant over elementary charge. The namesake of this quantity discovered that equal
volumes of gas contain an equal number of molecules. Boltzmann's constant equals the (*) gas
constant divided by this constant. It's the number of atoms of carbon-12 in 12 grams. For 10 points, name
this constant, the number of atoms in a mole, approximately 6.02 times 10 to the 23rd.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [or 6.022 times 10 to the 23rd until it is read; prompt on "mole"]
Measurements of this constant are based on x-ray diffraction of a crystal silicon lattice. Its namesake
developed a law stating equal volumes of gas in the same conditions will have the same number of
molecules. Multiplying this constant by the charge of an electron gives Faraday's constant. Multiplying it
by Boltzmann's constant gives the gas constant. It was once defined using 12 grams of carbon-12. For 10
points, name this number of atoms in a mole, roughly equal to 6.02 times ten to the twenty-third.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [prompt on number of atoms in a mole or similar answers]
Einstein's equation for Rayleigh scattering was once used to give an independent measurement for this
constant, and a recent high precision measurement of this used silicon spheres. Jean Perrin performed a
Brownian motion experiment that measured this constant, and it can be found by dividing Faraday's
constant by the elementary charge. This constant is also equal to the ideal gas constant divided by
Boltzmann's constant, and in stoichiometry problems it is used to convert particles to moles. Equivalent to
the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon-12, name this constant that is approximately equal to 6.02 times
ten to the twenty-third.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [or Avogadro's constant; accept 6.022... times 10 to the 23rd power inverse moles; accept one mole; prompt on mole]
Wertenstein estimated its value using the scintillation method that Rutherford had pioneered. One physicist
estimated it in various ways, winning the 1926 Nobel Prize for his efforts, that included determining the
value of b in the van der Waals equation for mercury vapor. CODATA defined its value as the molar mass
of the electron divided by the rest mass of an electron. It is sometimes erroneously referred to as
Loschmidt's constant, although it is directly related to it by the formula n naught equals P naught times this
value over R times T naught. Perrin also used observations of Brownian motion to estimate this. For 10
points, name this number that is defined as the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon-12.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [accept Avogadro's constant]
This quantity was given its current name and calculated using Brownian motion by Jean-Baptiste Perrin. Its
namesake observed that the volume of gas evolved by electrolysis obeyed the reaction's stoichiometry. It
also provides the conversion between the Boltzmann constant and the ideal gas constant. This number of
particles of gas at standard temperature and pressure occupies twenty-two point four liters, and it is the
conversion factor between grams and atomic mass units. For 10 points, identify this large constant, the
number of particles in a mole.
ANSWER: Avogadro's number [or Avogadro's constant; accept 6.02 times 10 to the 23rd]
If a certain value for these systems falls between the values of the individual components, the system
is known as the "saddle" type of them. One technique used on these systems involves adding an
"MSA," and another way to "break" them is to use a molecular sieve. The "hetero" version of them
contains a vapor phase. They can be classified as "positive" or "negative" depending on how their vapor
pressure differs from that of an ideal substance, and these mixtures deviate from Raoult's law. For 10
points, name these mixtures that cannot be separated by simple distillation.
ANSWER: azeotropes [accept word forms; prompt on constant boiling mixtures]
Aqueous N-methylethylenediamine exhibits a rare binary complex form of this property, and a
saddle form of this property exists as well for ternary solutions. The Gibbs-Konovalov theorem states
that the vapor and liquid phases of one of these must be isotonic, as observed for minimum and
maximum (*) boiling points. Hetero versions of one of these include 50/50 mixtures of chloroform and
water at 53.3 degrees Celsius, and the Dean-Stark Apparatus can be used to separate these mixtures, which
can deviate either positively or negatively from Raoult's Law. For 10 points, name this type of mixture,
whose components cannot be separated by fractional distillation.
ANSWER: Azeotrope [accept word variants]
These states correspond to intersections away from unity of the envelope lines in McCabe-Thiele
diagrams. The typical use of a Dean-Stark trap is to trap non-isochoric species in one of these
systems. One of these systems corresponding to a non-extremal critical phase change and known as a
(*) saddle one of these can form from ternary mixtures. In addition to its use in adsorbtion, the technique of
pressure swings can be used to break these mixtures because these mixtures are defined by having equal
activity coefficients among their components. For 10 points, name these mixtures in which each component
has the same boiling point and which consequently cannot be separated by fractional distillation.
ANSWER: azeotropes
The Mayo-Lewis equation can give the composition of a polymer chemistry analogue of one of these
mixtures. One of these may be created in order to promote the isolation of glacial acetic acid. These
mixtures are separated by adding entrainers, and positive and negative ones are defined by whether their
boiling points are a maximum or minimum. For 10 points, name these violations of Raoult's law, in which
each of two or more components has the same boiling point, either higher or lower than each in isolation.
ANSWER: azeotropes
The pervaporation method is used for these substances, and a membrane permeable to only one of their
components is used to induce partial vaporization. Distilling these substances after adding salt can achieve
the same result, and these substances result in extreme deviations from the ideal behavior of Raoult's Law
due to intermolecular forces. Examples of these include a mixture of 70% Nitric Acid to 30% Water, aswell
as mixtures of 95% Ethanol to 5% Water. For ten points, name these mixtures of two liquids which cannot
be separated through ordinary methods of distillation because their compositions remain unchanged in the
vapor phase.
ANSWER: Azeotropes
Residue curve maps are used to study these substances by mapping the location and stability of their nodes,
and a membrane divides the retentate and permeate in one technique used on them called pervaporation.
The Bancroft point describes the temperature of these substances, which are affected by the addition of an
MSA or entrainers. Their hetero form has two liquid phases, and an example of the negative form is nitric
acid and water. The vapor composition is identical to the composition of the liquid in these mixtures that
violate Raoult's Law. For ten points, name this type of mixture that cannot be separated by simple
distillation.
ANSWER: azeotropes
Formed in processes such as the Dutt-Wormall reaction, compounds of these with other organic functional
groups are unstable and most will break down under standard conditions, and as a result, the n-nonyl form is
the smallest that can be isolated and stored, and in general, a minimum carbon-to-nitrogen ratio of three-toone is required to guarantee stability. They are highly toxic, with LD50 values close to that of a similar class
of compounds, cyanides. As a toxin, they act by inhibiting the function of a cell by binding to the heme
cofactors of cytochrome c oxidase, and thus leading to chemical asphyxiation of cells. For ten points, name
this organic functional group that contains three double-bonded Nitrogen atoms.
ANSWER: Azides
The Mitsunobu reaction is sometimes used to produce alkyl forms of this functional group by using
as a nucleophile an acid whose conjugate base is this functional group. One method used to
synthesize these compounds is the Dutt-Wormall reaction. Its lead compound is used in detonators.
These compounds decompose to produce (*) isocyanates in one rearrangement, while in another reaction
these compounds react with triphenylphosphine to yield amines. Those reactions are the Curtius
rearrangment and the Staudinger reaction, respectively. They are coupled with alkynes in a popular click
chemistry reaction, the Huisgen cycloaddition. This functional group is found in the main chemical
component in airbags. For 10 points, what is this functional group that has three double-bonded nitrogens?
ANSWER: azides
Molecules of this type can be reacted with alkenes to form five-membered rings in the Huisgen
Reaction. Carboxylic ones can be converted into isocyanates via the Curtius Rearrangement and they
can be reacted with triphenylphosphine and converted to amines in the Staudinger Reaction. Along
with sulfuric acid, one is a reactant in the Schmidt Reaction, and an (*) acyl one can be formed in that
reaction if a carboxylic acid is used. The sodium one is an explosive commonly used in airbags and their
ions form the conjugate base of hydrazoic acid. FTP, name this type of compound which has a linear
structure of three nitrogen atoms linked by double bonds.
ANSWER: azides
Aryl ones are synthesized using tert-butyl nitrite and a substituted trimethylsilane, while vinylic ones are
synthesized from allenes that have an electron withdrawing group across from the site of addition. The
classic alkyl synthesis of these is the Dutt-Wormall reaction, which uses a sulfonamide, and they frequently
rearrange to isocyanates. These compounds also provide the easiest way to aminate a compound, by
reacting this functional group's sodium salt under SN2 conditions and then reducing the product with
lithium aluminum hydride. For 10 points, name this functional group, which, taken alone, isoelectronic with
carbon dioxide, a series of three double-bonded atoms of nitrogen.
ANSWER: azide
This ion combined with an acyl group is used to create an isocyanate in the Curtius rearrangement, and this
ion combined with hydrogen can be used to change a carboxylic acid into an amine in the Schmidt reaction.
A molecule with this ion can be reduced to an amine using the Staudinger reaction, and this ion combines
with an alkyne in ,Huisgen cycloaddition. This ion is combined with sodium using the Wislicenus process,
and the resulting molecule was once used in airbags. Many of its compounds are prepared using the DuttWormall reaction and are very explosive. Name this anion consisting of three nitrogen atoms.
ANSWER: azides [prompt on N3 (1)- or N3 -(1)]
Water- or acid-soluble compounds with this element are highly toxic, because this element can block
potassium channels in the membranes of neurons. It is considered to be a heavy metal, but not a transition
metal. The relatively heavy nuclei of this element helps make its low solubility sulfate an excellent X-ray
absorber that can be administered to serve as a radio contrast in the gastrointestinal tract. Like copper, it
gives a green flame test. Identify this element with a name from the Greek for "heavy", and with atomic
number 56, symbolized Ba.
ANSWER: barium [accept Ba before the end]
Spilites are a metasomatic type of this rock that are formed when seawater is involved in this rock's
formation. Group one kimberlites were once named for their similarity to this type of rock. Andesite
is more felsic than this rock and less than dacite. When this rock is low in calcium and alkaline
pyroxenes and high in iron rich augite, pigeonite or hypersthene, it may be called (*) tholeiitic. This
rock is high in magnesium and iron and low in silica, like gabbro, but gabbro forms more slowly and lower
in the earth's crust. This rock may be formed at rifts in the ocean, where it cools to form mid-ocean ridges,
and lunar mare is made of this rock. For 10 points, name this grey-black extrusive volcanic rock that is
extremely prevalent in Iceland and Hawai'i and forms when magma or lava rapidly cools.
ANSWER: basalt
Orthopyroxene can be found in one type of these minerals heavy in silica, known as Tholeiite ("TOL-aite"). A lava with "ropy", "shelly" and "slabby" varieties is primarily composed of this mineral. Found in
lavas such as a'a ("aah-aah") and pahoehoe, this type of rock is also the predominant mineral found on dark
plains on the moon, known as the lunar mares. Along with chemically equivalent gabbro, this mineral is
formed in spreading centers at mid-ocean ridges. This rock is less than 20 percent quartz by volume,
differentiating it from granite. For 10 points, name this igneous rock which makes up the bulk of the oceanic
crust.
ANSWER: basalt
It is rich in oxides of magnesium and calcium, but poor in silica. Its namesake flood plains cause the dark
"maria" observed on the moon, and formations have been found on Mars and Venus as well as on Earth.
Its extrusive form is called gabbro, and the Punalu'u Beach in Hawaii's black sands are made from this
material. FTP, name this fine-grained, black or grey volcanic rock formed by rapid surface cooling of lava.
ANSWER: Basalt
The Giant's Causeway is made from this type of rock as are Lunar mare. The pillow form of this rock is
created when it is quickly cooled by water. It is chemically similar to gabbro. This rock has relatively less
silica, but plenty of calcium and magnesium making it mafic. This extrusive rock makes up much of the
oceanic crust. For 10 points, name this igneous rock that is often contrasted with granite.
ANSWER: basalt
One of these chemicals etches silicon four hundred times faster along <111> planes. A class of these
compounds consists of a stable imine attached to an aryl or alkyl group, and they catalyze reactions
like the Claisen condensation. They include the aforementioned azomethine compounds named for
Hugo Schiff and induce the (*) saponification of the lipids in human skin, leading to their slimy texture.
These chemicals will turn litmus blue and phenolphthalien pink, and can be defined either as electron
donators or as proton acceptors. For 10 points, name this class of chemicals whose aqueous solutions have
pH greater than seven.
ANSWER: base [accept imine before mentioned]
Saponification is hydrolysis of lipids by these compounds. The molar concentration of the
conjugate type of one of these compounds is found in the numerator of the log term in the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. The presence of these compounds will turn phenolphthalein pink,
and Lewis defined these compounds as electron-pair donors. In Bronsted-Lowry theory, they accept
protons. Some types of these compounds produce (*) hydroxide ions in aqueous solutions. For 10 points,
name this class of compounds that have a pH greater than seven and form salts with acids.
ANSWER: base
One expression for the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation has a positive logarithm term with a fraction
containing the molar concentration of a conjugate one of these substances in the numerator.
Phenolphthalein turns pink in the presence of these substances and they also turn red litmus paper blue.
These substances are electron pair donors or, equivalently, hydrogen ion acceptors. For 10 points, name
these substances which include compounds with a hydroxide group and which have a pH greater than 7.
ANSWER: bases
One theory of these substances states that one type of them possesses a low-energy HOMO, low
polarizability, and high electronegativity; that theory was put forth by Pearson. In general, increased
strength of these substances is correlated with increased nucleophilicity, unless steric groups are present,
such as in triethylamine or LDA. Alkanes containing a leaving group can be converted to alkenes by adding
one of these substances, such as sodium hydride. Lewis defined these substances as electron donors, while
Bronsted and Lowry defined them as proton acceptors. These substances turn methyl red yellow and
phenolphthalein pink. For 10 points, name these substances that have a pH of greater than 7, contrasted with
acids.
ANSWER: base [accept more specific things like hard bases, Lewis bases, etc]
Lithium diisopropyl [die-eye-so-PRO-pill] amide is a "super" one of these chemicals. These chemicals
saponify esters to make soaps, and they are defined as electron pair donors by Lewis. Examples of
these include (*) ammonia and sodium bicarbonate, and they turn litmus paper blue and phenolphthalein
[fee-nol-THAY-leen] pink. Sodium hydroxide is, for 10 points, what kind of chemical whose pH in water is
greater than 7, the opposite of an acid?.
ANSWER: bases (accept basic)
An extremely strong class of these substances includes n-butyllithium and one named for Schlosser. In
one classification system, the "soft" type of these substances has higher-energy highest occupied molecular
orbitals, or HOMO, than the "hard" type. These substances were classified by Lewis as electron pair
donors, and the Bronsted-Lowry system classifies these substances as proton acceptors. For 10 points,
name these substances characterized by high pH's that are contrasted with acids.
ANSWER: bases
Calcareous grasslands have high concentrations of these compounds, and the effectiveness of these
compounds can be expressed as a DN value. Diisopropyl amine is treated with one of these compounds to
synthesize LDA, which can also act as one of these compounds. Compounds in which a carbon is a double
bonded to a nitrogen which in turn is substituted with an R group are versions of these compounds named
for Schiff. Arrhenius described these as substances that disassociate to yield hydroxide ions in water, and
another definition treats these compounds as proton acceptors. For 10 points, name these compounds which
have a pH over 7.
ANSWER: bases
Sodium fluoride acts as one of these when dissolved in bromine trifluoride, because it increases the
concentration of the characteristic anion. They are often but not always strong nucleophiles. Usanovich
defined them in the most general way possible as electron donors. Other definitions state that they donate
an electron pair, or that they accept a hydrogen ion. For ten points, name this class of compound, the most
common example of which is sodium hydroxide.
ANSWER: bases
Pearson's HSAB theory describes the hard form of these entities as having small size and high
electronegativity. The reaction of one of these entities with an ester in saponification is critical in soap
making. One theory of these entities defines them as electron pair donors, while another defines them as
proton acceptors. Those are the Lewis and Bronsted-Lowry theories of these entities. For 10 points, name
these entities often contrasted with acids.
ANSWER: bases
One class of these substances is a stable imine with a nitrogen atom attached to an aryl or alkyl group.
According to molecular orbital theory, the highest occupied molecular orbital of these compounds interact
with their counterpart's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital in reactions, and an example of a "super"
variety of these compounds is sodium hydride. One definition states that these compounds are electron pair
donors, while the Bronsted-Lowry definition states that they accept protons. "Strong" types of these
compounds include rubidium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide. For 10 points, name these compounds
that have a pH greater than 7.
ANSWER: Bases
Non-nucleophilic examples of these substances are used to catalyze the E2 reaction. One of these
compounds, which is a mix of n-butyl-lithium and potassium t-butoxide, is named for Schlosser.
Lithium di-isopropyl-amide is an example of the "super" type of these. These substances, which turn
phenolphthalein (*) pink, donate pairs of electrons in the Lewis definition, while they accept protons in
the Bronstead-Lowry definition. For 10 points, name these substances like NaOH that have a pH above 7.
ANSWER: bases
Enolates can be synthesized from their corresponding keto-enol tautomers in the presence of one of
these compounds, which also catalyze Claisen condensations and bimolecular elimination reactions.
Sodium hydride, which deprotonates alcohols, is one of these compounds. They usually serve as
nucleophiles, and all substituted amines are (*) weak ones. By hydrolyzing water, these compounds serve
as electron-pair donors and proton acceptors. According to the Arrhenius definition, they increase
hydroxide concentration in solution. For ten points, name these compounds which turn litmus paper blue,
have a pH greater than 7, and are not acids.
ANSWER: Bases (accept specific kinds of bases like Lewis, Arrhenius, or Bronsted-Lowry bases as well as strong bases, superbases, or weak bases)
Substrates unstable in the presence of these substances should be reduced using the Clemmensen reaction.
These substances catalyze the Michael reaction and the Claisen condensation. The Schiff types of these
substances are imines. They are defined as proton acceptors in the Bronsted-Lowry theory and as electron
donors in the Lewis theory. The presence of these substances turns red litmus paper blue. Examples of them
include sodium hydroxide and ammonia. For 10 points, name these chemical substances that have a pH
greater than 7, the opposite of acids.
ANSWER: bases [prompt on alkali]
Hunig's [HYOO-nig's] type of these substances is a poor nucleophile [NOO-klee-oe-file]. A Brook
rearrangement uses these substances, such as a Grignard [grih-NARD] or organolithium [or-GA-noe-LIHthee-um] reagent, as catalysts. These substances tend to hydrolyze triglycerides [trie-GLIH-suh-rides] in a
process called saponification, which is why they often feel slippery, and these substances typically taste
bitter. Depending on which definition is used, these substances donate an electron pair, accept protons, or
yield hydroxide ions. Name these substances that react strongly with acids.
ANSWER: bases
Gutmann introduced a measure that increases with the strength of these and is known as DN. In molecular
orbital theory, reactions involving them see their HOMO interact with their counterpart's LUMO. Electron
withdrawing groups decrease the ability of aromatic ring containing compounds to act as one, while
imidazole and pyridine act as these. E2 elimination is promoted by relatively strong examples of these, and
nucleophiles correspond with a classification of these. In one classification, they are electron pair donators,
while according to the Bronsted-Lowry definition they accept protons. For 10 points, name these substances
with a pH greater than 7.
ANSWER: base
One of these compounds is effectively used as a catalyst in the Michael addition, in which it creates a
carbanion. A carbon-nitrogen double-bond is present in one of these compounds named for Schiff. LDA
and potassium tert-butoxide are examples of non-nucleophilic, hindered versions of these compounds which
eliminate to give Hoffman products. These compounds cause saponification of lipids and turn
phenolphthalein pink. Bronsted-Lowry theory states that these compounds are proton acceptors, whereas the
Lewis definition states that these compounds are electron-pair donors. Identify these compounds which have
a pH above 7.
ANSWER: bases
Mercuric amidochloride, an early antiseptic, is known as Millon's this. An imine (ih-MEEN) bonded to an
alkyl (AL-kuhl) group forms the Schiff type of these compounds, which are oxide ion donors by the LuxFlood theory. More common definitions of these compounds make them electron pair donors or proton
acceptors, while Arrhenius (ah-RAY-nee-us) said they form hydroxide ions in water. Capable of turning red
litmus paper blue, name this class of slippery, bitter-tasting chemicals that form solutions with pH greater
than seven.
ANSWER: bases
One of these substances contains a carbon-nitrogen double bond connected to an aryl or alkyl group.
The Schiff variety of these substances are imines. According to Ralph Pearson, the hard types of
these substances include fluoride and chloride, whereas the soft ones include benzene and hydride.
The super types of these substances include sodium amide and n-butyllithium. These substances turn
red litmus paper [*] blue. The Bronsted-Lowry theory defines them as proton acceptors, while Lewis
theory defines them as electron pair donors. For 10 points, name these chemical substances which have
pH's greater than 7, which often release OH minus ions into solution.
ANSWER: bases [accept Schiff base before "Schiff"; accept imine before "imine"]
An extremely powerful example of one these compounds is lithium diisopropylamide ("di-iso-pro-pula-meed"). One definition of these compounds extends to a group of reagents known as nucleophiles.
Another definition states that they have a lone pair in their highest occupied molecular orbital.
Examples of these compounds that are considered strong contain alkali or alkaline earth metals.
According to the Lewis definition, they are electron donors. For 10 points, name these compounds which
according to the Bronsted-Lowry definition are proton acceptors, examples of which are sodium hydroxide
and ammonia.
ANSWER: base
The discharge rate of these is given by Peukert's law. Solid nickel chloride and molten sodium are
used in the ZEBRA form of these devices, which is also an example of the thermal form of them. One
of these was invented by Georges Leclanche and employs a zinc "can". They can be generally
classified into primary and storage categories, with the latter reusable. Reactants are not continually
added to these devices, distinguishing them from (*) fuel cells. One form of these devices see lithium
ions move alternatively between the positive and negative electrodes. These devices were pioneered by the
Voltaic Pile. For 10 points, name these devices that create electrical energy from chemical energy,
commonly found in sizes like D and AA.
ANSWER: batteries [word forms ok; prompt on electrochemical cell or voltaic cell]
Problematic hydrogen bubbles led John Frederic Daniell to develop this object, while an ancient type
is deemed a Baghdad variation. Leyden Jars in parallel could mimic one of these objects. The first
modern example was a system of galvanic cells in series created by Alessandro (*) Volta. One of these
can be created with zinc and copper electrodes and a potato. Converting chemical energy to electrical
energy, for 10 points, name these objects that come in AAA and AA varieties.
ANSWER: battery or batteries
The beta type of this device must operate above three hundred degrees Celsius to keep the sodium and
sulfur molten, while the aluminum-air type has not had much commercial success because it generates
hydrogen when not in use. The traditional dry type relies on a zinc-manganese dioxide system, though it is
quickly being replaced by the reuseable nickel-cadmium variety, and the most common storage type still
uses sulfuric acid as the electrolyte. Containing at least one cathode and anode, name this device for
supplying electricity invented by Alessandro Volta.
ANSWER: battery [accept galvanic cell; accept voltaic cell before "Alessandro"; prompt on cell]
One type of this device was created using copper sulfate and zinc sulfate by John Frederick Daniell. In a
different type of this device, two reactions are connected by means of a salt bridge. Some of these devices
suffer from memory effect, although one reusable form of this device, without memory effect, works using
lithium ions. For 10 points, name these devices that create energy between a cathode and an anode to
produce electrical power.
ANSWER: battery [or batteries; or Galvanic cells; or voltaic cells; or electrochemical cell; prompt on cell]
It consists of gibbsite, boehmite, and diaspore, along with goethite, hematite, kaolinite, and anatase
TiO2. It forms when silica in aluminum-bearing rocks is washed away. It is reddish-brown, white,
tan, and tan-yellow, and is dull to earthy in luster and can look like clay or soil. The (*) lateritic ones
in many countries of the tropical belt. It was named after Les Baux, a village in southern France. Name this
most important aluminum ore, first discovered in 1821 by geologist Pierre Berthier.
ANSWER: Bauxite
Maikala proposed modifications to this law to account for phenomena unique to human tissue.
Adherence to this law is a prerequisite to the analysis of the binding of two species by a Job plot. This
equation is often applied to find the bilirubin level in a plasma sample. This equation contains a
particularly large (*) sigma when applied to a solution of a charge-transfer complex. For 10 points, name
this result often invoked in analysis of UV/visual spectra, which places in direct proportion the product of
path length, concentration, and molar absorptivity with the absorption of light.
ANSWER: Beer's law [or Beer-Lambert-Bouguer law]
If this law holds, a Job plot can be used. This law is derived by integrating negative N times sigma
over a series of thin slices. The ratio of two values computed using this law is used to assess the purity
of a DNA sample. This law can be used to extrapolate points on a Bradford assay, assuming the
sample is in the linear range. This law assumes no turbidity, that the incident flux is non-invasive,
and that the medium is homogenous. In one form, this law says (*) A is equal to the product of the
extinction coefficient, path length, and concentration. This law can be written in terms of the transmittance
or absorbance. For 10 points, name this law is often used in spectrophotometry to measure the
concentration of a sample using monochromatic light
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert-Bouguer law
This law is the basis of devices which measure blood oxygen saturation in pulse oximetry. The absence of
tryptophan, cysteine, and tyrosine can complicate the use of this law in determining the purity of OD280
protein samples. Deviations from it are caused by polychromatic radiation and changes in the analyte's
index of refraction. This law relates the negative logarithm of the transmittance by the slope of a calibration
curve to the concentration of the analyte. For 10 points, name this law whose most wellknown formulation
sets the absorbance equal to the product of the path length, concentration, and the
molar extinction coefficient.
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert Law [or Beer's Law]
A Job plot must conform to this law, and is used to find the stoichiometry of a binding event like complex
formation. This doubly eponymous law is used to describe the atmospheric attenuation of solar or stellar
radiation that results from various gases and aerosols in the atmosphere. Its most common application is its
use in finding the concentration of solutes given data from a spectrophotometer and molar extinction
coefficient. For ten points, what is the law that states the logarithmic dependence between transmittance and
absorbance and relates the linear relationship between absorption of light passing through a solution with
the concentration of the absorbing species?
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert Law
One modification of this law allows for its applicability to the analysis of tissue in near-infrared
spectroscopy and was developed by Maikala. This law can be derived by treating molecules as opaque disks
whose cross sectional areas are encountered by a certain particle and integrating the product of this area and
the number of particles in an infinitesimally thin slab. This law sets the quantity it explains equal to two
minus the log of transmissivity, and that quantity can also be calculated as the product of path length,
concentration and the extinction coefficient. For 10 points, name this law that relates the properties of a
material to the absorbance of light traveling through it.
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert-Bouguer Law [accept either underlined name, or both in either order]
This relation is only valid if the interacting entities are homogeneously distributed in the medium and do not
scatter the incoming radiation, which must come in via parallel and preferably monochromatic rays. It
describes the adsorption of light as it relates to the properties of the media in showing that the transmissivity
of light depends logarithmically on the product of the adsorption coefficient of the substance and the path
length of the light. FTP, expressing what equation in terms of absorbance yields an equation that shows that
absorbance is proportional to concentration, where concentration is the adsorption coefficient divided by
the molar absorptivity?
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert-Bouguer Law
Cannon and Butterworth studied errors in the system response linearity inferred from this equation as seen
by changing conditions in measurements for naphthalene scarlet. Underestimation of the partial volume
effect as influenced by cross-talk between chromophores is typical of the modified form of this equation.
This law can be derived by approximating a molecule by an opaque disk whose cross-sectional area
represents the area seen by a particle, and the quantity it concerns is expressed as the product of extinction
coefficient, concentration, and pathlength or as the negative log of transmittance. For 10 points, name this
law that relates the absorption of light to the properties of the material through which the light is traveling.
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert-Bouguer law/equation [accept either underlined name]
Modifications to this law have been presented by Paynter and Sassaroli, and those modifications include
an additive term G and a multiplier called the DPF. It is used in calculating the amount of bilirubin in blood
plasma, and monochromatic incident radiation is required for this law to hold. The absorption coefficient
alpha and ratio of the intensities of incident and transmitted light are factors in this law, which also includes
the molar absorptivity of the sample concerned. For 10 points, name this law that linearly relates the
absorbance of a sample and the concentration of that sample.
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert law
One application of this law is assessing the purity of a DNA sample after a phenol-chloroform extraction
by measuring the 260 to 280 ratio, and both the Bradford and Lowry assays make use of this law. Sample
turbidity and the use of polychromatic radiation make this law inapplicable, and one term in this law is
expressed in molarity over centimeters and is known as the extinction coefficient. This law states that the
log of a light's initial intensity over its measured intensity is equal to the concentration of a species
multiplied by the distance traveled by the light times its absorptivity, and is commonly used in
spectrophotometers. For 10 points, name this law of chemistry sometimes named for Lambert and Bouger
that can be used to find the absorbance or transmittance of a solution.
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert-Bouger Law
One coefficient sometimes used in this law is equal to four pi times the imaginary part of the index
of refraction divided by the wavelength of the incident light. The molar extinction coefficient is more
prevalently used than the aforementioned absorption coefficient. There are actually two forms of this
law, one of which holds optical path length constant and the other of which holds molar concentration
constant. For 10 points, name this law that states that the absorbance is linearly proportional to
concentration, a fundamental law of spectrophotometry.
ANSWER: Beer-Lambert-Bouguer Law [or Beer's Law; or Lambert's Law; or Lambert-Beer Law]
The Clemmensen reduction is a reaction used to reduce acyl- types to alkyl- types of this compound,
and hydrogenation of this compound can yield cyclohexane. This compound was first isolated in 1825
by Michael Faraday, who called it bicarburet of hydrogen, but its (*) structure was not discovered until
1865, when Friedrich August Kekule dreamed of a snake biting its own tail. Phenols contain a hydroxyl
group bound to one of, for ten points, what organic compound with chemical formula C6H6, the simplest
aromatic hydrocarbon?
ANSWER: Benzene
This compound can be produced in the Bergman reaction via the heating and hydrogenation of enediyne,
and substitution of a nitrogen for one of its carbons yields pyridine. In the presence of lithium, ammonia,
and alcohol, this compound can be converted into 1,4-cyclohexadiene via the Birch reduction, while its
complete reduction yields cyclohexane. Derivatives of this compound include the hydroxylated version
phenol and the methyl version toluene. For 10 points, name this cyclic compound, whose structure was
hypothesized by Kekule, which has formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
This substance is reacted with sodium and an alcohol in the Birch reduction, and it is acylated
through the use of a Lewis acid catalyst in the Friedel-Crafts acylation. This substance is produced
through the catalytic reforming process, and linking two molecules of this substance forms biphenyl.
When a [*] methyl group is attached to this substance, toluene is formed. With a structure famously
described by August Kekule, this substance's alternating double bonds make it the simplest aromatic
hydrocarbon. For 10 points, identify this ring-shaped hydrocarbon with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [accept C6H6 until read]
One derivative of this compound is used with chloroform to extract DNA. This compound is reacted with
sodium and an alcohol to yield 1,4-cyclohexadiene in the Birch reduction. Two molecules of this compound
can fuse to form naphthalene. This compound contains resonance structures of alternating single and double
bonds as predicted by August Kekule. Adding a methyl group to this compound creates toluene while
adding a hydroxide to it creates phenol. For 10 points, name this simplest aromatic hydrocarbon with
formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [or C6H6 before read]
The Birch reduction transforms this compound into 1,4-cyclohexadiene, while the Friedel-Crafts reaction
can acylate or alkylate this compound. When one of the hydrogens in this compound is replaced with a
hydroxyl group, it is known as phenol, while replacing a hydrogen with a methyl group renames it toluene,
which has recently replaced this carcinogen in industrial applications. Friedrich Kekule envisioned the
structure of this molecule as a snake biting its own tail. Name this aromatic, cyclic hydrocarbon with
formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [or benzol; prompt on C6H6 before the end]
This compound is the second-smallest annulene after cyclebutadiene, and two of this molecule are linked
together to form biphenyl. Additions to this compound may be performed by the Friedel-Crafts acylation or
alkylation, and a palladium catalyst can be used to reduce it to cyclohexane. Compounds derived from this
compound include aniline and phenol. It is the smallest cyclic compound to follow the 4n+2 rule named for
Huckel, and is thus a common example of an aromatic compound. For 10 points, name this compound for
which a structure of alternating double bonds was proposed by August Kekule, a cyclic hydrocarbon with
formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [or 1,3,5-cyclohexatriene or cyclohex-1,3,5-triene; prompt on C6H6 before read]
Both James Dewar and Albert Ladenburg proposed incorrect structures of this compound. Fusing two
molecules of these compounds together forms the primary ingredient in mothballs. Attaching a methyl
group
to this compound forms a product that is the second "t" in TNT. Friedrich Kekule (KEK-yool) determined
the structure of this compound, which is a strong carcinogen and was replaced by tetraethyl
(TET-ruh-ETH-ul) lead as an additive in gasoline. For 10 points, name this compound that is a six member
ring with alternating double and single bonds, and has formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [accept C6H6 before it is read]
At high temperatures, some of this compound breaks down into biphenyl and hydrogen gas. This chemical
can be alkylated with propylene to make cumene, and it is alkylated (al-kuh-LAI-ted) with
ethylene (EH-thi-leen) to form styrene. It can be created from toluene, and exposure to this hydrocarbon can
cause aplastic anemia. Its structure was theorized by Friedrich August Kekule, who claimed that he had a
dream of a snake eating its tail. Name this ring-structured aromatic compound with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene (accept C6H6 before read)
This non-CO2 chemical was used as a solvent in the Roselius process, used to make decaffeinated
coffee. This compound is the simplest one that can be detected using chloroform and an aluminum
chloride catalyst. Sodium and ethanol in liquid ammonia help reduce this compound into 1,4 cyclohexadiene in the Birch reduction. A strong Lewis acid catalyst is needed to acylate or alkylate this molecule
in the simplest Friedel-Crafts reactions. The structure of this chemical was once proposed to consist of
alternating single and double carbon-carbon bonds, and was suggested by August Kekule. For 10
points, name this aromatic hydrocarbon with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [accept C6H6 before it is read]
Because this compound has a quadrupole but no dipole moment, it forms the prototypical system
for T-stacking in solution. In a Frost circle, this compound's HOMO has energy "alpha plus beta".
This compound can be used as an entrainer to break the ethanol-water azeotrope because it forms a
ternary azeotrope at 64.9 degrees Celsius. This compound, which has an index of hydrogen deficiency
of (*) 4, is the main target of EAS reactions. In line notation, a circle is drawn inside of this compound to
indicate resonance. A phenyl group is this compound without a hydrogen atom. Because it is planar and has
six pi electrons, it is the simplest neutral aromatic compound. For 10 points, name this compound drawn as
a hexagon with three double bonds, with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [or C6H6 before it is read]
Adding an ethylene (EH-thuh-leen) group to this compound forms the monomer unit of polystyrene.
Fully hydrogenating this compound forms cyclohexane. Huckel supposedly determined this compound's
structure by dreaming of a snake chasing its own tail. When two of its rings are joined together, it becomes
naphthalene (NAP-thuh-leen) and when a methyl (MEH-thul) group is added to it, it becomes toluene
(TOHL-yoo-een). It is often symbolized by a circle inside of a hexagon. For 10 points, name this aromatic
compound with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [accept C6H6 before mentioned]
A boron-nitrogen analogue of this compound is known as borazine. In hydrogen NMR, this compound
shows a single peak around 7.2 ppm. Derivatives of this compound include salicylic acid, used in the
production of aspirin, and aniline, used in artificial dyes. A molecule formed by fusing three units of this
compound together is called anthracene. All of the bonds in this compound have a length of 140
picometers, which represents an intermediate between single and double bond length. A circle is often
drawn in the middle of this compound to represent its delocalization, which is preserved in electrophilic
substitutions. For 10 points, name this aromatic molecule with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [accept C6H6 before mentioned]
The Gatteman-Koch reaction produces a compound consisting of this molecule with a formyl
substituent. When nitrated, this molecule forms a substance used as a precursor to aniline. A fused pair of
this molecule form a substance used in mothballs called napthalene. A phenyl group has one less hydrogen
than this molecule. August Kekule was the first to succesfully deduce this molecule's alternating double
bond ring structure. For 10 points, name this aromatic hydrocarbon with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
This compound reacts with hydrocyanic acid in the presence of an aluminum chloride catalyst to form an
aldehyde in the Gattermann reaction. Replacing two hydrogens in this molecule with hydroxyls forms
hydroquinone, which features para- substitution as opposed to ortho- or meta-. Other derivatives of this
compound, synthesized in the Friedel-Crafts reaction, include phenol and toluene, while reacting this
molecule with hydrogen yields cyclohexane. This molecule contains three pairs of alternating single and
double bonds arranged in a cyclic hydrocarbon. For ten points, name this organic compound with molecular
formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [accept C6H6 before mention]
The structure of this compound was confirmed by Kathleen Lonsdale using X-ray diffraction. It is
acylated in the most basic form of the Friedel-Crafts acylation. When one of its hydrogen atoms is replaced
by a functional group, it forms a derivative such as phenol or toluene. Its structure supposedly came to
Kekule in a dream, in which he envisioned a snake biting its own tail, which resembles its ring-like
structure. For 10 points, name this aromatic compound whose formula is C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [accept C6H6 before mention]
If an alcohol, sodium, and ammonia are present, this compound can undergo the Birch reduction, and this
compound can be acylated or alkylated by the Friedel-Crafts reaction. If one of the hydrogens in this
compound is replaced by a hydroxide group, it is known as phenol, while if replaced with a methyl group, it
is known as toluene. Friedrich Kekule proposed the structure of this smallest cyclic compound to follow the
4n plus two rule named after Huckel. A cyclic structure with alternating single and double bonds, for 10
points, identify this simplest aromatic compound with formula C-6-H-6.
ANSWER: Benzene [accept C6H6 before it is read]
A derivative of this molecule is carboxylated to form salicylic acid in the Kolbe-Schmitt reaction. This
molecule is attached to a methyl group to form the side chain of phenylalanine. Some derivatives of this
molecule include toluene and aniline. As a functional group, it is given the name "phenyl," and reducing
this molecule completely yields cyclohexane. Because of this cyclic molecule's alternating single and
double bonds, it possesses two Lewis structures. This hydrocarbon with six delocalized pi electrons can be
depicted as a hexagon with a circle in the middle. For 10 points, name this aromatic molecule with a
chemical formula of C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [or cyclohexa-1,3,5-triene; or 1,3,5-cyclohexatriene; or benzol; or phene; accep C6H6 before mentioned]
Bacteria such as some strains of Pseudomonia can degrade a toxic derivative of this compound by
catalyzing the addition of oxygen to it, and when substituted with a hydroxyl group it can undergo
the Pechmann condensation to yield (*) coumarins. The Bergman reaction creates a derivative of it by
heating an enyne with a hydrogen donor, and it yields 1,4-cyclohexadiene when reacted in the presence of
sodium or lithium in the Birch reduction. Its complete hydrogenation yields cyclohexane, and a derivative
of this compound with a methyl group is known as toluene. For 10 points, name this aromatic compound
with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
When this molecule undergoes a Birch reduction, it yields cyclohexadiene. Electrophilic substitution on this
molecule can be accomplished with a Lewis acid catalyst in the Friedel-Crafts reaction. Derivatives of this
compound include fusions of two of these to form naphthalene and various substitutions to form aniline or
toluene. The structure of this molecule as a ring with alternating double bonds was proposed after Kekule
dreamed of a snake biting its tail. For 10 points, name this cyclic aromatic compound with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
Aluminum chloride may be used to catalyze a high-pressure reaction involving this compound along with
hydrogen chloride and carbon monoxide in the Gattermann-Koch reaction. This compound is employed in a
reaction that synthesizes acyl from this compound and 1-4 cyclohexadienes may be formed when this
compound undergoes a Birch reduction. This compound can undergo Friedel-Crafts acylation or alkylation
and its methyl version is known as toluene. For 10 points, name this compound with chemical formula
C6H6, whose structure was proposed by Kekule.
ANSWER: benzene
In the presence of alcohol, sodium, and ammonia, this compound can undergo the Birch reduction.
Catalyzed by aluminum chloride, it reacts with an acyl chloride or alkyl halide in the Friedel-Crafts
reactions. All of its bonds are 140 picometers long. It has two more than a multiple of four electrons, in
accordance with Huckel's rule. Its substituted derivatives include aniline, toluene, and phenol. It exhibits
delocalization and resonance. Its structure can be drawn with three double-bonds and three single-bonds.
For 10 points, name this simplest aromatic compound.
ANSWER: benzene [prompt on arenes, prompt on aromatic compounds]
This molecule is exposed to nitric and sulfuric acid and then hydrogenated, to form aniline. Napthalene
contains two of these molecules fused together. When this molecule is missing a hydrogen, it is called a
phenyl group. This carcinogen's structure is often drawn as a hexagon with a circle inside, representing the
movement of electrons around its ring. For 10 points, identify this hydrocarbon that consists of a
completely conjugated six carbon ring and has formula C 6-H 6.
ANSWER: benzene [or C6H6 until it is read; prompt on phenyl]
As a ligand, it can form compounds with chromium and a few other transition elements. It can be produced
by either steam cracking or catalytic reformation. Its most important derivative, styrene, is used in many
plastics, while another derivative, aniline, is used in dyes. Among the reactions it can undergo are nitration
to pyridine, as well as reduction in the presence of a nickel catalyst and hydrogen to cyclohexane. It has two
resonance structures, which results in an average carbon-carbon bond length of 139 picometers intermediate
to a single bond and double bond. August Kekule explained the structure of, FTP, what aromatic compound
with formula C6H6?
ANSWER: Benzene
The Balz-Schiemann reaction adds fluorine to this molecule and the Kolbe-Schmitt reaction involves
the base promoted carboxylation of one of its derivatives. The substitution of an amino group on this
compound is achieved via a diazonium salt in the (*) Sandmeyer reaction. They can be linked in azo
coupling and bromide can be added to this compounds using FeBr3 by electrophilic substitution. The fusion
of two of these molecules produces naphthalene and the presence of a methyl group produces toluene. For
10 points, name this simplest aromatic hydrocarbon, C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
An ethylene group is attached to this compound in the monomer that forms the plastic
polystyrene ("POLLY"-sty-reen). Placing two methyl groups on this compound produces xylene
(ZY-leen), while fully reducing this compound produces cyclohexane (SY-klo-hex-ain). (*) Friedrich
Kekule (KECK-you-lee) determined the structure of this compound which consists of alternating single and
double bonds, a system of delocalized electrons which gives it a property known as aromaticity. For 10
points, name this hydrocarbon with chemical formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [or C6H6 before mentioned]
An isomer of this compound is named for James Dewar, and this compound is the second in a series of
compounds that starts with cyclobutadiene [sigh-kloe-BYOOD-uh-"DIE"-een]. Changing a hydrogen
atom in a molecule of this element to a hydroxyl ["high"-DRAHK-sil] group creates an ingredient of
bakelite [BAY-kuh-lite] called either carbolic acid or phenol [FEE-nol], while changing a hydrogen
atom to a methyl [METH-ul] group creates toluene. Discovery of the structure of this molecule is
credited to August Kekule, who claimed he had a vision of a snake eating its tail. Name this aromatic
hydrocarbon sometimes pictured with alternating single and double bonds, whose chemical formula is
C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [prompt on C6H6]
Michael Faraday first isolated this substance from gaslight residue, and its uniform bond length of
140 picometers can be explained by resonance. The locations of substituents on this molecule can be
described the prefixes "ortho-," "para-," and "meta-", and it can be made from (*) cyclohexene.
Derivatives of this compound include aniline, phenol, and methylated toluene. Described by August Kekule,
for 10 points, name this simplest aromatic molecule with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene (prompt on C6H6 before the end)
This compound is transformed into 1,4-cyclohexadiene in the Birch reduction and can undergo the
Friedel-Crafts acylation while in the presence of a strong Lewis acid. This compound has 4n + 2
delocalized electrons where n=1, therefore fulfilling Huckel's rule. Two of these molecules fused
together results in naphthalene and when a hydroxyl group replaces one of this molecule's
hydrogens, phenol results. This compound's structure was theorized by [*] Kekule and it is depicted as
a circle inside a hexagon because of its ring of delocalized electrons. For 10 points, name this simplest
aromatic hydrocarbon that has alternating double and single bonds, with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [accept C6H6 before mentioned]
In the presence of a strong Lewis acid, this compound can be acylated or alkylated via the Friedel-Crafts
reactions. It has an NMR shift of around 7.2, and it is reduced to cyclohexane in the presence of excess
hydrogen. Its inability to participate in addition reactions like alkenes was not addressed by Kekule's
hypothesis for its structure. Its bonds are approximately 1.4 angstroms long. Its hydroxylated version is
called phenol, while its methylated version is known as toluene. For 10 points, identify this ring molecule
with the formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
This molecule has uniform bond lengths of 140 picometers. A strong Lewis acid catalyst can be used to
alkylate or acylate this molecule. Alternating carbon-carbon single and double bonds characterize this
molecule's two resonance structures, which represent its six delocalized pi electrons. Huckel's rule
describes this molecule's structure, which was first discovered by August Kekule. Adding an -OH group to
this molecule produces phenol, while adding a CH3 group to it makes toluene. For 10 points, name this
aromatic compound with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [prompt on C6H6 before read]
This compound's structure was confirmed by Kathleen Lonsdale using X-ray diffraction. An isomer of this
compound named for Dewar is formed from the conjunction of two cyclo-butene rings. This compound is
bonded to a hydroxyl and carboxyl group in salicylic acid. Phenol is a hydroxyl derivative of this
compound, and toluene is a methyl derivative. Hydrogenation of this compound produces cyclohexane. This
compound is linked by resonance structures within the pi orbitals of its atoms rather than by three carbon
double bonds, as in Friedrich Kekule's [key-koo-LEES] model. For 10 points, name this simplest aromatic
hydrocarbon with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene [prompt on "C6H6"]
Naphthalene is created when two of these molecules fuse together. A hydrogen halide is produced when this
compound reacts with a haloalkane and a Lewis acid catalyst in the Friedel-Crafts alkylation. Replacing one
of its hydrogen atoms with a functional group can produce phenol and toluene, and one of its properties
arises from its 4n + 2 pi electrons where n equals 1 according to Huckel's rule. Kekule proposed this
molecule's alternating double bonds and ringlike structure. For 10 points, name this simplest aromatic
hydrocarbon with formula C6H6.
ANSWER: Benzene [accept C6H6 before end]
This compound and chromium trichloride were used by Hafner and Fischer to synthesize a particular
organometallic sandwich compound. DNA extraction sometimes uses a mixture of chloroform and one of
this compound's derivatives for liquid-liquid extraction. When two of these compounds are fused, the
product is naphthalene. This compound forms a near-ideal solution when combined with one of its
derivatives, toluene, and the hydroxylated version of this compound is phenol. August Kekule elucidated
the structure of this compound. Name this aromatic compound with alternating double and single bonds and
formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
The Gatterman reaction can be used to form aldehydes from derivatives of this compound, while it
can be reduced to a compound with one fewer double bond in the Birch reduction. Replacing a
hydrogen group in this compound with methyl and hydroxyl groups creates its respective derivatives
(*) toluene and phenol. August Kekule theorized the structure of this compound, understood in modern
valence bond terms as a resonance structure of alternating double and single bonds. Often drawn as a circle
surrounded by a hexagon, for 10 points, name this simplest aromatic organic compound with formula
C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
The Gatterman-Koch reaction adds carbonyl groups to derivatives of this molecule, which when substituted
with a hydroxyl group can undergo the Pechmann condensation to synthesize coumarins. The ANRORC
mechanism is used to describe certain types of nucleophilic substitutions in it, and reacting it with sodium
and an alcohol in liquid ammonia will selectively reduce it in a reaction named for Birch. It readily
undergoes the Lewis acid-catalyzed Friedel-Crafts acylation, and simple derivatives of it include aniline and
toluene. For 10 points, identify this chemical compound with molecular formula C6H6, whose structure was
elucidated by Kekule.
ANSWER: benzene [prompt on C6H6]
Substituting two of this molecule's hydrogen atoms with -OH groups can lead to such compounds as
the antiseptic catechol, and the antioxidant hydroquinone. Substitution with one -OH group and one -
COOH group leads to salicylic acid, while substituting a hydrogen with a methyl group results in toluene.
This simplest aromatic hydrocarbon has formula C6H6. For 10 points, name this organic compound
whose structure was famously discovered when Frederick Kekule dreamt of a snake eating its own tail.
ANSWER: benzene
Kevlar and Nomex consist of repeating units of this molecule crosslinked by amide groups. Hafner and
Fisher created a sandwich compound consisting of two of these atoms flanking a chromium atom. When
this molecule changes hapticity from six to four, it folds along one axis of symmetry. This molecule can be
reacted with propylene to yield cumene, and another derivative of it is used with chloroform in DNA
extraction. That derivative, which is distinguished by the presence of an attached hydroxide ion, is phenol.
For 10 points, name this compound that obeys Huckel's rule, an aromatic ring-shaped molecule with
formula C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene
This mineral comes in several varieties including goshenite, heliodor, and bixbite, the last of which is also
known as "red emerald". The blue variety of this silicate is named for sea water, though the green variety is
the most soughtafter and expensive. While some varieties are used as gemstones, in general, the mineral is
best-known as the source of its namesake rare element. Identify this mineral whose varieties include
aquamarine and emerald, the namesake of element number four.
ANSWER: beryl [do not accept variations such as "beryite" or "beryllium"]
This technique was developed alongside an analogous, but slower and easier-to-control procedure,
named for Siemens and Martin. Sidney Gilchrist Thomas solved the "phosphorus problem" with this
procedure by introducing a dolemite lining, which produced phosphate fertilizer as a byproduct. The
apparatus central to this technique depends on openings called "Tuyeres," through which oxygen flows into
an ovoid container. This process results in the removal of sulfur and excess carbon in order to make an alloy
of iron. For 10 points, name this industrial process, the first widespread way to make steel.
ANSWER: Bessemer process [prompt on steelmaking or equivalents]
This process involves an oxidation step in which silicon impurities are removed from a reaction
system known as the Gilchrist-Thomas converter, which carries out the process in the presence of
phosphorus. Reactive nitrogen is a byproduct of this process which uses a pig iron bath and very high
temperatures to meld together alloys. For 10 points, name this industrial process which facilitates the
production of large amounts of steel, named for its British inventor.
ANSWER: Bessemer-Kelly Process
The anomeric effect destabilizes this form of D-glucopyranose, despite its equatorial hydroxyl group. This
letter designates the hydroxyketones produced in the aldol reaction, as well as the keto-esters produced in
the Claisen condensation. In NMR, nuclei aligned against the field are called "spin-down," or this letter.
This letter names the type of four-membered lactam found in penicillins. Cellulose features 1,4 glycosidic
bonds with this letter designation, and a secondary protein structure bearing this name is a pleated sheet.
This type of nuclear decay results in the emission of a positron or electron. For 10 points, give this letter
that names a carbon atom one away from an alpha carbon.
ANSWER: beta
This interaction changes the refractive index of a thin gold film on which a molecule is immobilized with a
Biacore sensor chip. Programs like Autodock simulate this interaction, which is screened by fragment-based
lead discovery. Protein-directed dynamic combinatorial chemistry is a method used to optimize the strength
of this interaction for molecules. The major uses of isothermal titration calorimetry and surface plasmon
resonance are to test potential drugs for this non-enzymatic interaction, which is modeled by the MWC and
Hill equations if it's cooperative. Affinity constants quantify the strength of this interaction, which is
measured in saturation experiments that can be visualized on a Scatchard plot. For 10 points, name this
physical interaction between a ligand and
its receptor.
ANSWER: ligand binding [or binding to a receptor; prompt on protein-protein interaction or PPI or similar answers; anti-prompt on protein activation or inhibition or specific cases of binding; prompt on drug activity or related answers; do not accept "forming a bond", "bonding", or any answer about covalent bonding]
Whewellite is created by this process, and is typically found as a thin calcium oxalate pruina patina.
Minerals created by this process are often mosaiced or mesocrystalline, owing to an enforced
heterogeneous crystallization environment. Celestite deposits found near hydrothermal vents are
typically formed by this process. Magnetites formed by this process constitute the (*) earliest evidence
of it, and these magnetites are characterized by being elongated with a single magnetic domain. When
vaterite is formed by one particular case of this process, it is stabilized and has a spherical morphology,
owing to unidentified catalysts in nacre. Apatite formed by this process is typically hydroxyl-substituted. It
is not known to have occurred macroscopically during the Precambrian. For 10 points, name this process
that is used by molluscs to make their calcite shells.
ANSWER: biomineralization [accept anything that indicates minerals being created by living things]
This reaction was used to synthesize 19-nortestosterone as well as the first oral contraceptive pill in the
1940s due to its ability to easily modify steroids. A modification of this reaction involves using polycyclic
molecules and methyl, ethyl or other alkyl groups and is named for Benkeser. An alkylation version of this
reaction involves the trapping of the carbanion formed in the unmodified reaction by an electrophile and in
general, this reaction produces the kinetic product. Although potassium and lithium also can carry out this
reaction, sodium is the most common alkali metal used to form the essential electride salt. Named after its
Australian discoverer, For 10 points, identify this mechanism that reduces aromatic rings with an alcohol to
form cyclic dienes in an ammonia solution.
ANSWER: Birch reduction
Donohoe and Cousins described an application of this reaction to 3-pyrroles, while the same group
formulated an alternative to this reaction applies that uses 8 molar napthalene as an electron carrier.
Another modification of it is named for Benkeser. When an electron-withdrawing substituent is
present on the reactant, it begins at the ipso position, and adding a haloalkane can result in an
alkylation through this reaction's (*) anionic intermediate. This reaction is stopped due to the lack of
conjugation in its product, and relies on a pair of proton transfers from methanol and a solvated electron to
produce the initial radical. FTP, name this reaction in which sodium metal in liquid ammonia is used to
transform benzene derivatives to 1,4-cyclohexadienes, named for an Australian.
ANSWER: Birch reduction
This is the color of the Hoescht (HOASH) stain when it binds to DNA. Fehling's A solution is this color.
One compound named after this color is used to treat heavy metal poisoning by cesium and thallium. Irises
of this color are caused by Tyndall (TIN-dull) scattering, which also causes smoke to appear this color
when light is passed through it. Cyanide got its name because it appeared as this color. For 10 points, name
this color that red litmus paper turns under basic conditions.
ANSWER: blue
A negative Biuret's test appears this color. It's not green, but a light of this color is used to
illuminate SYBR green stained gels, and a fluorescent protein of this color serves as the donor
protein in a commonly used FRET pair, with YFP. Proteins turn this color in the Bradford assay,
which turns a dye named for Coomassie from brown to this color. Indium and arsenic give this
color on a flame test, and due to electron solvation, solutions of alkali metals in ammonia have
this color. A universal indicator takes on this color between pH 8 and 11, and particular
bromophenol and bromothymol derivatives used as indicators turn this color at basic pH.
Pigments of this color are often made from cobalt salts. For 10 points, name this color, which in
ball-and-stick organic models is often assigned to nitrogen.
ANSWER: blue [or cyan; or purple; or violet]
On an NFPA label, the square of this color, located on the left, indicates health hazards. Light shining
through a colloid produces this color in the Tyndall effect. Anhydrous cobalt chloride, used as a desiccant,
is this color, as is solid hydrated copper nitrate. In basic solutions, bromothymol sulfone phthalein
(THAY-lean) will turn this color. In a flame test, most alcohols will burn this color. In CPK modeling kits,
nitrogen is represented with this color. For 10 points, name this color into which litmus paper turns in
sodium hydroxide or other basic solutions.
ANSWER: blue
This color gives the colloquial name for the Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry book published by
IUPAC. An indicator of this color is used to treat methemoglobulinemia; that is its "methylene" form. In a
common laboratory demonstration, a colorless, alkaline glucose solution in a closed bottle turns this color
when the bottle is shaken. The indicator Congo red unusually turns this color in acidic solution. The anion
in prussic acid was named for being isolated from the "Prussian" pigment of this color. It represents
nitrogen in CPK models of compounds. This is the color of anhydrous cobalt ions and of copper-ammonia
solutions. For 10 points, name this color of many cyanide-containing compounds, also the color that litmus
turns in basic solution.
ANSWER: blue
This process is impeded by the Leidenfrost effect and differs from cavitation in that it does not involve a
change in ambient pressure. To prevent bumping, one may use its namesake "chips." In the absence of
nucleation sites, this process is delayed, resulting in superheating. Its corresponding line on a phase diagram
ends at the critical point. Used to separate mixtures in distillation, it occurs when a liquid's vapor pressure
reaches the atmospheric pressure. The reverse of condensation, for 10 points, name this process of
vaporizing a liquid, which for water occurs at 100 degrees C.
ANSWER: boiling [accept word forms]
The change in entropy for substances undergoing this process is often around 10.5 times the gas
constant according to Trouton's Rule. When a solution lacks nucleation sites, this process may not occur in
it, resulting in superheating. This process occurs when vapor pressure equals atmospheric pressure. The
temperature at which it occurs may increase due to solute particles in a colligative property describing its
"elevation." For 10 points, name this phase change during which a liquid turns into a gas.
ANSWER: boiling [or vaporization]
The entropy change brought about by this process is largely constant across compounds according to
Trouton's rule. Namesake tubes used for this process are used to prevent bumping and are made of
borosilicate glass. PFTE-coated chips are often used as nucleation sites for this process. The temperature
required for this process is elevated in a common colligative property. This transition occurs after the input
of the latent heat of fusion. For 10 points, name this phase transition in which a liquid is transformed into a
gas.
ANSWER: boiling [accept evaporation; accept vaporization]
In a certain technique, this process does occur to the "overhead" product but not to the "bottoms" product.
This process occurs at the bottom of a reflux. Because it can result in "bumping", this process requires
nucleation sites on namesake "chips" to occur safely. The Clausius-Clapeyron equation almost always is
used with the enthalpy of this process. This process occurs most rapidly to volatile compounds. It occurs
when vapor pressure is equal to the partial pressure. Dissolved solute elevates the temperature at which it
occurs. For 10 points, name this phase transition which occurs at 100 degrees Celsius for water, turning it
into vapor.
ANSWER: boiling [or vaporization; or word forms of either; prompt on "evaporation"; accept distillation, fractional distillation, simple distillation, or other forms of distillation or word forms of the word "distillation" before "dissolved solute"]
The ratio of latent heat to this quantity is approximately 21 calories per mole per Kelvin according to
Trouton's ratio, and this quantity's reciprocal appears on the right side of the Clausius-Clapeyron equation.
A mixture of acetone and chloroform has a higher value for this quantity than either of its components
because it is a negative azeotrope. Other ways to elevate this value include adding a salt to a solvent or
increasing the atmospheric pressure relative to the vapor pressure of the substance. For 10 points, name this
temperature, about 100 degrees Celsius for water, at which a liquid vaporizes into a gas.
ANSWER: boiling point [prompt on "heat of vaporization" or "enthalpy of vaporization" before mention]
Given the vapor pressure and the heat of vaporization at a certain temperature, the value of this quantity
can be calculated using the Clausius-Clapeyron (CLOW-see-us klah-PAY-ron) equation. For roughly every
300 meter increase in elevation, this quantity drops by one degree Celsius. It is defined as the temperature
at which the vapor pressure of a liquid equals the environmental pressure. For 10 points, name this quantity
which in standard conditions is 100 degrees Celsius for water.
ANSWER: boiling point
Trouton's constant is the entropy of a certain process at it, and Duhring's plot has this property for a pure
solution on the x-axis. On a coexistence curve, this property is represented by the rightmost line, whose
slope is given by the Clausius-Clapeyron relation. Due to the fact that it is a colligative property, it is
increased by the presence of solute in a solvent, and substances with significant intermolecular attractions
frequently have high ones. It occurs when the vapor pressure of a liquid equals the atmospheric pressure.
For 10 points, name this point which occurs at sea level for water at 100 degrees Celsius, the point of
transition between a liquid and a gas.
ANSWER: boiling point
At this condition, atmospheric pressure equals a quantity calculated for water by the Goff-Gratch
equation. A Perkin triangle can be used to separate substances that differ in this condition, and that
process is optimized by the Fenske equation and the McCabe-Thiel method. The addition of solute (*)
raises this value for a solution. For 10 points, name this quantity achieved when the ambient pressure equals
vapor pressure, equal for water to one hundred degrees Celsius.
ANSWER: boiling point [accept equivalents]
An azeotrope either minimizes or maximizes this quantity depending on whether the solution shows
positive or negative deviations from Raoult's Law. Compared to a pure solvent, a solution will increase this
quantity proportionally to its molality. Liquids for which this quantity is lower than the external temperature
are called volatile. It is defined as the temperature at which the external pressure and the vapor pressure of a
liquid are equal. For 10 points, name this point, which at one atmosphere of pressure is one hundred degrees
Celsius for water.
ANSWER: boiling point
In Pxy ["P-sub-x-y"] and Txy ["T-sub-x-y"] diagrams for binary mixtures, these quantities mark the
intersection of the bubble point and dew point curves. According to Trouton's rule for liquids, dividing
the change in enthalpy by this quantity will often yield a change in entropy equal to about 88 joules per
kelvin per mole. The change in this quantity for a solution can be calculated by multiplying the molality
of the solution, the van't Hoff factor, and a constant termed Kb ["K-sub-B"]. When this point is reached,
the vapor pressure is equivalent to the atmospheric pressure. For 10 points, name this temperature at
which substances transition from a liquid to a gas phase.
ANSWER: boiling point
This quantity can be estimated by adding 198 to the sum of the group contributions with Joback's
Method, and the entropy at this point is given by Trouton's constant. Adding a non-volatile solute to
a pure solvent results in this quantity's "elevation" and [*] superheating occurs when a liquid's
temperature is above this quantity. This quantity is lower at higher elevations and this point is equal to the
temperature at which the vapor pressure of the liquid equals the atmospheric pressure. Measured with an
ebulliometer, for 10 points, name this quantity for liquids which is 100 degrees Celsius and 212 degrees
Fahrenheit for water, at which a liquid turns into a gas.
ANSWER: boiling point
This value can be measured with an ebullioscope (eh-BYUL-ee-oh-scope). Upon addition of a solute,
this value increases proportionally to the molality of a solution. On a phase diagram, this value is
represented by a line connecting the triple point and critical point, increasing with pressure. This value is,
for a given system pressure, the temperature at which vapor pressure equals that of the system. For 10
points, name this temperature, which for water is 100 degrees Celsius.
ANSWER: boiling point
The Clausius-Clapeyron equation makes use of a type of enthalpy associated with this value. Since
this value is constant for a mixture of liquids in an azeotrope, fractional distillation cannot be applied
to such a system. It occurs when the vapor pressure of a liquid equals the (*) atmospheric pressure,
and the "elevation" of this quantity is a colligative property, similar to freezing point depression. On his
temperature scale, Anders Celsius set this value for water as 100 degrees. For 10 points, name this
temperature at which a phase change from liquid to gas occurs.
ANSWER: boiling point [prompt on boiling; prompt on vaporization]
Depending on the value of this quantity, azeotropes are classified as "positive" or "negative". A device for
measuring this quantity is called an ebullioscope. This quantity increases as the pressure on a substance
increases. Substances are separated based on differences in this quantity in distillation. A liquid whose
temperature is higher than this quantity is said to be superheated. This temperature is colligatively increased
when a solute is added to a liquid, and is highest for substances with strong intermolecular forces. For 10
points, name this temperature at which a liquid becomes a gas.
ANSWER: boiling point [or vaporization point/temperature; prompt on "volatility" or word forms]
This man lends his name to a method in computational fluid dynamics that uses the BGK method to
approximate the collision parameter, and Hinton and Sejnowski developed a type of stochastic neural
network called his "machine", and he names the probability distribution of the length of a vector
with three normally distributed orthogonal components. More famously, he names the underlying
distribution of the canonical ensemble, and is the second namesake of a law that scales blackbody
radiation with the fourth power of temperature. For 10 points, name this scientist who names a distribution
of gas particles with Maxwell and a constant equal to 1.38 times 10 to the negative 23.
ANSWER: Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann
E to the negative product of minus thermodynamic beta times the energy is the formula for this
man's namesake factor. The evolution of particle probability in a position-momentum phase space is
given by his transport equation. His namesake constant is equal to the ideal gas constant divided by
Avogadro's number. He co-names the (*) distribution of particle speeds in an ideal gas with James
Maxwell. For 10 points, name this man whose gravestone states that entropy equals k log W.
ANSWER: Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann
The van't Hoff relation states that this quantity is equal to the equilibrium pressure of a system
divided by the product of concentration and temperature. In the Arrhenius equation, when
activation energy is given in molecular units, this quantity, instead of the gas constant, is used.
When multiplied by three-halves T it is equivalent to the (*) average translational energy of an ideal gas,
and when multiplied by the number of micro-states available to a system, this quantity gives entropy. Name
this quantity, a constant equal to the gas constant divided by Avogadro's constant, often represented by K
sub B.
ANSWER: Boltzmann's Constant [accept K-sub-B early]
This is the name of a crater found in the Argyre quadrangle on Mars, and this kind of albedo is the fraction
of radiation reflected by a body back into space. This kind of graph has arcs that represent a bidirectional
flow of information, unlike block and signal-flow diagrams. One of these between a carboxyl group and an
amino group can be found in chains of amino acids, and the valence theory of these states that the orbitals
of atoms in a particle merge together. Name this concept, also defined as the attraction between particles,
exemplified by the ionic, covalent, and hydrogen types.
ANSWER: bond
In metal complexes, the back variety of these interactions occur between the filled d orbitals of a
metal and the empty orbitals of a ligand. The likelihood of these interactions to homolyse into
radicals is inversely proportional to their strength. One (*) sigma and two pi ones of these interactions
combine to form the triple one of these in diatomic nitrogen, which is represented by three lines in a Lewis
Dot Diagram. The one in nitrogen is non-polar, but those between atoms with greater electronegativity
differences aren't. For 10 points, identify these interactions, types of which include covalent and ionic.
ANSWER: bonds
The immense strain on cyclopropane (SY-clo-PRO-pain) is accounted for by the "banana" type of this
interaction. A delocalized "sea of electrons" is the defining feature of a type found in metals. Molecular
orbital theory was developed to fully understand this interaction, which involves the localization of charge
on one of two participating atoms in an ionic kind. For 10 points, identify this interaction between atoms
whose "single" and "double" varieties involve covalently sharing electrons.
ANSWER: chemical bonds
For macromolecules, two different kinds of this quantity are required in order to use the Flory
convention. Another kind of this quantity is given by the formula alpha over quantity l times c; that
quantity is negative for an L-isomer and positive for a D-isomer. For two sterically hindered groups, this
quantity is minimized in the gauche conformation and maximized in the anti confirmation, whereas for any
two adjacent groups, this quantity is minimized in the eclipsed and maximized in the staggered
conformation in Newman projections. The Ramachandran plot for a given amino acid yields all the
possible combinations of two dihedral ones. In tetrahedral molecules, this quantity assumes the unusual
value of 109.5. For 10 points, name this quantity that, for a linear molecule in VSEPR geometry, is 180
degrees.
ANSWER: angle [or dihedral angle; or torsion angle; or bond angle; or specific rotation]
This quantity is given in terms of the s and p character of orbitals by Coulson's theorem, and it is
predicted to be larger for singlet carbenes than triplets. An attempt to reconcile the optimal value of
this quantity with that which is demanded by small cyclic hydrocarbons results in banana bonds.
This quantity is dramatically smaller than predicted for hydrogen (*) disulfide because of lone pair
donation into sigma star orbitals. This quantity is decreased in VSEPR theory when one replaces a
substituent with an electron pair, because the electron pair is more repulsive and compresses the other
substituents. For 10 points, give this measure, equal to approximately 109.5 degrees for methane and 104.5
degrees for water.
ANSWER: bond angle [accept anything that indicates understanding that we're looking for the angle between bonds to an atom]
This quantity is given by square root of h over two pi square root of c times reduced mass times the
microwave spectrum line spacing in the rigid rotor approximation. Aromaticity was discovered upon
finding via x-ray crystallography that benzene possesses only two values for this quantity. This quantity
decreases as the p-character decreases, and it decreases as bond order increases. For 10 points, name this
quantity, the average distance between two atoms that share electrons in a molecule, which can vary for
carbon-carbon bonds from one hundred twenty to one hundred fifty-four nanometers.
ANSWER: bond length
In microwave spectroscopy, this quantity can be empirically calculated as h-bar over the square
root of twice the rotational constant times reduced mass. The rigid rotor model assumes that this
quantity is constant for rotating molecules. It's the x-value of the minimum energy from the Morse
potential. Like lattice constants, this quantity can be measured using X-ray diffraction only if it is the
same order of magnitude as the X-rays' (*) wavelength. Only one value for this quantity is
experimentally reported for nitrate due to resonance. This quantity decreases as bond order increases. It's
usually around one angstrom. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the distance between two atoms in
a covalent bond.
ANSWER: bond length [or bond separation distance before it is read; prompt on partial answer]
As a micronutrient, this element interacts with calcium in plants and helps maintain their cell walls.
In an alloy with neodymium and iron, atoms of this element form the strongest permanent magnets.
Found in colemanite and the optically bizarre ore ulexite, this element's [*] hydride contains 'banana
bonds' and is a Lewis acid. Its oxide is found with silica in labware made of Pyrex glass, and this lightest
element with electrons in a p-shell usually requires six valence electrons to be stable, violating the octet
rule. For 10 points, name this nonmetal element with atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron
The skeletal electron pairs of compounds made of this element bonded to hydrogen determines their
classifications in categories such as closo or arachno based on Wade's rules. A palladium catalyzed reaction
to convert an acid containing this element into an alkyl halide is named for Suzuki. Though it is not silicon,
this element is used to make pyrex glass. A compound containing this element is used along with
tetrahydrofuran to convert an alkane into an anti-Markovnikov alcohol. This trivalent element is often used
to dope P-type semiconductors. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron
An alloy of iron, neodymium and this element forms a tetrahedral structure in strongest permanent
magnet known. A reagent containing this element has two atoms of it flanked by two cyclooctadine rings,
and a class of reducing agents incorporating it have it bonded to 3 sec-butyl groups with a lithium
counterion. Besides 9-BBN and the selectrides, this atom is also bonded to four hydride atoms with a
sodium counterion in a gentler alternative to lithium aluminum hydride. One class of derivatives of this
element are given prefixes like closo- and arachno-; many of those compounds dimerize via three-center
two-electron bonds to satisfy the octet rule. A common anti-Markovnikov reaction uses this element, which
has isotopes of atomic weight 10 and 11. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number five.
ANSWER: boron [or B]
Compounds of this element and silicon were first isolated by Moissan and Stock. The selectrides
are reducing agents containing this element, and cluster compounds of this element adopt closo, nido,
or arachno configurations based on the number of electrons in the system. Reacting a compound of
this element with an alkene is a method of oxidizing the less substituted carbon in violation of
Markovnikov's rule. This element's (*) triflouride is a powerful electron-deficient Lewis acid. Hydrides
of this element tend to form 3 center two-electron bonds, and this element tends to violate the octet rule by
having only 6 valence electrons. For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [or B before mention]
A dimer (DIE-murr) of a simple compound with this element as its central atom forms a high strained
bond called a banana bond. Compounds containing this element are often named using the prefixes sido
(SIY-doh) or arachno (uh-RACK-noh) as part of a designation called Wade's Rules. This element violates
the octet rule with just six electrons, because it contains only one electron in the 2p subshell, thus making
compounds with this element useful Lewis acids. For 10 points, name this metalloid element with atomic
number 5.
ANSWER: boron
A hydride of this element can be produced when reacting with peroxides in the Brown reaction, and halides
react with this element's acid in Suzuki coupling. The mineral form of this element's acid is sassolite, and
the bonding of this element to hydrogen is specified by Wade's rules. The hydride of this element has
banana bonds, and this element can be isolated from ulexite and borax. This is the lightest element to have
an electron in the p-shell, and it can violate the octet rule, with an incomplete octet of only six electrons
around it. For 10 points, name this element discovered by Humphry Davy, with atomic number 5 and
symbol B.
ANSWER: Boron
Eleven atoms of this element, and eleven halides, are found in the strongest known single-molecule
acid. This element's allotropes form 12-atom icosahedral clusters. A compound containing only this
element and hydrogen unusually exhibits three different bond angles and bonds of order one-half.
The formation of a pi complex allows this element to add to the less substituted carbon of a double
bond. This element and (*) gallium are used to dope silicon p-type. Nearly all compounds of this element
are Lewis acidic since it violates the octet rule by only having six electrons. It's the first element with a
ground-state p electron. For 10 points, name this first metalloid, which has atomic number 5.
ANSWER: boron [or B]
This element is found with calcium and oxygen in colemanite, and sodium and oxygen in
kernite. Rhenium bonded to two atoms of this element forms a superhard material that
approaches that of diamond. Heterodiamond is made from explosive shock synthesis between
diamond and this element's nitride. Alfred Stock was the first to synthesize hydrides of this
element, which when containing n + 1 electron pairs is classified as closo. More often, hydrides
are classified as nido or arachno, according to Wade's rules. Glass formed from silicon dioxide
and this element's trioxide is present in Pyrex glass. This element is unusually stable when it has
only six electrons in its valence shell. For 10 points, identify this first element of group 13, with
an atomic number of 5.
ANSWER: boron
The two naturally occurring isotopes of this element possess nuclear spins of 3 and 3/2 and thus may be
used for NMR. It is a component of the naturally occurring mineral, ulexite, in which parallel fibers transmit
light, creating a fiberoptic effect. In organic chemistry, a compound of this element is used in an addition
reaction to an alkene in anti-Markovnikov orientation as opposed to oxymercuration. In forming trigonal
planar molecules with the halogens, this element disobeys the octet rule. This is because it possesses only
three valence electrons and thus forms only three bonds. For 10 points, identify this lightest metalloid with
atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [accept B before mentioned]
One of this element's allotropes has a three hundred twenty atom unit cell, and each major
allotrope feature in some capacity twelve-atom icosahedra. Stock and Pohland isolated a compound
of this element and nitrogen that is isoelectronic and isostructural to benzene. Compounds of this
element with hydrogen feature three center two electron bonds and are described by Wade's rules as
hypho, arachno, nido, and closo. This element is isolated from (*) ulexite and borax. For 10 points,
name this element with atomic number five and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron
One isotope of this element with an equal number of neutrons and protons is used to absorb
neutrons in cancer therapy and the control rods of nuclear reactors. Like gallium, a compound
containing two elements of this element and six of hydrogen contains two three-center two-electron
bonds. Beryllium-10 decays into this element via (*) beta-minus decay, and it is the first element which
contains electrons in the p orbital. For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [or B until it is read]
Acids of this element are used with a palladium catalyst to carry out the Suzuki reaction. Its hydrides
add in THF solution to alkenes and are oxidized by peroxides in a reaction named for Brown. The
structures of those hydrides of this element can be predicted using (*) Wade's rules. It may be found in
the fibrous mineral ulexite. Its enriched 10 isotope is used to capture thermal neutrons in nuclear reators.
Along with helium-3, this element is used to detect ionizing radiation in Geiger counters, and it violates the
"octet rule" since it can form bonds using only its three valence electrons. For 10 points, name this
metalloid with atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [accept B before mention; accept element number 5 or equivalents before mention]
This element's hydroxide salt, called sassonite, is actually a Lewis acid. P-type semiconductors often use
silicon doped with this element. This element's carbide is often used in nuclear reactors' control rods, and
Pyrex laboratory glass contains this element's silicate. This element is usually electron-deficient in
compounds, forming only three bonds. It is the first element to have an electron in a p orbital and is the
lightest metalloid. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 5.
ANSWER: boron [or B]
The sodium salt of this element's hydride is used as a soft reducing agent in organic chemistry, and most
laboratory glassware is heat-resistant because it is fifteen percent this element's oxide. This element is used
to dope germanium to enhance p-type conductivity. It forms compounds with hydrogen that are given
prefixes like nido- and arachno-. Three atoms of this element form a compound analogous to benzene by
alternating with three atoms of nitrogen. For 10 points, name this element found in ulexite and borax with
atomic number five.
ANSWER: boron [or B]
This element's geometrically frustrated beta rhombohedral phase is equivalent to an
antiferromagnetic Ising model on an expanded kagome lattice. The Kucherov reaction hydrates
hydrocarbons using this element's triflouride as a catalyst, while (*) Wade's Rules govern the bonding
of this element to Hydrogen. This element's carbide's ability to absorb neutrons without forming
radionuclides allows for its use in shielding and shutdown pellets in nuclear plants. Organic acids of this
element can be bonded to halides with the help of a Palladium catalyst in Suzuki Coupling. Compounds of
this element commonly violate the octet rule. For 10 points, name this element found naturally in borax and
kernite, a metalloid with atomic number five and symbol B.
ANSWER: Boron
In plants, it serves as a micronutrient, influences calcium ion utilization, and allows root tips to elongate.
This element's ability to absorb neutrons led it to be used in the control rods of nuclear reactors. Involved in
a common anti-Markovnikov reaction, this element is commonly found in banana bonds and is a notable
exception to the octet rule. Together with its silicate, it is found in Pyrex glassware. The lightest element
with a 2p electron, it is located above aluminum on the period table. For 10 points, name this element with
atomic weight 10.81 and atomic number 5.
ANSWER: boron
In the presence of tetrahydrofuran, a compound of this element reduces alkenes in an anti-Markovnikov
fashion. This element forms a compound with rhenium that can surpass the hardness of diamond, and its
oxide is added to silica to produce a durable form of glass used in labware. It is the lightest element used in
p-type doping, and its hydride is a Lewis acid. For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 5
and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron
A compound containing this element in plant walls binds two RG-II monomers in pectin.
Compounds containing this element react in the Suzuki Coupling. One ore containing this element,
ulexite, has natural fiber optical properties, and other ores include raxorite and rasorite. This
element's hydride dimerizes to from three-center banana bonds, and closo nido and arachno are
three configurations predicted by (*) Wade's rules. This element, which is used in nuclear reactor control
rods, is used to provide a green color in fireworks and its nitride is isoelectric with diamond. For 10 points,
name this element with atomic number five and symbol B.
ANSWER: Boron [accept B before giveaway]
This element's hydrides come in forms like closo-, nido-, and arachno-, and were useful in formulating
Wade's rules. Three nitrogens and three of this element form the central ring of the so-called "inorganic
benzene." This element complexed to hydrogen is dissolved in THF in an anti-Markovnikov oxidation
reaction partly named for it. The triatomic allotrope of this element is a 9.3 on the Mohs scale, and it often
forms Lewis acids because of its three valence electrons. For 10 points, name this metalloid element,
number five on the period table, with chemical symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [accept B before it is read]
An atom of this element is bonded to nitrogen and oxygen in the CBS catalyst. Like carbonium, compounds
of this element often exhibit 3-center-2-electron bonds. A mineral of this element forms cross-links between
polyvinyl alcohols found in certain glues to form a slime-like polymer. A compound of this element can
react with an alkene in an anti-Markovnikov fashion. Found in Pyrex glass, this element is used to dope ptype silicon and forms trigonal planar trihalides, common examples of Lewis acids. Somewhat stable with
only 6 valence electrons, it is an exception to the octet rule. For 10 points, name this fifth element with
symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [accept B until mentioned]
It is found along with hydrogen and oxygen in sassolite, and heterodiamond is formed by combining carbon
with its cubic nitride. Compounds consisting of an equal number of this element and hydrogen have a
charge of -2 and are prefixed closo-, as opposed to nido- or arachno-. A material resistant to thermal shock,
manufactured from silica and this element's oxide, is known as Pyrex glass. A neutral atom of this element
has 3 valence electrons, but it is typically stable with just 6, violating the octet rule. It has an atomic number
of 5. For 10 points, name this metalloid with chemical symbol B.
ANSWER: boron
This element can form electron-deficient structures that take up the shapes of delta-hedra, which
are predicted by the 4n rule. This element is the partial namesake of a reaction that performs
an anti-Markovnikov addition of an alcohol. Neodymium magnets are actually an alloy of iron,
neodymium, and this element. Polyvinyl alcohol's reaction with a mineral containing this element
can form a "slime" that elementary students often make by mixing that mineral with white glue.
Compounds with this element often violate the octet rule, since this element only has three valence
electrons. Name this element with atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [prompt on B]
The hydride of this element were largely categorized by Alfred Stock, who suggested an incorrect
ethane-like structure for one of the more interesting examples; that structure for a heterocycle
consisting of two atoms of this element and six hydrogens was later corrected by the x-ray studies for
which William Lipscomb won a Nobel Prize. Three-center-two-electron bonds, also known as (*)
banana bonds, are present in the bridge of the aforementioned hydride of this atom. This element's simplest
oxyacid is the most common chemical shim in fission reactors. This element's carbide and nitrate are among
the hardest materials known. FTP, name this element, the most common p-type dopant in silicon
semiconductor devices, whose chemical simple is b.
ANSWER: Boron
The diamond-square-diamond or DSD mechanism explains the structural rearrangements in some
compounds with this element and the three-center two-electron-bond is seen in many of compounds
containing it. William Lipscomb studied its compounds extensively and the banana bond appears in
its simple hydride. Its halides are typical Lobe-LUMO Lewis acids and when added to water
produces its simplest oxoacid. Injections of it are used with a neutron beam as a form of radiotherapy
and its simplest oxoacid acid is used as a coolant in (*) nuclear reactors. It is a common p-type dopant for
semiconductors as it has one less valence electron than the major component of the semiconductors, silicon.
The decay of beryllium-10 results in an isotope of this metalloid with weight 10. For 10 points, name this
element with chemical symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [prompt on B]
After one isotope of this element is purified, the waste product is often used as a starting material for
aneutronic fusion. It's not gadolinium, but a phenylalanine derivative containing this element is
delivered to brain tumors in the proposed mechanism for neutron capture therapy. This element's
hydrides adopt closo-, nido-, and arachno- configurations, as predicted by (*) Wade's rules. This
element's oxide and silica are found in a ubiquitous glass used in virtually all laboratory glassware. Many
compounds involving this element have electron-deficient three-center two-electron bonds because this
element, which is present in Pyrex, can only hold on to six valence electrons. For 10 points, name this
lightest metalloid, the fifth element.
ANSWER: boron [or B]
The Corey-Bakshi-Shibata catalyst contains a toluene molecule bound to one of these atoms, and the
reducing agent L-selectride contains lithium and this element. Acids of this element react with alkyl halides
in the Suzuki coupling, and complexes of this element adopt closo, nido, and arachno configurations
according to Wade's rules. 9-BBN contains this element, and another reaction that uses it was developed
by Herbert Brown and is a counterpart to oxymercuration that violates Markovnikov's rule. FTP, name this
electron deficient element whose sodium hydride is a common reducing agent, with atomic number 5 and
symbol B.
ANSWER: Boron
A reaction between acids of this element and an aryl or vinyl halide is used to produce conjugated styrenes
and biphenyls, and a compound containing this element is generally solvated in a compound with a five
membered ring with an oxygen heteroatom. This element is bonded to a cyanide group, three hydrogen
atoms and a sodium atom in a weak reducing agent. One compound that contains this element adds
hydroxyl groups to less substituted carbon of an alkene, and hydrogen peroxide is used to displace this
element in the second step of that reaction. A trihydride of this element is solvated in THF and used in a
reaction to yield an anti-Markovnikov product. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 5.
ANSWER: boron
In 2004, Juhasz et al. described the protonation of fullerene with superacids made from this element,
calling that superacid the strongest known Lewis-free Bronsted acid. A base is required to activate
an organo acid made of this element in a reaction with a halide that is an improvement over the tinbased method of the Stille coupling. Reducing Schiff bases into stable secondary amines can be done
via a compound made from hydrogen, sodium, this element, and sometimes cyanide. Acids containing
this element are used in the palladium-catalyzed (*) Suzuki coupling. Hydrogen peroxide attacks this
element in another reaction that creates alcohols from alkenes and begins with this element adding to the
alkene in an anti-Markovnikov fashion. For 10 points, name this element with important hydrides that has
atomic number 5.
ANSWER: boron [prompt on B; prompt on stuff like carboborane or boric acid]
In the Corey-Bakshi-Shibata catalyst, an atom of it is attached to a pyrrole ring, an oxygen atom, and a
toluene group. This element's acids are combined with amines and ketones in the Petasis reaction and in
combining alkyl halides through the Suzuki coupling. Complexes containing it are called sido or arachno
according to Wade's rules, and a more famous reaction using it is sometimes named for Herbert Brown.
Mined from the ore Uletite, its silicate was once used in making hard glass for manufacturing laboratory
equipment. For 10 points, name this element that participates in an anti-markonikov addition reaction to
alkenes, with atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: Boron [accept B until mentioned]
The Suzuki reaction couples acids of this element with halides, while in the Czochralski process of crystal
growth it is often added as an impurity to molten silicon. With carbon and nitrogen it forms a hard
substance called heterodiamond, while in its filament form, it is used in composites for the fuselage of
aircraft. Its trihalide compounds are Lewis acids in solution, a consequence of their electron deficiency,
with only six electrons in this element's valence shell. Major sources of this element's ore are located in
Turkey and the Mojave Desert. FTP, name this element with atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: Boron
The mineral form of an acid of this element is known as sassolite. The reaction of halides with acids of
this element, catalyzed by palladium, is known as a Suzuki coupling. The hydride of this element contains
"banana bonds" and compounds of this element, such as its trifluoride, frequently violate the octet rule. For
10 points, identify this fifth element on the periodic table, symbolized B.
ANSWER: boron
Neodymium magnets are alloys of neodymium, iron, and this element, acids of which are used in the Suzuki
reaction. Herbert Brown won the Nobel Prize in chemistry for devising an organic reaction that uses a
compound of this element to produce alcohols in an anti-Markovnikov fashion, and chemical electroplating
of nickel commonly uses this element's sodium hydride as a reducing agent. Discovered by Sir Humphry
Davy, its bonding can be determined by Wade's rules, and it notably violates the octet rule. For ten points,
name this element found in Pyrex glassware with atomic number 5 and elemental symbol B.
ANSWER: Boron (prompt on "B")
After diamond, the two hardest known compounds are the nitride and carbide of this element. In a
p-type semiconductor, silicon is usually doped with this element. Its trihalides are trigonal
planar-shaped Lewis acids, as this element is electron (*) deficient in many of its compounds. It is the
first element to contain an electron in a p orbital, and, located at the top of the "staircase," it is also the
lightest metalloid. For 10 points, name this element which has atomic number 5 and symbol B.
ANSWER: boron [or B before it is read]
A scientist with this surname developed one of the first reference materials, for trace elements, by
grinding 100 kilograms of kale into powder; that scientist also came up with the idea of using foam
booms to contain oil spills. In the atmospheric sciences, a scientist with this surname names a
quantity that is the ratio of the sensible heat flux to the latent heat flux. A dude with this surname
compiled the stupendous lectures The Evolution of the Igneous Rocks, which revolutionized petrology.
A construct named for that dude is equivalent in form to the (*) Goldich stability series. That dude
recognized the importance of fractional crystallization in magma and showed how progressively more silicic
rocks are formed with decreasing temperature. For 10 points, identify this surname held by a Canadian
geologist who names a reaction series.
ANSWER: Bowen [or Norman Levi Bowen; or Ira Sprague Bowen; or Humphrey Bowen]
In one part of it, polymerization increases as the temperature drops. The structures of elements the it
describes include island, chain, double chain, and sheet structures. Other elements on it react to form an
albitic phase as temperature decreases. At low temperatures, it predicts that elements that fail to react with
excess liquid approach eutectic crystallization. It progresses from peridotite to graphite and is divided into a
continuous series, consisting of feldspar, and a discontinuous series that transitions from olivine to quartz.
For 10 points, the order of crystallization of silicate minerals from cooling magma can be depicted using
what progression?
ANSWER: Bowen's reaction series
S. S. Goldich used this construct to predict rates of dissolution, and in one section of this, materials
consistently transition to an albitic phase. This construct predicts the unusually high melting point of
peridot, and the trend on one side is for calcium-rich plagioclase to become sodium-rich. The higher silicate
content of granite compared to basalt is explained by this diagram, which links pyroxene to amphibole to
biotite before ending with the felsic rocks and quartz. Containing continuous and discontinuous branches,
name this Y-shaped diagram that shows how the mineral composition of magma changes as it cools.
ANSWER: Bowen's reaction series
Many of this scientist's early theories were inspired by Johann van Helmont, and after returning home to
England from his schooling in Geneva he led an anti-Aristotelian group called the Invisible College. He
described many color reagents and acid-alkali indicators in his Experimental History of Colours. His most
famous contribution occurred when his student improved Guericke's model of an idea of Torricelli,
allowing him to discover a law described in his The Sceptical Chymist. FTP, what teacher of Hooke used an
air pump to create a namesake law relating pressure and volume?
ANSWER: Robert Boyle
This man argued that matter was composed of corpuscles rather than Aristotle's four elements in
The Skeptical Chemist. Based on his experiments, this man embraced the notion of a (+) vacuum and
rejected that of an all-pervading ether. He used an air pump invented by his assistant to discover that
sound did not travel in a vacuum and that flames required air. That air pump was designed by
Robert Hooke and was J-shaped. This scientist also used that air pump to measure the (*) pressure of
a gas at a constant temperature when different amounts of mercury were added. For 10 points, name this
scientist whose namesake law states that pressure varies inversely with volume.
ANSWER: Robert Boyle
This man used ammonia as a test for the presence of copper in compounds, and developed a thirtyitem
test for identifying compounds in mineral water. He improved on Otto von Guernicke's vacuum
pump and published experiments with it in The Spring and Weight of the Air, but may be better known
for The Skeptical Chemist and a gas law developed after experiments conducted by his assistant, Robert
Hooke. For 10 points, name this English scientist best known for a gas law which states that as the
pressure of a gas increases, its volume decreases.
ANSWER: Robert Boyle
This man discussed the physical nature of air in his first published scientific work, New Experiments
Physico-Mechanical, Touching the Spring of the Air and Its Effects. This man is best known for
formulating a law whose deviations above the inversion temperature are modeled by the JouleThomson effect. That law is sometimes referred to as (*) Mariotte's law, after a man who independently
discovered it. He hypothesized that matter was made of atoms in motion in his magnum opus, The Sceptical
Chymist. For ten points, name this man whose namesake law states that the pressure and volume for a given
mass of gas are inversely proportional.
ANSWER: Robert Boyle
The results of this scientist's most famous experiments were published in New Experiments
Physico-Mechanicall, Touching the Spring of the Air and Its Effects. In order to conduct those experiments,
this scientist, inspired by Otto von Guericke (GEH-rih-kuh), had his assistant, Robert Hooke, design a more
advanced air pump. The publication of his The Scepitcal Chymist is considered to have founded modern
chemistry. For 10 points, identify this scientist who formulated the inverse relationship between the
pressure and volume of a gas.
ANSWER: Robert Boyle
The methodological dispute between this man and Thomas Hobbes is described in Leviathan and the
Air-Pump. He suggested air was not a homogenous substance in Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of
the Air. This man explained his atomic theory of matter and proposed there were more than four elements
in The Sceptical Chymist ("Skeptical Chemist"). For 10 points, name this early proponent of the scientific
method, the namesake of a gas law stating that pressure and volume are inversely proportional.
ANSWER: Robert Boyle
The temperature named for this person is the value at which the van der Waals equation is closest to
the ideal gas law. This person discovered his namesake law by pouring different amounts of mercury
into U-shaped containers and by using an air pump he developed with Robert Hooke. This person's
law gives the relationship between two quantities whose product equals two-thirds of total kinetic
energy. His law, which concerns the two values that are modified in the van der Waals equation, can
be combined with Charles's law to form the ideal gas law. Name this Irish chemist who stated that
pressure and volume vary inversely.
ANSWER: Robert Boyle
This man created a circle of intellectuals called the Invisible College, and he published a method of
analyzing ores via sinking them in water in his Medicina Hydrostatica. One construct developed by this
man is most accurate when the second virial coefficient is zero. With Robert Hooke, this man developed
the pneumatical engine to conduct a series of experiments on the spring of the air. For 10 points, name this
chemist whose law states that pressure and volume are inversely proportional.
ANSWER: Robert Boyle
When an exponent often added to generalize it is equal to gamma, the specific heat ratio, it
describes any isentropic process. Deviations from this law that occur above the inversion temperature are
modeled by the Joule-Thomson effect, and its constant of proportionality has units of energy and is given by
the product of particle number, temperature, and the ideal gas constant. Increasingly accurate for low gases
as altitude increases, for 10 points, identify the gas law which describes an inverse relationship between
pressure and volume at fixed temperatures.
ANSWER: Boyle's law
This law exhibits deviations that can be modeled by the Joule-Thomson effect above a point at which
expansion causes heating, the inversion temperature. Other deviations in it occur at high-pressure, lowtemperature situations and can be described using the compressibility factor. This law, also named for
Mariotte, has a namesake constant of proportionality that is the product of temperature, particle
number, and the ideal gas constant. For 10 points, name this gas law that states that at constant
temperature, pressure and volume of a gas are inversely proportional.
ANSWER: Boyle's law [or Boyle-Mariotte law before Mariotte is mentioned]
This statement was used by Newton and Laplace to derive the speed of sound, and a McLeod gauge
applies this law, although it was first discovered using a manometer designed by Robert Hooke.
Daniel Bernoulli used Newton's laws of motion to derive this statement, which he explained using his
kinetic theory of gases. Also named for (*) Mariotte, this law explains why ears pop at high altitudes, and
is featured in the combined gas law with Charles's law and Gay-Lussac's law. For ten points, identify this
gas law that states for constant temperature, pressure and volume are inversely related.
ANSWER: Boyle-Mariotte law (prompt on ideal gas law)
An associate of its namesake built a bone digester and conceived the idea of a piston and cylinder
engine. That man, Denis Papin, inspired Thomas Savery to build a machine implementing this principle.
It was also discovered by Edme Mariotte, and deviations from it are expressed as the compressibility
factor. It is used to calculate changes in the two quantities it relates, which are related to temperature in
Gay-Lussac and Charles' Laws. For 10 points, name this law stating that pressure and volume of a gas in
a closed system are inversely proportional.
ANSWER: Boyle's Law
Laplace replaced this law with the adiabatic law to give a correct derivation of the speed of sound. This law
was discovered during its namesake's attempts to disprove Franciscus Linus's funicular hypothesis. This law
was later derived by taking the limit as the ratio of molecular diameter to average intermolecular distance
goes to zero. One experiment verifying this law involves taking a J-shaped piece of glass tubing, sealing air
at one end, and placing varying amounts of mercury into the tube. The air pump designed to verify this law
was designed by Robert Hooke, an assistant to its namesake. For 10 points, name this gas law which states
that for an ideal gas at a fixed temperature, pressure and volume are inversely proportional, a law named
after an Irish chemist.
ANSWER: Boyle-Mariotte Law
The Carnot cycle is calculated using this law or modifications of it, and Daniel Bernoulli derived it
with Newton's laws of motion. Independently discovered by Edme Mariotte, credit for it is most often
given to the author of (*) The Skeptical Chymist. It is part of the combined gas law, with Gay-Lussac's
Law and Charles' Law. For 10 points, identify this law that states that at a fixed temperature, pressure and
volume of a gas are inversely proportional.
ANSWER: Boyle's Law [or Boyle-Mariotte Law; or Mariotte's Law before "Mariotte" is mentioned]
An example of this law in action occurs during breathing when the diaphragm raises and lowers. This
law is sometimes named for a Frenchman who also discovered it, named Edme Mariotte. This law can be
described by the equation "pV equals k," with k representing a constant for a given temperature. For 10
points, name this gas law that states pressure is inversely related to volume, and which forms the combined
gas law with Charles's law and Gay-Lussac's law.
ANSWER: Boyle's law [or Boyle-Mariotte law]
This law, independently discovered by Edme Mariotte, is named after the name that discouraged the
idea of the four classical elements in his work The Sceptical Chemist. That formulator discovered it by
varying the amounts of mercury in a J shaped tube that was sealed at one end; the difference in the
heights of the mercury was equal to the difference in pressure. It is caused by the fact that decreasing
the size of a container will lead to an increased number of collisions and it combines with Charles's law
and Gay Lussac's law in the combined gas law. For 10 points, name this law which states that a constant
temperature, the volume of an ideal gas is inversely proportional to its pressure.
ANSWER: Boyle's law
An atom of this element is placed on the 8th position of cyclic AMP to create a PDE inhibitor. An
atom of this element replaces a carboxylate group in the Hunsdiecker reaction, and it is added to the
alpha carbon of a carboxylic acid in the Hell-Volhard-Zelinsky reaction. NBS is used to add this
element to alkanes via a radical. In mass spectrometry, compounds with this element have a pair of
peaks of equal intensity separated by 2 mass units, because this element has (*) two isotopes of
approximately equal abundance. When ionically bonded to potassium, it forms a powerful sedative, and its
compound with silver is used in photographic film. For 10 points, name this element, a halogen which is a
red-brown liquid at room temperature, which atomic number 35 and symbol Br.
ANSWER: Bromine [accept Br before mentioned]
Since this element has two isotopes that differ by a mass of two in almost equal abundance, compounds
containing it have a double peak in their mass spectra. Its anion is bound to ethidium in a common dye used
in gel electrophoresis. Methylated and ethylated versions of this element were formerly used as pesticides.
Its diatomic form predominates at STP, and exists as a red-brown liquid at room temperature. For 10
points, name this element, a halogen with atomic number 35 and symbol Br.
ANSWER: Bromine [or Br before mention, accept bromide]
They are functionalized via 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition in the Prato reaction, and their 6, 6 bonds can
react as dienes or dienophiles in the Diels-Alder reaction. They are resistant to hydrogenation, but
they can be oxidized via osmium tetraoxide and a 2002 study showed that they can organically
synthesized, but they are usually generated by a current between graphite electrodes. They can form
inclusion compounds known as endohedral and according to Euler's theorem their smallest type
needs twelve pentagons to form a closed and stable molecule. (*) Nanotubes are a cylindrical version of,
FTP, these carbon allotropes which often take the shape of soccer balls.
ANSWER: buckminsterfullerenes or buckyballs (accept buckytubes or carbon nanotubes during the first sentence)
A group of these chemicals that are zwitterionic and thus a single chemical are named for Good. A
logarithmic equation governing these chemicals is not useful in dilute solutions and is named for Henderson
and Hasselbalch. A common one of these is a pairing of acetic acid and acetate ions, an example of pairing
an acid with its conjugate base. FTP, name these chemical compounds found in blood for homeostasis that
resist changes in hydrogen ion concentration to maintain pH.
ANSWER: Buffers
In blood, this type of system occurs naturally through the presence of bicarbonate, which can form
carbonic acid. The effect of this type of solution can be seen using an equation that takes the log of the
concentration of the acid divided by the concentration of the conjugate base. That equation for finding the
pH of one of these solutions is the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. For 10 points, name this type of
solution that can be used to keep a relatively constant pH.
ANSWER: buffers
Twelve compounds useful in the creation of these systems were identified by Norman Good. Biologists
often use the phosphate saline type of these systems or tris (trys). They are most effective when their
components are equal in concentration, as predicted by the Henderson-Hasselbalch (Hend-ur-son
Hassle-back) equation. They are composed of a weak acid and its conjugate base, which interconvert in
accordance with Le Chatelier's (shah-tuh-lee-AIRS) principle. For 10 points, name these chemical systems
that resist changes in pH.
ANSWER: buffers [or buffer solutions or buffering agents]
Examples of these compounds include bicine (BY-seen), tricine (TRY-seen), and tris. The mixture of
carbonic acid and carbonate acts as one of the agents in the blood. They are most effective when the pH of
the solution is close to the pKa (P-K-A) of its components. The pH of these agents is often calculated using
the Henderson-Hasselbach equation and they typically consist of a weak acid and its conjugate base. For 10
points, name these substances that resist a change in pH.
ANSWER: buffer solution [or buffering solution; or buffer agent]
A common type of one of these systems is the TAE or TBE type, which both use the molecule Tris along
with EDTA. Twelve reagent mixtures selected by Good for use in biological research are these types of
systems. In the Pinnick reaction, the phosphate type of this system is used, which is a mix of salts of
dihydrogenphosphate and hydrogen phosphate. These systems generally form at the half-equilibrium point
of a titration. The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation can be used to calculate the pH of one of these systems.
For 10 points, name these systems in chemistry which can absorb significant quantities of acid or base
without large changes in pH.
ANSWER: buffers
Calculations involving these mixtures often involve rearranging an equation with negative log of the acid
dissociation constant, or pKa [pee-kay-ay]. That Henderson-Hasselbalch equation can then be used to find
the strongest point for these mixtures, which is often when pKa is equal to pH. These solutions are made by
mixing together a weak base and its conjugate acid or a weak acid and its conjugate base. For 10 points,
name this type of solution, that used in chemistry when adding acids or bases to a solution to make sure
there is only a small change in pH.
ANSWER: buffer solutions
Carmody and Britton-Robinson name two "universal" solutions of this type. These solutions can be
prepared by solving an equation that multiplies 2.303 to a term containing K-sub-w and K-sub-a; that
equation used for these solutions is the Henderson-Hasselbalch (HOSS-el-BOCK) equation. These solutions
usually consist of a weak acid or base and its conjugate acid or base, such as the carbonic acid-bicarbonate
(bi-CAR-bo-NATE) system in the blood. For 10 points, name these solutions that keep pH consistent.
ANSWER: buffers
Norman Good described ten criteria for choosing biological examples of these substances, such as
high solubility and not forming complexes with other components of a solution. By adding pKa [P-KA] to the log of the (*) base concentration over the acid concentration in the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation, one can find the pH of one of these solutions. For 10 points, name these solutions made of a weak
acid and its conjugate base, exemplified by bicarbonate in the blood, which resist changes in pH.
ANSWER: buffer(s)
Norman Good once selected 12 of these types of compounds, including Tricine and Bicine, for use in
biochemistry. They take advantage of the common-ion effect to maximize their namesake capacity, which
can be calculated by an equation first used to describe carbonic acid as one of these compounds by
Lawrence Henderson, which was later re-expressed in logarithmic terms by Hasselbalch. Due to Le
Chatelier's Principle, their pH changes very little when a small amount of strong acid or base is added to
them. For 10 points, identify these solutions made up of a weak acid and its conjugate base, or vice versa.
ANSWER: buffer solutions
One common variety of these compounds contains a central carbon atom bonded to one amino group and
three methanol groups. That compound is called Tris. Blood acts as one through a mixture of carbonic acid
and carbonate ions. These compounds, whose effectiveness can be measured using the
Henderson-Hasselbach equation, typically consist of a weak acid and its conjugate base. For 10 points,
name these compounds that resist a change in pH.
ANSWER: buffer solutions [or buffer agents]
Cacodylate is often used as one to avoid the precipitation of calcium phosphate while monopotassium
phosphate is often used as one in food products. Universal ones can be made with Borax and potassium
acetate and are often used on glass electrodes. When choosing one it is critical to know at what range it
works best, known as their namesake "capacity". Essentially using the common ion effect to obtain its
effectiveness, a common one is a 1,3 diol known as Tris. Found in a bicarbonate form in human blood, their
effectiveness can be measured by using the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. FTP, identify these solutions
that are often composed of a weak acid and its conjugate base and resist changes in pH.
ANSWER: Buffer solutions/agents
Substances with this property are secreted into the blood to rectify abnormalities detected in the CSF by the
central chemoreceptors. Histidine residues on hemoglobin also perform this function in the blood via their
imidazole sidechains. Tris is a component of these substances often used in electrophoresis. Intracellularly,
H2PO4- and HPO42- ions are the primary substances with this function. The bicarbonate system in the
blood is an example of one of these, whose range of effectiveness can be calculated with the Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation. They may be made of a weak acid and its conjugate base. For 10 points, name these
substances which resist changes in pH.
ANSWER: buffers [accept word forms such as buffering; accept buffer systems; accept buffer solutions]
In cell fluids, this role is performed by a combination of dihydrogen phosphate and hydrogen phosphate.
Another example of this is the combination of carbonic acid and bicarbonate in blood plasma, the
breakdown of which leads to alkalosis [al-kuh-LOE-sis]. Another solution that commonly plays this role is
acetic [uh-SEE-tik] acid with sodium acetate [AS-uh-tate]. These are often used to make enzymes effective
in solution. Name these solutions, often the combination of an acid and a salt, which help solutions maintain
a relatively constant pH level.
ANSWER: buffer (prompt on "pH maintenance" or related answers)
The measurement of fluoride in water is more precise when a total ionic strength adjustment type of this
solution is used. A list of these substances that are blocked by membranes, do not react with most salts, are
highly soluble, and have a pH [p h] near 7 is named for Norman Good. Sometimes exemplified by the
combination of carbonic acid and bicarbonate in blood plasma, these solutions often contain a weak acid or
base with its conjugate. Name these solutions that resist changes to the pH of a solution.
ANSWER: buffer (solution) (or buffering agent)
Twelve of these substances collected by Norman Good are used extensively in
biological research and were selected based on nine criteria including stability and ease of preparation.
Although not a base, an example of these substances is a molecule containing 3 hydroxyl and 1 amino
groups, Tris, and it is commonly used to stabilize nucleotides. Their capacity is greatest when the
components are in a one-to-one ratio as determined by the (*) Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, and their
namesake region precedes the equivalence point in a titration curve. For ten points, name these mixtures of
acids and their conjugate bases that resist changes in pH.
ANSWER: buffers
A barbital variety of these is commonly used to separate serum proteins, while a Tris variety of these can be
used as a primary standard in analytical chemistry. Criteria for these were put forth by Norman Good, who
also compiled a list of twelve of them. Their effectiveness can be determined by their namesake capacity,
and carbonic acid and bicarbonate in human blood are an example of one of these solutions. Their pH can
be calculated by using pKa in the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. For 10 points, name this type of
solution which can resist changes in pH.
ANSWER: Buffer Solutions
MES, TAE, and tris are examples of these commonly used in biology. In 1966 Dr. Norman Good compiled
a list of twelve of these with desirable characteristics such as enzymatic and hydrolytic stability, low cell
membrane permeability, and a pKa, or acid dissociation constant, between 6 and 8. In 1908, an equation
governing the effect of carbonic acid as one of these was written by Lawrence Joseph Henderson. That
equation was later rewritten in logarithmic form by Hasselbalch. Their primary function depends on the
common ion effect because each contains a weak base and its conjugate acid, or vice versa. For 10 points,
name this kind of solution which resists change in pH.
ANSWER: buffer solution
Phosphate plays this role in a solution which is used to disengage clumped cells and maintain
osmolarity; that solution is sometimes avoided because it can lead to the precipitation of calcium. A
parameter that describes these compounds is calculated as the ratio of dn to the change in
cologarithm of ionic concentration. When studying proteins, (*) Tricine and MES are used as these
compounds. In an equation that describes these compounds, the log of the ratio of the ionic form to the
undissociated form is added to the pKa to yield pH. These compounds are composed of weak conjugate
acid/base pairs. For 10 points, name these compounds that resist drastic changes in pH.
ANSWER: buffers
The LB and SB variety of these compounds are used in electrophoresis. MOPS and TRIS are two
useful ones. Norman Good proposed 12 chemicals of this sort and he selected criteria for them, such
as membrane impermeability and an acid dissociation constant near 7. Their pH is most simply found
by using the Henderson-Hasselbach equation and they consist of a weak acid and their conjugate base, or
vice versa. For ten points, name this type solution that resists changes in pH.'
ANSWER: buffers
One type of these solutions developed by Prideaux and Ward contained phosphoric,
phenylacetic [FEE-nul-uh-SEE-tik], and boric acids, and a similar example of the universal
type of this solution was developed by Britton and Robinson. One of these solutions, often
a saline [SAY-leen] with phosphate or acetate [AA-suh-tate], is used in high-performance liquid
chromatography. These solutions often use at least two solutes, and their impact can be predicted by
the Henderson-Hasselbalch [HAS-ul-bahlk] equation. Name these solutions typically containing a
weak acid or weak base that are used to maintain constant alkalinity, meaning they resist changes to
pH [P-H] levels.
ANSWER: buffers [or buffering solutions or buffering agents]
One of the eight criteria for one type of them is that they should not absorb light at wavelengths
longer than 230 nanometers. That type also ensures stable complexes involving them and cationic
ligands, and is named for Norman Good. MKP reduces nitrogen loss and is a commonly used namesake
"agent". The value that they most influence can be calculated using the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation, which requires knowledge of their pKa. For 10 points, name these solutions which minimize
pH change.
ANSWER: buffer solutions
The process at which superheated water in geysers is ejected upwards was first theorized and
tested by this scientist. This chemist discovered that ferric oxide can be used to remove arsenic
from water. This man's laboratory assistant at the University of Heidelberg, Peter Desaga, was
the one who actually built the working prototype of most famous invention. An award for
advances in analytical spectroscopy is named for Gustav Kirchhoff and this man, with whom he
discovered cesium and rubidium. This scientist also names a piece of lab equipment that has an
adjustable valves at the top for air flow and at the bottom for gas flow. For 10 points, name this
19th century German chemist who invented a device used to create an open flame, his namesake
"burner."
ANSWER: Robert Bunsen
He helped determine the chemical composition of cacodyl, which was some of the first work in
organometallic chemistry. This man invented a battery with a carbon electrode which Henri Moisson used
to isolate fluorine; that is his namesake cell. Sulfur dioxide, iodine, and water react to form sulfuric acid and
hydrogen iodide in his namesake reaction. Henry Roscoe and this man worked together to study the
formation of hydrogen chloride from its constituent gases. He discovered the elements caesium and
rubidium with Gustav Kirchoff . Name this man, whose namesake "burner" is a mainstay in chemistry
classes.
ANSWER: Robert Bunsen
In the 1830s, this chemist discovered that hydrated iron oxide could serve as an antidote for arsenic
poisoning. During a trip to Iceland, he proposed a theory on the mechanics of how geysers function. Along
with Gustav Kirchhoff, this man invented the spectroscope and used it to discover the elements cesium and
rubidium. For 10 points, identify this German chemist who did not invent, but did popularize, a laboratory
heating device known as his namesake burner.
ANSWER: Robert Bunsen
Lesser known accomplishments of this inventor of the zinc-carbon electric cell and the ice calorimeter
include proposing the first accepted theory of geyser action and developing iron oxide hydrate as an
antidote for arsenic poisoning. This teacher of Lothar Meyer and Dmitri Mendeleev worked on developing
the first spectroscopic methods with Gustav Kirchoff, which led to their co-discovery of cesium and
rubidium. A known entity named for this chemist was actually developed by Peter Desaga. For 10 points,
name this German chemist best known for improving his namesake burner.
ANSWER: Robert Bunsen
This chemist's namesake cell consists of a zinc anode in sulfuric acid and a carbon cathode in nitric or
chromic acid. With Henry Roscoe, he studied the formation of hydrogen chloride and the use of electrolysis
to isolate pure metals. With Gustav Kirchhoff, he analyzed the emission spectra of heated elements, leading
to the discovery of cesium and rubidium. For those projects, he worked with his assistant Peter Desaga
(deh-SAH-guh) to develop a laboratory device for heating samples. For 10 points, name this German
chemist, who lends his name to a gas burner.
ANSWER: Robert Bunsen
This man invented a device that was modified by Tirrill. Along with his colleague Gustav Kirchoff, this
scientist performed spectroscopic experiments that discovered rubidium and cesium. Along with Peter
Desaga, this scientist invented a piece of laboratory equipment that is used to perform flame tests. For 10
points, name this German scientist hwo invented a commonly used laboratory burner.
ANSWER: Robert Wilhelm Eberhard Bunsen
Variations of this device include the Teclu type and Merker-Fisher variety, and Michael Faraday had also
attempted to invent a device that would be like this one. First constructed at the University of Heidelberg by
Peter Desaga, an assistant to the man for whom this device is named, it receives airflow due to the Venturi
effect. Named for the scientist who discovered caesium alongside Gustav Kirchoff, for 10 points name this
lab device named after a German chemist and consists of the barrel, gas intake tube, gas flow tube, and
collar and is used to produce a clean adjustable flame.
ANSWER: Bunsen burner
During Dewar isomerization, anthracene proceeds toward a nonradiative funnel by this type of
folding motion. The Prilezhaev reaction proceeds through this type of mechanism. A two point Fast
Fourier (*) Transform can be illustrated as one of these. The spatio-temporal mapping of the toroidal
magnetic field component of the Sun can generate these types of diagrams for sunspots. For 10 points,
aposematic coloration results in Mullerian mimicry between the monarch and viceroy type of what animals
found in Lepidoptera?
ANSWER: butterfly mechanism
The first biological role for this element was discovered in 2000 when it was found in the carbonic
anhydrase enzyme of marine diatoms, and the first spectroscopic definition of the meter was based on this
element's red line. Along with bismuth, lead, and tin, this element comprises the alloy known as Wood's
metal, and it is the only element in Group 12 that can form complex ions with chloride. The only ore
mineral with this element is greenockite. This metal is the basis for the highest-grade yellow pigment, but its
ingestion causes itai-itai disease, which includes severe osteoporosis. Combined with nickel in most
rechargeable batteries, identify this transition metal with atomic number 48 and symbol Cd.
ANSWER: cadmium [accept Cd before the end]
Closely linked to the compounds theobromine and theophylline, this odorless compound occurs naturally as
a white powder or as silky needles, and is characterized by a bitter taste. Scientifically called tri-methylxanthine, it is very soluble in hot water, and upon cooling deposits crystals of its namesake monohydrate. A
member of the alkaloid group, its toxic oral dosage is 10 grams, and more than half of American adults
consume over 3% of that dose daily. A cardiac stimulant and a mild diuretic having formula C8H10N4O2,
FTP name this substance commonly found in guarana, mate, tea, and coffee.
ANSWER: caffeine
This compound's discoverer later isolated aniline from coal tar. It can be synthesized from uracil by Nmethylation, nitration, and cyclization, proceeding through a theophylline intermediate, though a more
common lab synthesis uses dimethylurea and malonic acid. Its achiral structure features fused five- and sixmembered nitrogen-containing rings, a purine structure similar to that of adenosine. Synthesized in plants
from xanthosine, it is extracted into supercritical carbon dioxide. It differs by a methyl group from the
related compound theobromine, which is found in chocolate. For 10 points, name this stimulant found in tea
and coffee.
ANSWER: caffeine
This mineral gives its name to a "compensation depth" in the ocean, and one of its polymorphs occurs in
gallstones and converts to it in the presence of water at low temperatures, vaterite. A hexahydrate of the
same molecular formula form towers in fjords, ikaite, while a clear version of this mineral is called Iceland
spar. A mineral often called its poor cousin may twin repeatedly to form "flowers of iron;" that mineral is
aragonite. For 10 points, name this famously birefringent mineral of Mohs hardness three, the most common
type of calcium carbonate on earth.
ANSWER: Calcite [prompt on calcium carbonate before mentioned]
Ikaite is an extremely unstable hydrated form of this mineral. Vaterite and aragonite are slightly
more stable polymorphs of this mineral, a transparent variety of which is known as Iceland spar.
This
mineral is naturally birefringent, and magnesium added to this mineral's formula results in (*)
dolomite. The primary component of limestone, marble, and marine shells is, for 10 points, what carbonate
mineral with a value of three on the Mohs hardness scale and formula CaCO3?
ANSWER: calcite [or calcium carbonate before "carbonate"]
Crystals are trigonal-rhombohedral and usually white or colorless. It is harder than gypsum but softer than
fluorite, placing it as number 3 on Moh's scale. Stalagmites and stalactites are often made from this, a
common component of limestone and the primary mineral in metamorphic marble. Shells of many marine
organisms are made from this carbonate mineral. FTP, name this most stable polymorph of calcium
carbonate.
ANSWER: calcite (prompt on calcium carbonate early)
The formation and dissolution of this mineral created the Snowy River Cave in New Mexico. One variety of
it known as Iceland Spar is used in optics, and Rasmus Bartholin discovered birefringence in one of its
single crystals in 1669. It is found in metamorphic marble as well as in most stalagmites and stalactites.
Along with aragonite and vaterite, it is a polymorph of calcium carbonate. For 10 points, name this mineral,
the main constituent of sedimentary rocks such as limestone and of marine organisms' shells.
ANSWER: Calcite
Along with sodium carbonate, this substance's chloride is a byproduct of the Solvay Process. This
element can be made through the reaction of its oxide with aluminum. This element's oxide is known as
quicklime. Lime is a heated form of this element's carbonate. Marble is a crystalline form of this element's
carbonate that is also known as limestone. This element has an electron configuration of [Ar]4s2 ("Argon
Four S Two"). For 10 points, name this alkaline earth metal with symbol Ca.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca before it is read]
Low serum levels of this substance's ionic form stimulates increased PTH secretion. This element's
most stable carbonate mineral polymorph converts to aragonite (uh-RAG-un-aight) at high temperatures,
exhibits birefringence ("BUY"-ree-"fringe"-ens), and is a 3 on the Mohs scale. Cartilage turns to bone in a
process named for this metal, whose absorption requires vitamin D. For 10 points, identify this alkaline
earth metal found in limestone, with symbol Ca.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca before it is read]
This element is in anorthite [AA-nor-thite] but not albite [AL-bite]; those forms of plagioclase [PLAY-jeeoh-klase] differ based on how much of this element they contain as compared to sodium. Its hydrous sulfate
is alabaster, also known as gypsum [JIP-sum], which is used to make plaster. Its carbonate is often used as
an antacid or in chalk, and its oxide is called quicklime. Name this element, used by the body for muscle
contraction and the prevention of osteoporosis [os-tee-oh-po-ROH-sis], which is in dairy products.
ANSWER: calcium or Ca
An ionized form of this element produces solar absorption lines called the H and K lines. Its hydroxide is
used as a flocculant and is part of a solution which is used to test for the presence of carbon dioxide. Its
chloride is a byproduct of the Solvay process. Ions of this element are stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum
and play a role in muscle contraction. Its oxide is sometimes known as quicklime. For 10 points, name this
element which is a component of bones and teeth.
ANSWER: calcium
Along with sodium carbonate, this element's chloride is produced by the Solvay process. Ions of this
element, important in muscle contraction, are found in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Its electron
configuration is argon four S two. A crystalline form of its carbonate is called limestone. For 10 points,
name this alkaline earth metal found it milk that is an important structural element in teeth and bones.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca]
This element's inosilicate is known as wollastonite. This element is NOT present in forsterite and
fayalite, but it is present in kirschsteinite and monticellite. The first plagioclase to crystallize
according to Bowen's reaction series is entirely a feldspar of this element; this element gets replaced
with sodium as you move farther away from anorthite. This cation is found in Iceland spar and (*)
aragonite. Along with magnesium, this cation is the most common source of water hardness. A mineral
composed of this element, phosphate, and hydroxide is known as hydroxyapatite. This element's sulfate
dihydrate is the mineral gypsum. For 10 points, the mineral with a Mohs hardness of 3 takes it name from
what element found in teeth and bone?
ANSWER: calcium [prompt on "Ca"]
The least common naturally occurring isotope of potassium decays to argon or this element.
Feldspars rich in sodium or this element, instead of potassium, are classified as plagioclase. One
crystal form of this element's carbonate is aragonite, which is found in a sedimentary rock whose
solubility at weak acidities leads to the formation of (*) karst topography. That sedimentary rock is
limestone. For 10 points, identify this element found in hydroxyapatite, an important mineral constituent of
bones, and that has symbol Ca.
ANSWER: calcium [or Ca until it is read]
Ikaite is a crystal of this compund. This has begun to replace kaolin in the manufacture of glossy paper in
North America. It is the primary component in travertine and Tums antacid, while vaterite and aragonite are
both completely composed of this compound. Eggshells, as well as the shells of marine organisms and
snails, are made of this substance. Combating acidification of soil and water with this compound is known
as "liming". Identify this chemical compound, sometimes called calcite, with formula CaCO3.
ANSWER: calcium carbonate [accept CaCO3 before mentioned]
Literally meaning "cooking-pot," this term was coined by German geologist Leopold von Buch to
describe features associated with ring dykes, such as the ones at Yellowstone and Krakatoa. These (*)
volcanic features are generally formed as a result of explosive eruptions, in which the rapid emptying of the
magma chamber causes the volcano to collapse inward. For ten points, identify this cauldron-like volcanic
feature, often confused with a crater.
ANSWER: Caldera
One type of this device used in the CMS experiments of the Large Hadron Collider consists of a barrel with
two endcaps and utilizes lead tungstate to determine particle energies. Another of these devices, named for
Joly, consists of two spherical containers in a steam bath and measures how much condensation appears on
each container. Modern-day ones use thermocouples or thermistors as their measuring devices. Yet another
type of this device that maintains constant volume to eliminate PV work determines a sample's heat of
combustion. That is known as the "bomb" type. For 10 points, name this instrument that can measure the
heat given off in a reaction or the specific heat of a sample.
ANSWER: calorimeter [accept calorimetry]
Particle physicists use devices with this name to measure particles in detectors, often using lead [led] to stop
particles and then measuring the amount of energy released. The isothermal titration [tie-TRAY-shun] type
of this device uses a reference and sample cell, each of which is a good thermal conductor. A common type
of this device uses stainless steel inside a constant volume container that is a good thermal insulator; that is
the bomb type. Name this device used to measure heat capacity and the heat of chemical reactions
ANSWER: (bomb) calorimeter
One variety of this device was developed by Lavoisier and Laplace to demonstrate that respiration was
chemical in nature. They are often operated at constant volume or pressure; the "bomb" variety is an
example of the former, while a pair of styrofoam cups can be an approximation to the latter. For 10 points,
name this type of device used to measure changes in heat of a reaction.
ANSWER: calorimeter [or isothermal titration calorimeter before it is read]
One type of this process is referred to as "differential scanning [this]" and is commonly used to find a
substance's glass transition temperature. A more common type of this technique operates at constant volume
with high-pressure pure oxygen and is ignited with an electric charge, which is reflected by a change in the
surrounding water. In addition to the "bomb" form, simple ones typically contain a liquid in a good
insulator, which is heated by a burning substance. FTP, identify this process of measuring the heat content
of a given mass of fuel.
ANSWER: calorimetry (accept word forms such as calorimeter)
The value for the glass transition in polymers is often found using a differential scanning variety
of these devices. A sample is placed in a combustion crucible and ignited in the most common type of
these devices found in labs, the bomb. A simple example of these devices can be created by nesting
two (*) styrofoam cups and capping them with a lid that has two holes, for a thermometer and stirrer. For
10 points, identify these devices that are used to measure the heat of a reaction and heat capacity of
materials.
ANSWER: calorimeters
NASA has sent an X-ray absorption version of this device into space, and H. L. Callendar improved the
traditional type by adding a platinum-resistance gauge. Robert Bunsen developed the standard ice version of
this device, though Laplace (luh-PLAHS) and Lavoisier had used a more primitive one in 1780 to show that
respiration is a form of combustion. The Atwater-Rosa type of this device proved that the human body
obeys the conservation of energy, while an adiabatic jacket surrounds the most common type, containing an
ignition unit, oxygen supply, and steel bomb. Easily made in the lab from a thermometer and two coffee
cups, identify this device that uses change in temperature to measure the heat associated with a reaction.
ANSWER: calorimeter
A 2008 paper from Ishihara et al found that anhydrous phenylglyoxal is a solution to the problem of low
reactivity of an asymmetric variety of this reaction with alcohols. A similar reaction to this one involves
using aluminum alkoxide catalysts and instead of its normal products produces ethers and is named after
Tischenko and Claisen. The first step of this process involves the nucleophilic addition of a base to a
carbonyl group to give an alkoxide which is then deprotonated to create a namesake di-anion intermediate.
One version of this reaction utilizes formaldehyde as a reducing agent to yield a higher output of an alcohol
product and is known as the crossed version. Producing both an alcohol and a carboxylic acid, FTP, identify
this disproportionation reaction discovered in 1853 by an Italian chemist.
ANSWER: Canizzarro reaction
Weakly coordinated versions of these species can be synthesized by adding an alkyl halide to silver
hexaflourophosphate, and the first one imaged by NMR was created by reacting hexamethylbenzene
with with methyl chloride and aluminum chloride. During monoterpene biosynthesis these species are
created with the loss of pyrophosphate at several intermediate steps. An unusually stable one of these
species has a norbornane backbone, and the structure of stable ones was deduced by George Olah
using superacids. They undergo the superfast Wagner-Merwein Rearrangement. They have an
approximately sp2 structure and are stabilized by hyperconjugation, which explains why tertiary ones are
more stable than primary ones. Appearing as intermediates in SN1 and E1 reactions, for 10 points, name
these reactive intermediates, a carbon atom with a positive charge.
ANSWER: Carbocation
One material composed of this element was first isolated by Geim and Novoselov, who used the "Scotch
tape" method. Dolomite belongs to a class of minerals named for this element. An isotope of this element
that has a half-life of about five thousand seven hundred and thirty years is commonly used in radioactive
dating. One allotrope of this element is used in pencils, while another is a ten on the Mohs Hardness scale.
For 10 points, name this element that constitutes graphite and diamonds.
ANSWER: carbon [or C]
A planar substance composed entirely of this element was the subject of Andre Geim and Konstantin
Novoselov's 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics. Another compound consisting of sixty atoms of this element
forms a soccer-ball like truncated icosahedrons and was named for American architect R. Buckminster
Fuller. In addition to those allotropes of this element, it is found in a covalent network in the hardest natural
compound. For 10 points, name this element which occurs naturally in graphite and diamond, as well as all
organic compounds.
ANSWER: carbon [or C]
This element is commonly used to isolate silicon from silica. This element also makes up lampblack, which
is used in tires and dry cell batteries. An acid named for this element is blamed for ocean acidification. This
element is added to iron to make pig iron, and some remains when the pig iron is purified into steel.
Because one allotrope of this element is shaped like a geodesic dome, it is called buckminsterfullerene. This
is also the primary element in coal. Name this element found in graphite, diamonds, and organic
compounds.
ANSWER: carbon [prompt on C]
The opacity of one material made up of this element is equal to pi times the fine structure constant, or
roughly 2.3%. That material was first isolated by Geim and Novoselov by using the "Scotch tape" method.
One molecule made from this element is made up of twelve pentagons and twenty hexagons. An isotope of
this element with eight neutrons has a half-life of around 5,730 years. Buckyballs are made of this element;
another substance made up of this element has a value of 10 on the Mohs hardness scale, while another is
used as pencil lead. For 10 points, name this element used in radioactive dating that makes up graphite and
diamonds.
ANSWER: Carbon [or C]
Because it produces this element as a byproduct, the Bosch reaction is not yet a feasible method for
producing water. Reaction pathways that produce intermediates containing ionized atoms of this element
will be favored if the intermediate is of a lower energy, according to Markovnikov's rule. Under Molecular
Orbital theory, this element's diatomic form has a bond order of 2 even though none of its p orbital valence
electrons are in a sigma orbital. Aldehydes and ketones contain this element double-bonded to an oxygen
atom. One form of this element consists of a 60-atom ball and is called buckminsterfullerene. For 10 points,
name this element found in all organic compounds.
ANSWER: carbon [or C]
Atoms of this element can be arranged into nanotubes that have high levels of conductivity. This is
the first element to have two electrons in a p orbital. This is the most common element to form long
chain like structures via covalent bonds. The study of compounds that contain this element is known
as (*) organic chemistry. Fullerenes are composed only of this element. The most abundant stable isotope of
this element is the basis for atomic mass. An isotope of this element with a half-life of about six thousand
years is commonly used for radioactive dating. For 10 points, name this element whose allotropes include
diamond and graphite.
ANSWER: carbon
A linear polyatomic ion containing three atoms of this element has a negative four charge and is only
found bonded with lithium and magnesium. In stars, three alpha particles undergo a fusion reaction
to produce this element in the triple alpha process, and it is used with nitrogen and oxygen to convert
hydrogen to (*) helium. The 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded for work with one-atom thick
planar sheets of this element. Sixty atoms of this element are bonded together in a buckminsterfullerene, and
its other allotropes include diamonds and graphite. For 10 points, identify this element, symbolized C,
which is present in all organic compounds.
ANSWER: Carbon [accept C before mentioned]
One mineral that contains this element was named for Kathleen Lonsdale and discovered in some Diablo
Canyon meteorites. The ninety degree rotation of a bond containing atoms of it is known as the StoneWales defect and occurs in its allotrope that comes in single-walled and multi-walled types. One isotope of
this element is used as the standard for atomic weight, and another with a half-life of 5,730 years is used in
radiometric dating. Allotropes of this element also include graphite and diamond. For 10 points, name this
element found in all known forms of life.
ANSWER: carbon
An acetylide contains two molecules of this element that with nitrogen composes the cyanide ion. It
composes the entirety of fullerenes such as bucky balls and it is used in the standard definition of a mole.
5730 years is the half life of its 14 isotope and it is the largest element present in alkynes where it is found
triple bonded to itself. Its atomic number is 6 and its forms include diamond and graphite. For 10 points,
this is what element with symbol C.
ANSWER: carbon
A rotation in the atoms of this element causes the Stone-Wales defect. Geim and Novoselov used adhesive
tape to isolate an atom-thick material composed of this element. Another material composed of this element
can be divided into single-walled and multi-walled types. Curl, Kroto, and Smalley discovered a molecule
that is composed of this element and resembles a geodesic dome. One allotrope of this element is the
hardest substance known, and another is used in pencils. For 10 points, name this element whose allotropes
include diamond and graphite.
ANSWER: carbon
An excited state of this element named for Hoyle is important in stellar nucleosynthesis. One molecule
created from this element isomerises to create Stone-Wales defects, and that form is purified using a
mixture of DBU and trimethylbenzene. One form of this element is produced when cosmic rays bombard
nitrogen. Chemical shifts between 0 and 200 ppm are observed in a type of NMR that observes a form of
this element. Kroto, Smalley, and Curl found an unusual form of this element which forms a ball-like
structure. A sample of one type of this element is used in the precise definition of Avogadro's number,
while another form of this element has a half-life of 5700 years. For 10 points, name this element whose
isotope with a mass number of 14 is used in radioactive dating.
ANSWER: carbon
One allotrope of this element is often described as a truncated icosahedron, and was discovered by Curl,
Kroto, and Smalley. Another allotrope of this element consists of a single layer of hexagonal rings. In
addition to the buckminsterfullerene and graphene, this element also forms a three-dimensional lattice that
is
among the hardest structures known to man, and a soft conductor used in pencil lead. For 10 points, name
this element whose allotropes include diamond and graphite.
ANSWER: carbon [or C]
Multiwalled structures formed from this element have a tensile strength up to 63 gigapascals. A related
structure made out of 60 atoms of this element has an icosehedral shape and can be used to trap atoms of
other elements. In addition to forming fullerenes, this element makes up graphite and diamonds. Organic
compounds contain this element of which there is one atom in the gas that people breath out. For 10 points,
name this element with atomic number six and symbol C.
ANSWER: carbon
One allotrope of this element with a hexagonal lattice structure is synthesized in the Acheson
process. Another allotrope of this element with a face-centered cubic lattice structure is found in
kimberlite and lamproite and is a 10 on the (*) Mohs scale of hardness. Plant and animal respiration and
the decay of dead organisms are components of this element's namesake "cycle." For 10 points, name this
element whose allotropes include graphite and diamond.
ANSWER: carbon
One porous form of this element is useful for adsorption reactions and in water filtration; that form is known
as its "activated" variety. One isotope of this element has a half-life of 5730 years; that mass 14 isotope is
used for radiometric dating. Organic compounds must contain this element, which forms an allotrope that is
the hardest substance in the world. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 6 that can be found
in coal, graphite, and diamond.
ANSWER: carbon
Lonsdaleite is composed of this element, a form of which is visualized using the de Heer abacus to have
armchair, zigzag, and chiral conformations. When another form of this element is dissolved in toluene, it
forms a bright purple color. Geim and Novoselov isolated an allotrope of this element which has extremely
high electron motility and consists of a single layer of atoms. A truncated icosahedron consisting of
hexagons and pentagons formed from this element was named for architect R. Buckminster Fuller. For 10
points, name this element whose allotropes include buckyballs, nanotubes, graphite, and diamonds.
ANSWER: carbon [or C]
The M+1 peak in mass spectrometry is due to an isotope of this element. An isotope of this element is used
in a form of NMR which uses DEPT to determine chemical shifts between 0 and 220 ppm. Three alpha
particles are transformed into an isotope of this element in the triple-alpha process. The mass of one dalton
is defined based on the mass of one of this element's isotopes. The natural logarithm of two, divided by
5700, gives the rate constant in inverse-years for a process undergone by an isotope of this element. A mole
is defined as twelve grams of its most common isotope. For 10 points, name this element used in radioactive
dating, which normally has six neutrons.
ANSWER: carbon [or C]
The compound acetylide (ah-SEE-tih-lide) is a diatomic form of this element with a negative charge. In
stars, this element is formed by a series of nuclear fusion reactions called the triple alpha process. The
Calvin cycle uses the enzyme RuBisCO (roo-BIHS-koh) as a means of fixating this element. It forms the
entirety of fullerenes along with related compounds like buckyballs and nanotubes. For 10 points, name this
element whose allotropes include graphite and diamond, the study of which forms the basis of organic
chemistry.
ANSWER: carbon
This compound is added to phenol to generate salicylic acid in the Kolbe-Schmitt reaction. This
compound's vibrational modes include an IR-inactive symmetric stretch, an asymmetric stretch
around 2350 inverse centimeters, and two bending modes around 670 inverse centimeters, a total of
four vibrational modes. As a supercritical fluid solvent, this compound is renowned for its use in
decaffeination via extraction. The reaction of this compound and water forms the centerpiece of the
primary (*) buffer system in human blood. Reaction of this compound with a Grignard reagent followed by
acidic workup produces a carboxylic acid. The presence of this compound in the atmosphere is the primary
cause of ocean acidification. For 10 points, name this compound that is produced alongside water in a
complete combustion reaction.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide or CO2
This molecule is produced in the process of calcining limestone, and in the Bosch reaction, it is reacted with
hydrogen to form water. The Keeling curve is used to measure the concentration of this molecule, and the
supercritical form of this molecule has been used as a green solvent for decaffeination. Along with ethanol,
this molecule is produced in the fermentation of glucose by yeast, and in water, this molecule is in
equilibrium with carbonic acid. In the Calvin cycle, this molecule is catalyzed by RuBisCO, and this
molecule is found as a gas in fizzy soft drinks. For 10 points, name this molecule with chemical formula
CO2.
ANSWER: Carbon Dioxide [accept CO2 until read]
This compound is the focus of the Vostok (VAW-stawk) record. The concentration of this compound is
graphed on the Keeling curve. This compound is suddenly released from the bottom of a lake in limnic
eruptions. The uptake of this compound by the ocean can prevent calcification due to a process known as
ocean acidification. Variants of the Kraft process are one proposed method of sequestering this compound.
For 10 points, name this greenhouse gas whose concentration shows a very strong correspondence with
temperature.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide
The Kolbe-Schmitt process reacts sodium phenolate with this compound to produce salicylic acid.
Both the Bosch and Sabatier processes use hydrogen and this compound to produce water, with the
latter also producing methane. When a Grignard reagent is reacted with this compound, a carboxylic
acid is formed, while reaction with ammonia leads to (*) urea production. As a high-pressure liquid, it is
used as an organic solvent, such as in decaffeination, but it is most often found as a gaseous by-product of
reactions. Produced in the fermentation of sugars to alcohol and the decomposition of lime, for 10 points,
name this gas that is produced after combusting organic compounds.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide or CO2
This compound's IR spectrum lacks an expected stretch at 1530 inverse centimeters but does show
asymmetric stretching at 2345 inverse centimeters. Klaus Lackner published a landmark paper about
handling this compound, and dolomite and quartz are formed when this compound first reacts with water
and then with magnesium silicate. One form of this compound is used to extract long chain hydrocarbons in
a technique that is being preferred over steam distillation. When it is is held above its critical temperature
and pressure, this compound is often used as a solvent in green chemistry. This molecule is converted into
two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate when it is acted upon by Rubisco during the Calvin cycle. For 10
points, name this gas with formula CO2.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [accept CO2 until mentioned]
This compound is absorbed in the chilled ammonia process, and efforts are now starting to store this in
porous sandstone that has been drained of its oil. Commonly used in its supercritical fluid state to
decaffeinate coffee, its more common gaseous state is a good atmosphere for welding. When it is important
not to leave a chemical residue, this compound is used in fire extinguishers. This compound is combined
with water to create glucose and oxygen during photosynthesis, and it is used to make the fizz in soft drinks.
Name this triatomic molecule whose increased concentration in the atmosphere is believed to be a major
cause of global warming.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [or CO2]
This substance is combined with organomagnesium bromides to give carboxylic acids. As a supercritical
fluid, it is used to decrease the viscosity of crude oil. As well as ethanol, this substance is produced in the
fermentation of glucose by yeast. Its structure is predicted to be linear due to its two double bonds. In the
presence of water, this triatomic substance is in equilibrium with carbonic acid. For 10 points, name this
gas,
symbolized CO2 (see oh two).
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [accept CO2 before it is read]
Gas metal arc welding typically uses this gas to shielding the welding from contaminants. The Bohr
effect describes how the concentration of this substance in the blood limits hemoglobin's ability to bind to
oxygen. Like water, it is produced in all complete combustion reactions of hydrocarbons. Dry ice is
composed of the solid form of this compound. For 10 points, name this triatomic greenhouse gas produced
in cellular respiration, which has chemical formula CO2.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [or CO2 until it is read]
The transformation of calcite into quicklime gives off this molecule. The symmetric and
antisymmetric stretching modes of this molecule show up at 1480 and 2565 wavenumbers,
respectively. This molecule, which belongs to the D sub infinity h symmetry group, is used as a
solvent in decaffeination reactions. The Keeling Curve gives the concentration of this molecule in the
atmosphere. Removing this molecule from histidine gives histamine, and adding it to a solution of
Grignard reagents is a common carboxylation method. It's a linear molecule with two double bonds, and it
is the primary cause of global warming. For 10 points, name this gaseous molecule which is present in soft
drinks and which humans exchange for oxygen.
ANSWER: Carbon Dioxide or CO2
The concentration of this compound is plotted on the Keeling curve. This compound was released
from Lake Nyos after a limnic eruption in 1986. This compound drives ocean acidification because it
reversibly forms carbonic acid when dissolved in water. This compound is fixed by the (*) Calvin
cycle and, after water vapor, it is the second most abundant greenhouse gas in the Earth's atmosphere. For
10 points, identify this compound with chemical formula CO2.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [or CO2 until it is read]
The Keeling Curve plots the atmospheric concentration of this compound. Its supercritical form is
used to decaffeinate coffee beans, and it reacts with ammonia to form urea or with water to form
carbonic acid. This linear molecule with two (*) double bonds is produced alongside water in combustion
reactions. At room temperature this gas sublimes from its solid form, called dry ice. For 10 points, name
this greenhouse gas exhaled by humans, with formula CO2.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide (accept CO2 before the end; do not accept "carbon monoxide")
Population inversion is achieved in diatomic nitrogen and in this molecule in order to produce infrared
light in the most commonly used form of laser industrially. In the body, a certain "anhydrase" enzyme
converts this molecule into an anion. The bond angles of this molecule are 180 degrees, thus making it the
textbook example of a molecule with linear geometry. At atmospheric pressure, it does not form a liquid,
instead undergoing deposition from its normal form into dry ice. For 10 points, identify this greenhouse gas
with formula CO2.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [accept CO2 prior to mention]
The Keeling curve measures the concentration of this compound, whose supercritical form is being
explored as a solvent for green chemistry. The Haldane effect describes a situation when hemoglobin
has an increased affinity for this gas. Exploding lakes like Lake Kivu emit this gas, first discovered by
Joseph Priestley when he heated limestone to produce a substance originally known as "fixed air".
This gas is also produced along with water in a complete combustion reaction. Photosynthesis removes this
gas from the atmosphere while its solid form, which undergoes sublimation, is called dry ice. For 10 points,
name this triatomic molecule with formula CO2.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide (accept CO2 before mentioned)
Limnic eruptions result in the release of this compound from lakes. This compound is a side product in the
synthesis of lime. This compound was first discovered when Joseph Priestley created what he called "fixed
air." It is the substrate for carbonic anhydrase, which converts this compound to carbonic acid. Dry ice is
the solid form of this compound, and it is the product of combustion reactions and cellular respiration. For
10 points, name this gaseous compound with formula CO2.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [accept CO2 until the end of the question]
Chemical scrubbers and the oxides of calcium and magnesium are commonly used to remove this
molecule. Along with hydrogen gas, this molecule is the end-product of the water-gas shift reaction.
Antisymmetric stretching and bending are the only two observed modes of vibration in this molecule,
released during the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. This molecule dissolves in the
bloodstream, resulting in a proton and a (*) bicarbonate ion, via carbonic anhydrase. The primary culprit
of ocean acidification, this molecule is the simplest to have a linear arrangement about a central atom. For
10 points, name this triatomic molecule, a greenhouse gas produced alongside water in combustion
reactions.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [or CO2]
Too much of this compound in the body is called hypercapnia [high-per-CAP-nee-uh] and can be caused by
SARS [sahrs]. Its supercritical fluid is being used to replace tetrachloroethylene [teh-trah-klor-oh-ETH-uhleen] for dry cleaning and to soak coffee beans to remove their caffeine. This is a byproduct of the
production of ethanol by yeast, and ocean acidification [uh-SID-uh-fi-KAY-shun] is being caused by its
rising levels. This is combined with water to form carbohydrates during photosynthesis. Name this
compound found in dry ice and carbonated soft drinks.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide or CO2
A type of laser based on this compound is used in scalpels and produces an infrared beam of principal
wavelength 9.4 micrometers. The concentration of this compound in the atmosphere is given by the
Keeling curve. Carbonic anhydrase combines it and water to form carbonic acid in the bloodstream, and
this molecule is the most important greenhouse gas. Dry ice is its solid form. For 10 points, name this
molecule which humans exchange with oxygen via respiration.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide [or CO2]
In 1986, large amounts of this compound erupted from the bottom of Lake Nyos. In the Sabatier
process, this molecule reacts with hydrogen to produce methane and water. The abundance of this
molecule in the atmosphere is 388 ppm, making it the second most common (*) greenhouse gas after
water vapor. For ten points, identify this chemical compound, a byproduct of cellular respiration, consisting
of a carbon atom covalently bonded to two oxygen atoms.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide (accept CO2 before "oxygen", afterward, prompt)
The IR spectrum of this substance has a degenerate bending mode at 546 inverse centimeters, an
inactive symmetric stretch, and an antisymmetric stretch mode at 2345 inverse centimeters. This
substance is produced as a byproduct of quicklime production, and algae bioreactors are designed
primarily to absorb this substance. Above 300 degrees Kelvin and 7.4 megapascals, this substance
forms a supercritical fluid that is used for decaffeination reactions and extraction of hydrocarbons
from soil. The Keeling Curve gives the levels of this substance in the atmosphere, and adding this
substance to a solution of Grignard reagents is a quick method of synthesizing carboxylates. For 10 points,
name this substance, the primary greenhouse gas produced alongside water in combustion reactions.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide or CO2
This molecule is the "gas" in the water-gas shift reaction used to produce hydrogen gas, and it can be
produced by the reaction of concentrated sulfuric acid and formic acid. This molecule is reacted with
impure nickel in the Mond process, and blast furnaces reduce hematite by reacting it with this molecule. It
is produced by insufficient combustion of hydrocarbons, which is why running an automobile in an
enclosed area can lead to high air concentrations of it. For 10 points, name this heteronuclear diatomic
molecule that has over two hundred times as high a binding affinity for hemoglobin as oxygen does.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide [or CO; do not accept or prompt on "carbon dioxide"]
In 2013, bismuth was used by Joel Rosenthal as a catalyst to create this compound. This compound is
combined with water vapor in the water-gas shift reaction, and this is mixed with hydrogen to make
synthetic fuel in the Fischer-Tropsch [tropsch] process. This compound combines with hemoglobin to create
carboxyhemoglobin [kahr-BOK-see-hee-moe-gloe-bin], which causes oxygen deprivation. Name this
compound that can be created by incomplete combustion so that there is not enough oxygen to create
carbon dioxide.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide or CO
Phosgene is synthesized by chlorinating this compound, which can be used to synthesize
benzaldehydes from benzene in the Gatterman-Koch reaction. Like nitric oxide, it is a gaseous
neurotransmitter in the body, formed from the breakdown of hemoglobin. It is isoelectronic with the
cyanide ion, as its stablest form has a triple bond. As a ligand, it is called a (*) carbonyl. This gas is
formed from combustion of hydrocarbons in the absence of excess oxygen. It binds to hemoglobin to limit
oxygen transport in the body, which is why it is so toxic. For ten points, name this gas with formula CO.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide (or CO before mention)
This compound and hydrochloric acid are reacted with aromatic hydrocarbons in the Gattermann-Koch
reaction. The two main components of syngas are hydrogen and this compound, which also reacts with
chlorine to produce phosgene. This compound reacts with water in the water gas shift reaction, and this
compound reacts with nickel in the Mond process. The effect of hydrogen ions and this compound on the
binding ability of hemoglobin for oxygen is known as the Bohr effect. In a catalytic converter, platinum
metal catalyzes the conversion of this toxic compound into a non-toxic compound. For 10 points, name this
gas present in automobile exhaust that has formula CO.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide [or CO before mentioned; do NOT accept "carbon dioxide"]
Alkenes and this compound react in the Koch-Haaf reaction, while this compound and hydrochloric
acid are combined in standard Friedel-Crafts conditions in the Gatterman-Koch process. With
chlorine gas, this molecule can form the compound phosgene, and alongside hydrogen gas, this
molecule catalyzes hydroformylation reactions. Water gas is created when this compound is mixed with
hydrogen gas, and nickel is extracted and purified with this compound in the Mond process. A potent
cytochrome C oxidase inhibitor is, for ten points, this product formed alongside soot and water vapour in
incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons with formula CO.
ANSWER: Carbon Monoxide [or CO early]
This compound can by synthesized by passing the products of reacting sulfuric acid with oxalic acid
through potassium hydroxide. Impure nickel is reacted with an excess of this compound in the second
and third steps of the Mond process. Aromatic aldehydes are synthesized by reacting the aromatic
compound with hydrochloric acid and this compound in the Gatterman-Koch reaction. The binding
of this molecule to (*) hemoglobin drastically increases the protein's affinity for oxygen, as a result of
which insufficient oxygen is deposited at tissues. Along with nitrogen derivatives, this compound is reduced
by catalytic converters. For 10 points, name this compound in which a carbon atom is triple bonded to an
oxygen atom, with formula CO.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide [accept CO until mentioned]
This neutral covalent compound, with its large ligand-field splitting parameter, is located at the
greatest end of the spectrochemical series. A methyl group migrates to this compound in a critical
step of the Monsanto process and other hydroformylations. This compound has a nearly zero bond
dipole moment because its formal charges are oriented opposite the bond polarity. Water gas
contains this compound and (*) hydrogen, and in the water gas shift reaction, this compound reacts with
water. It is isoelectronic to cyanide. Incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons gives water and this
compound. The affinity of this compound for hemoglobin is much stronger than oxygen's affinity, which is
why this gas is so toxic. For 10 points, name this compound with formula CO.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide [or CO before it is read]
Nickel is purified in the Mond process by reacting it with this compound. This compound can react with
chlorine gas to form phosgene (FOSS-jeen), which was once used as a chemical weapon. A mixture of it
with hydrogen gas is called syngas. It is referred to as carbonyl (CAR-bo-neel) when it functions as a
ligand. In the body, hemoglobin (HEE-mo-glo-bin) is about two hundred times more likely to bond to this
compound than oxygen. It is formed in incomplete but not complete combustion reactions. For 10 points,
name this odorless, colorless gas that is often called "the silent killer," which has the formula CO.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide [or CO before mentioned]
Cytochrome P450 is so named because its complex with this compound has an absorption spectra
maxima at 450 nanometers. Along with HCL, it is used in a Friedel-Crafts like reaction called the
Gattermann-Koch reaction. Four molecules of this combine with nickel in an intermediate step of the Mond
process. Along with hydrogen it is found in syngas and is consumed in the Fischer Tropsch process. When
this compound binds hemoglobin, it increases hemoglobin's affinity for already bound oxygen, thus
preventing oxygen from being distributed to the body. For 10 points, name this compound with one carbon
and one oxygen atom.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide
The Parchment model and the Russian doll model describe the multi-walled variety of these
substances. This substance entirely consists of sp2-bonded atoms, and slicing a molecule of this
substance lengthwise would produce graphene. Applications of this substance include (*) space
elevators and combat jackets due to its incredibly high tensile strength. For 10 points, name this allotrope of
carbon, a type of fullerene that has a cylindrical shape.
ANSWER: carbon nanotubes [prompt on fullerene; do not accept "buckminsterfullerene"]
There are electrical arc discharge and the so called "HiPco" varieties of producing these objects.
When a small spherical like structured is fused on to their surface, they form a structure called a
bud. These structures have recently been proposed as a possible material for space elevators and
when unrolled they form the individual sheets of graphite. There are single and multi-walled varieties of
these objects, sometimes referred to as buckytubes since they possess the same composition as buckminster
fullerenes. For 10 points, name this allotrope of carbon with a cylindrical structure.
ANSWER: carbon nanotubes
These substances were recently used to create a radio that received signals via their vibration. Processes for
their production include chemical vapor deposition and laser ablation. These objects were first created in
the fifties, but little notice was taken until 1991. Their toxicity is being questioned before these substances
are developed for biological applications like the delivery of drugs. Theirsp2 bonding gives them a higher
tensile strength than diamond, and they can be single- or mutiply-walled. Consisting of rolled-up graphene,
identify these allotropes of carbon that are cylindrical.
ANSWER: carbon nanotubes [accept CNTs; accept carbon nanotubules]
This substance was used in a tracer in a 1950 paper whose authors included JA Bassham and his graduate
advisor. One source of it is the Clinton pile where ammonium nitrate is irradiated and the product is shipped
through barium carbonate. The existence of this substance was demonstrated by Ruben and Kamen, while
Libby helped develop a notable application. It is produced in the atmosphere when cosmic ray neutrons
collide with nitrogen. The resulting heavy product is then incorporated into organic compounds thanks to
photosynthesis. It has a half-life of 5,730. For 10 points, name this isotope of carbon used in radiometric
dating that has two more neutron than carbon-12.
ANSWER: Carbon 14 [or C14]
The Ol Doinyo Lengai volcano is unusual because its lava contains large amounts of this class of minerals.
The rare earth ores at Bayan Obo are mostly found in rocks made from one member of this group. One
classification for rocks with these minerals uses the presence or absence of micrite. That classification is
known as the Folk system and contrasts with the Dunham system. One of its large subgroups is noted for
having rhombohedral structures. Dolomite is a magnesium containing member of this group which is found
along with another member in Karst topography. They contain their namesake anion. For 10 points, name
this group of minerals whose calcium type is found in calcite and limestone.
ANSWER: carbonate minerals
During this period, the collision of the continent Gondwona with the American-European landmass
resulted in the Alleghanian orogeny which formed the Appalachian Mountains. The amniotic egg
evolved in small synapsid reptiles during this period and large insects such as the dragonfly-like
Meganeura came into existence. Atmospheric oxygen is thought to have increased to about 30% due the
sheer abundance of plants in this period which can be subdivided into Mississippian and Pennsylvanian
epochs. Lasting from about 359 to 299 million years ago, FTP, identify this penultimate period of the
Paleozoic era, so named for the abundant coal beds that date to this time.
ANSWER: Carboniferous Period
Whereas the Meerwein-Ponndorf-Verley reduction produces an alcohol, Oppenauer oxidation results in a
compound with this functional group. Dithianes and dithiolanes can be used to protect this functional group,
which can be then be restored with the Corey-Seebach reaction, although a more common approach to
protection uses alcohols and an acid catalyst to create hemiacetals and acetals. An oxygen atom can be
added adjacent to this functional group via Baeyer-Villiger oxidation, resulting in esters and lactones. For
10 points, name this functional group found in carboxylic acids, ketones, and aldehydes, a carbon atom
double bonded to an oxygen atom.
ANSWER: carbonyl
In the Clemmensen and Wolff-Kishner reductions, compounds containing this functional group bonded to
only carbon and hydrogen atoms can be reduced to alkanes. As long as the substituents on the carbon atom
in this ubiquitous functional group are not both hydrogen atoms, the compounds containing this functional
group can exist in the enol-form through tautomerization. For ten points, name this functional group,
characteristic of aldehydes and ketones, as well as amides, esters, carboxylic acids, and acyl chlorides,
containing a Carbon atom double-bonded to an Oxygen atom.
ANSWER: carbonyl
The Flippin-Lodge and Burgi-Dunitz angles describe nucleophilic attack on this functional group,
which can be protected by converting to a 1,3-dioxylane in a reaction with ethylene glycol. Imines can
be synthesized from amines and these groups, and an alkene can be turned into two of these groups
through ozonolysis. Grignard reagents attack these groups to form (*) alcohols, and phosphonium
ylides convert them to alkenes in the Wittig reaction. PCC and chromic acid reagents yield these groups
through oxidation of primary or secondary alcohols. Two of these groups are bound to the same oxygen
atom in anhydrides. For 10 points, name this functional group found in amides, esters, ketones, and
aldehydes, characterized by a carbon-oxygen double bond.
ANSWER: carbonyl group [accept aldehyde or ketone]
A compound containing four of this functional group is the basis of all chemical indicators used in
calcium imaging; that molecule is BAPTA. A class of nucleophilic aromatic substitution involves the
reaction of a para-substituted nitro compound with potassium cyanide to place this functional group
at the meta position. That is the Von Richter reaction. These compounds, along with the
corresponding haloform, are produced when methyl ketones react with halogens in the presence of a
strong base. The proton NMR spectra for these compounds often show a singlet at (*) delta 10-12.
These compounds undergo a highly reversible reaction with alcohols in both acidic and basic conditions to
form esters; that reaction is Fischer esterification. For ten points, name this functional group written COOH.
ANSWER: carboxylic acid [accept carboxylate]
A derivative of these functional groups that contains a halogen, such as sebacoyl chloride, is reacted
with hexamethylene diamine to create nylon. Treatment of this functional group with bromine and
phosphorus trichloride alpha-brominates them in the Hell-Volhard-Zelinsky reaction. After the
dianion attacks the aldehyde in the Cannizzaro reaction, it is converted to the anion of this functional
group. Chromic acid oxidizes primary alcohols to them as part of the Jones reagent. Acyl hypohalites,
which are easily converted to alkyl halides, are commonly formed by reacting the silver salt of these
functional groups with a halogen. An acid-catalyzed reaction between this functional group and an alcohol
yields an ester in a reaction named for Emil Fischer. For 10 points, name this functional group that is a
combination of a carbonyl and hydroxyl group and is named for its ability to protonate moieties.
ANSWER: carboxylic acids [prompt on acids]
In the von Richter reaction, aromatic nitro compounds turn into these when treated with a potassium
cyanide catalyst, and the Schmidt reaction converts them to amines. In infrared spectroscopy they exhibit a
sharp band associated with the carbon-oxygen vibrating bond somewhere between 1680 and 1725 inverse
centimeters. Hydrogen bonding can occur between two of these types of molecules to produce a dimer,
which increases the dispersion forces and results in a higher boiling point. Treating one of these compounds
with an alcohol in the presence of a dehydrating agent yields an ester in a process known as esterification.
For 10 points name these kinds of acids, the simplest of which are formic acid and acetic acid.
ANSWER: carboxylic acids
In Barbier-Wieland degradation, the alpha-methylene group in an aliphatic one of these compounds
is removed in a sequence of reaction steps. Mellitic acid has 6 of the functional groups which give this
class of compounds its name. The hydroxyl group on these may be replaced with a chlorine atom
using thionyl chloride to give acyl chlorides. The (*)Schmidt reaction converts these compounds to
amines, and they can be reduced to alcohols by hydrogenation or using stoichiometric hydride reducing
agents such as lithium aluminium hydride.These compounds are proton donors under Bronsted-Lowry
theory, and salts and esters of this family of compounds are called carboxylates. Acetic acid is found in, for
10 points, this organic family of compounds which is characterized by a carboxyl group, COOH.
ANSWER: Carboxylic acids
The Jocic reaction produces these compounds from trichloromethylcarbinols. The Schmidt reaction
produces primary amines from these compounds and hydrogen azide, and the Jones Reaction makes them
from primary alcohols. The Fischer esterification creates esters from alcohols and these compounds in
acidic solution, and their namesake functional group forms the C terminal end of proteins. For 10 points,
identify these compounds which have a -COOH functional group.
ANSWER: carboxylic acids
In the production of aspirin, this group is added to the para position of a benzene ring, resulting in a
product of acetylsalicylic acid. They are generally classified as Lewis acids which are easily
deprotonated, resulting in a resonance-stabilized system. Utilization of spectroscopic techniques in
the observation of polysaccharides has led researchers to identify them as key components in the
formation of proteins. For 10 points, name this chemical group contained by acetic acid with chemical
formula COOH, more often associated with being the key constituents of amino acids.
ANSWER: Carboxylic acids [or carboxyl group]
The adipic type of these compounds, used industrially as a monomer of nylon, contains its functional group
on each side, and the propionic type is used to prevent the growth of mold. One of these formed by the
oxidation of acetaldehyde is called "glacial" when undiluted. The oxalic one is the simplest, and
triglycerides are formed from glycerol and three of these with long hydrocarbon tails. Formic acid consists
of their functional group bonded to a hydrogen atom, and they include amino acids. Acetic acid is, for 10
points, one of these common organic acids with a COOH group.
ANSWER: carboxylic acids [prompt on organic acids]
The Arndt-Eistert synthesis uses a silver catalyst and diazomethane to produce homologated versions
of these compounds, which are synthesized from primary nitroalkanes undergoing the Nef reaction.
The Cannizaro reaction uses base catalysis to produce alcohols and these compounds from aldehydes,
and Jones' oxidation of a primary (*) alcohol will produce them, rather than the ketone produced from a
secondary alcohol. Reflux of these and alcohols is a key step in Fischer esterification, and reacting a
Grignard reagent with carbon dioxide produces them. FTP, identify these acids characterized by the
presence of a functional group with a carbon bonded to a hydroxyl and double bonded to an oxygen, a
carboxyl group.
ANSWER: carboxylic acids
One molecule in this class is the oxidation product of the Cannizzaro reaction, and a polymer of this type of
molecule is found in disposable diapers because it can adsorb many times its weight in water. The simplest
molecule in this class was first extracted from ants, and esters are often made by reacting one of these
molecules with an alcohol. An important tri- example of one of these acids is found in citrus fruits, while
the odor of vinegar is due to the acetic type. Name this class of organic molecules containing a carbonyl
(CAHR-buh-nil) bonded to a hydroxyl (hai-DROKsil) group, often expressed as R C O O H.
ANSWER: carboxylic acid [or carboxyl group; prompt on acid]
This functional group reacts with ketones and nitrilium ions in reactions that finish in Mumm
rearrangements, like the Passerini and Ugi reactions, which are useful in combinatorial chemistry. Aromatic
aldehydes disproportionate to form alcohols and these in the Dakin reaction. They can be reacted with
silver, bromine, and carbon tetrachloride to form bromides in the Hunsdiecker reaction, or they can be
alpha-brominated by the Hell-Volhard-Zelinsky reaction. They can also be produced by reacting ketones
with mCPBA in the Baeyer-Villiger reaction, or adding potassium permanganate to primary alcohols.
Anhydrides and acyl halides can be derived from, for 10 points, name what class of compounds with
formula RCOOH?
ANSWER: carboxylic acid
These compounds are halogenated in the Hell-Volhard-Zelinsky reaction, and are produced, along with
alcohols, in the Cannizzaro reaction. Two examples found in coconuts are the caprylic and lauric ones, and
citric acid is a "tri" one of these. Ones with an unbranched aliphatic tail are called fatty acids, and amino
acids are a type of these compounds. The two-carbon one, found in vinegar, is acetic acid, while the
simplest one is formic acid. For 10 points, name these organic compounds containing their namesake
functional group with formula COOH.
ANSWER: carboxylic acids [prompt on organic acid]
These compounds are produced by the peroxide cleavage of an Evans oxazolidinone. These
compounds are alpha-brominated in the presence of catalytic phosphorus tribromide in the HellVolhard-Zelinsky reaction, and like alcohols, they can be chlorinated by addition of thionyl chloride.
These compounds can be produced from primary alcohols with the addition of sulfuric acid and (*)
chromium trioxide. The second simplest example of these compounds has a water-free "glacial" form. One
of these compounds is reacted with an alcohol in the Fischer esterification. For 10 points, name these
compounds which possess a COOH group, whose "acetic" variety is present in vinegar.
ANSWER: carboxylic acids [prompt on "COOH" before mention, prompt on "acid"]
Compounds with this functional group have a high enthalpy of vaporization because they
dimerize via hydrogen bonding in solution. Pouring a solution of Grignard reagents over dry ice is
one method of synthesizing them, as is oxidation of a primary alcohol or aldehyde. These compounds
include one created by crushing ants and another that is the active ingredient in (*) vinegar. For 10
points, name this functional group with formula COOH.
ANSWER: carboxylic acid or carboxylate
John Adams used turbidites, deposited by synchronous turbidity currents, to determine that
this geologic zone erupts in an earthquake around every 590 years, plus or minus 170. Unusually,
this region is buffeted by triple junctions at both its north and south end: the Queen Charlotte
Fault and Explorer Ridge to the north, and the Mendocino Triple Junction to the south, where it
meets the Gorda plate. Unlike the nearby San Andreas fault, this region is capable of producing a
9.0+ magnitude megathrust earthquake colloquially dubbed the coming "Big One". This region is
formed by the Juan de Fuca plate being subducted underneath the North American plate. For 10
points, name this region in the Pacific Northwest named for a nearby mountain chain that
includes Mount St. Helens and Mount Rainier.
ANSWER: Cascadia subduction zone [or CSZ; or Cascadia subduction margin; or Cascadia fault; prompt on Pacific Northwest or Ring of Fire]
The BHC Company's synthesis of ibuprofen uses a three-step version of this process to reduce waste.
Quarternary ammonium or phosphonium salts partake in this process by acting as detergents to bring ionic
salts into the organic phase. The "sacrificial" variety of this process is used to perpetuate it in loop reaction
mechanisms known as this process's "cycles." For the "bio," "homogeneous," and "heterogeneous,"
varieties, the turnover number quantifies the efficiency of this process differently. Through various means,
such as by phase-transfer, protonation or deprotonation of functional groups, and stabilizing reaction
intermediates, this process lowers activation energy. For 10 points, identify this process by which a
namesake substance increases the rate of a reaction.
ANSWER: catalysis [or catalyzing a reaction; do not accept "catalysts"]
One type of these compounds can be used to bring ionic salts into an organic phase and are called the
"phase transfer" type of them. One mole per second is the namesake SI unit describing the function of these
species. In hydrogenations, noble metals often serve this purpose. These compounds do not change the
position of an equilibrium, and they work by lowering the activation energy barrier for a reaction. In
biology, protein ones are called enzymes. For 10 points, name this species which speed up chemical
reactions.
ANSWER: catalysts
Palladium is commonly used as one of these species in most organic coupling reactions. A mixture of
titanium and aluminum forms the Ziegler-Natta one used in polymerization reactions. In cars, platinum is
used as one to convert carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide. Chlorofluorocarbons act as one in the
breakdown of ozone in the atmosphere. These species work by lowering the activation energy of a chemical
reaction, and a common industrial one is iron in the Haber-Bosch process. For 10 points, name these
chemical species which speed up a reaction.
ANSWER: catalysts
One of these compounds is made by treating a nickel-aluminum alloy with sodium hydroxide, while another
consists of calcium carbonate treated with lead and palladium. These compounds may be poisoned when
another compound binds to them, and they frequently work by providing increased surface area for
adsorption. Elements such as osmium, iridium, and platinum are often used as these compounds, while
biological ones are known as enzymes. Because they affect the forward and reverse reactions equally, they
do not alter a reaction's equilibrium position. For 10 points, name these compounds that lower a reaction's
activation energy, increasing its rate without being consumed themselves.
ANSWER: catalysts
The efficiency of this type of chemical is measured by comparing its amount to the substrate amount, and it
is also measured by its turnover number, which is how much it accomplishes before it deactivates, and its
turnover frequency. Substances that deactivate these substances are called poisons. Zeolites often take on
this role in the creation of gasoline, and platinum used to be commonly used in this role to create sulfuric
acid. Often, this substance is consumed and then produced in a reaction; it must still exist when the reaction
is over. Name these substances typically used to speed up chemical reactions.
ANSWER: catalysts (prompt on "enzymes")
Depending on their phase, these substances are termed homogenous or heterogeneous. Their efficiency is
given by the turnover number. The activity of biological ones can be quantified by the Michaelis-Menten
equation; those ones use the "lock and key" and "induced fit" models. These substances, which are never
consumed by reactions, reduce the gap between reactants and transition states by lowering the activation
energy. For 10 points, name these substances whose biological variety are enzymes and which speed up
reactions.
ANSWER: catalysts [accept enzymes before mentioned]
The activity for these substances can be measured by the turnover number, as well as in a unit that is equal
to moles per second. The heterogeneous type of these substances often works by causing adsorption and
desorption. Enzymes are proteins that act as this type of substance, which lowers the activation energy
needed to carry out a reaction. For 10 points, name these types of substances that increase the speed of
reactions but do not get used up in them.
ANSWER: catalysts
A heterogeneous example of these substances is platinum weakening hydrogen bonds in hydrogenation.
Iron is used as one of these in synthesizing ammonia in the Haber process. A biological example of these
substances works by binding substrates to its active site. Those substances are enzymes. For 10 points,
name these substances which lower the activation energy of a reaction, speeding it up without themselves
being consumed.
ANSWER: catalyst
One of these compounds called P-2 contains nickel boride. Another example is a rhodium coordination
compound named for Wilkinson. One of these compounds prevents back-biting and branching in polymers.
Adsorption of alkynes on a palladium one of these compounds promotes syn addition of hydrogen. Organic
examples process substrates at their active sites. For 10 points, Ziegler-Natta, Lindlar's, and enzymes are
examples of what compounds that lower the activation energy of a reaction but are not consumed by it?
ANSWER: catalysts [prompt on enzymes]
The one named for Crabtree is a significant improvement over one named for Wilkinson. Some of these are
usually "poisoned" with lead compounds, and are usually deposited onto surfaces such as carbon or calcium
carbonate, while another kind is made from titanium-aluminum complexes of organic compounds and is
used in polymerization of 1-alkenes. Those examples are named for Lindlar and Ziegler-Natta. For 10
points, identify these entities which speed up chemical reactions without being consumed themselves.
ANSWER: catalysts
One of these substances consists of palladium deposited on CaCO3 reacted with lead acetate and is
used to hydrogenate alkynes into alkenes, called the Lindlar variety. Another of these substances is
usually titanium and is used in alkene synthesis, called the Ziegler-Natta type. Iron oxide acts as one
of these in the Haber process and these substances act by [*] providing an alternate pathway to a
reaction, thereby lowering the energy of the transition state. These substances' biological analogs are
enzymes and they are used and remade throughout a chemical reaction. For 10 points, name these
substances which speed up reactions without being consumed in the process.
ANSWER: catalysts
A common one of these substances consists of palladium poisoned with lead salts and is used for
hydrogenation (high-drah-gen-AY-shun). Iron oxide is one of these substances in the Haber process
for producing ammonia. These substances move the transition state closer to the reactants without
changing the final equilibrium. They lower the (*) activation energy, and they are regenerated after the
reaction. Enzymes are the biological equivalent of, for 10 points, what substances that increase a reaction's
rate without being consumed?
ANSWER: catalysts [accept Lindlar's catalyst until "iron oxide" is read]
Palladium is a substance of this type in the Heck reaction, and one named for Raney consists of powdered
nickel. An industrial process that produces ammonia uses one of these substances consisting of iron, and
these substances can be poisoned when species bind to them chemically to block their active sites. The
addition of these substances does not affect the value of a reaction's equilibrium constant, and they are
contrasted with inhibitors, which may reduce these substances' activity. These substances in biology are
called enzymes, and they work by lowering activation energy. For 10 points, name these chemical species
that speed up a reaction but are not themselves consumed.
ANSWER: catalysts [do not accept or prompt on "enzymes"]
An organopalladium one is used in the Heck Reaction. In ring-closing metathesis, one of these is added to a
diene carrying an ammonium salt group in order to make it water-soluble. Another class of these
compounds consists of a transition metal such as vanadium or titanium and a main group metal alkyl
compound, which is usually an aluminum alkyl. More famous ones include manganese dioxide, which is
used to decompose hydrogen peroxide, and iron, which is used in the Haber process. Compounds named for
Grubbs and Ziegler-Natta are examples of, for 10 points, what substances which speed up the rate of a
chemical reaction?
ANSWER: catalysts
The rate of diffusion within these entities can be quantified by the Thiele modulus. One type of these
entities works by facilitating ion transfer between two phases and is exemplified by quaternary
ammonium salts and crown ethers. "Sacrificial" varieties of these entities are used to regenerate
other examples of them in their namesake (*) "cycles." The selectivity of these compounds can be
increased by adding a poison. Whether they are heterogeneous or homogenous depends on whether they are
in the same or a different phase from the reactants. For 10 points, name these compounds exemplified by
enzymes, which lower the activation energy, thus speeding up reactions.
ANSWER: catalysts [accept more specific answers such as "phase-transfer catalysts"]
Heterogenous varieties of these substances commonly require a support, and one type of them uses phase
transfer. These substances may be "poisoned" to make them more selective. One example of these
substances consists principally of iron and functions by allowing gases to adsorb to its surface. Metals like
palladium and nickel usually serves as these species in hydrogenation reactions. In general, these
substances lower the activation energy for a reaction, but aren't consumed in the process. For 10 points,
name these substances which speed up the rate of chemical reactions.
ANSWER: catalysts
A recently discovered example of this type of substance is water-splitting cobalt oxide, which is not well
understood but seems to use phosphate anions [AAN-"eye"-ahnz]. Another replaced the use of Schrock
carbenes [KAHR-beenz] and is named after Robert Grubbs. In the homogeneous or acid type of this,
protons usually perform this kind of substance's main function, while the heterogeneous type often involves
transition metals such as palladium or platinum. Commonly, one of these is used as an intermediate in a
reaction, increasing the number of steps but lowering the activation energy. Name these materials
unchanged by a chemical reaction that change the reaction rate.
ANSWER: catalysts [accept word forms; do not accept "enzyme"]
The contact process produces sulfuric acid using vanadium(V) [vah-NAY-dee-um "five"] oxide in this
role. In the Haber process, iron filings act as this type of substance. A device found in cars uses
rhodium, palladium, or platinum as one of these substances. They create an alternative (*) transition
state and lower a reaction's activation energy, but are not consumed. Proteins that act as these are called
enzymes. For 10 points, name these substances that increase the rate of a reaction.
ANSWER: catalysts
These species are formed from carbon in an intermediate step of E1 and SN1 reactions. Type A of these
species can be formed from alkali and alkaline earth metals. These species are created at the anode in an
electrochemical cell, and are most easily formed from elements with low ionization energies. These species
have an oxidation number equal to their positive charge. For 10 points, name these species that bind to
anions in ionic solutions, and which are positively charged ions.
ANSWER: cations [prompt on ions; accept carbocations before "Type A"; prompt on positively charged ions or equivalents]
An intermediate of this type is formed on a carbon chain during E1 and SN1 reactions. That intermediate is
carbenium and assumes an sp2 hybridized state. A molecular example of this chemical species is arenium,
which is stabilized by pi bond delocalization. Coordination complexes occur when ligands bind to these
entities. Metals in aqueous solutions usually form these chemical species, which tend to have smaller atomic
radii than their neutral or oppositely-charged counterparts because of these species' relative lack of
electrons. A hydrogen form of this type of species is a bare proton. For 10 points, name these positively
charged chemical species, contrasted with anions.
ANSWER: cations [accept "carbocations" before "arenium"; prompt on "positive ions"; do not accept or prompt on "anion"]
These areas may contain pearly white balloons made out of hydromagnesite, and gypsum
structures in these regions are given names such as "flowers," "needles," and "beards." Anchialine
examples of these entities contain both fresh- and saltwater. Some organisms that inhabit these areas
are affected by a fungus called Geomyces destructans, which afflicts its host with (*) white nose
syndrome. One common type of structure within these regions is made out of "soda straw" and is a type of
speleothem that joins with its counterpart to form a column. Lakes in these areas may contain blind fish and
troglobites. For 10 points, name these underground regions that contain stalagmites and stalactites.
ANSWER: caves [or caverns; accept word forms]
The efficiency of this technique for a given analyte is given by the clearing factor. One equation
useful for describing materials undergoing this technique is named for Lamm. Virus and
polyribosome purification is performed using a version of this technique in which a sucrose gradient
is created. Either a vacuum manifold or this technique is used on a QIAgen (kia-gen) column in a
miniprep. Laboratory examples of these devices usually use RCF units to measure power. The
isopycnic variety of this technique was used in the (*) Meselson-Stahl experiment with cesium chloride.
Molecules are separated according to Svedberg units in this technique, which is also used to separate
isotopes of uranium. For 10 points, name this technique that separates solutes based on weight by spinning
them around really fast.
ANSWER: Centrifugation [accept ultracentrifugation; accept word forms]
One term important in analyzing the results of this technique is equal to the particle mass times quantity one
minus the partial specific volume times the density, end quantity, all over the frictional coefficient. The time
required to perform this technique depends on the "clearing factor" of certain objects used in it, some of
which are named for Beckman and Sorvall. Experiments based on this technique can be analyzed by the
Lamm equation. A variety of this technique that creates a gradient of cesium chloride and is used to analyze
DNA is called its "isopycnic" type. Described by the Svedberg Equation, this technique results in the
formation of a "pellet" and a "supernatant." It can be used to isolate organelles from tissue with the motion
of a rotor. For 10 points, name this technique used to separate different species of particles by their sizes
through rapid rotation.
ANSWER: centrifugation [or centrifuging; or ultracentrifugation]
This element can be extracted from its pollucite ore by dissolving it in hydrochloric acid, after which it is
sold as an azide due to its reactivity. This metal's chloride is often added to a DNA solution to achieve a
gradient in isopycnic centrifugation. Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff named this element after the blue
emission lines in its spectrum. Of the non-radioactive elements, this element's 133 isotope has the lowest
electronegativity and the largest atomic radius. The oscillations of this element between two ground states is
the basis for the SI unit of time and for atomic clocks. For 10 points, identify this alkali metal which reacts
even more explosively with water than rubidium.
ANSWER: cesium [or Cs]
One group of these compounds is based on hydroxamic acid and typically consists of non-ribosomal
peptides, known as siderophores. The namesake effect of these compounds describes their increased
thermodynamic stability as a result of a more positive entropy, and molecules like DMSA can be used in
their namesake therapy to treat certain poison victims. Seen biologically in porphyrins and chlorophyll, a
common example of these is the amino acid EDTA. For 10 points, name these coordination compounds in
which one or more polydentate ligands bind with and often sequester a central metal ion.
ANSWER: chelates [accept chelating agent]
Some compounds that go through this process are known as siderophores (SID-uh-roh-for), and the
strongest agent of this-found in E. coli-is enterobactin. Wilson's disease can be treated by this process
using dimercaprol (dai-mur-KAAP-rawl), once called British anti-Lewisite when it used this same process
to prevent the effects of chemical warfare. One agent of this process, used to remove calcium carbonate
from water, is EDTA, and porphyrins (por-"FEAR"-inz) such as heme (HEEM) use this process to transport
iron. Though there is controversy about the use of this chemical process to remove impurities from healthy
people, this technique is commonly used to remove poisons. Name this formation of bonds between two or
more separate binding sites within the same ligand and a single central atom.
ANSWER: chelation (kee-LAY-shun) [accept word forms of chelate (KEE-layt)]
The streptomyces bacterium produces an antibiotic that can be deactivated by this process; that molecule,
tetracycline, cannot be taken with milk or indigestion remedies containing zinc. In organic chemistry,
stereoselectivity can be induced by the use of this process, particularly in the presence of esters and amides,
a technique called this control. Virtually all biological molecules can do this, but some have specificity for a
certain ion, like the porphyrin rings in hemoglobin, which do this to iron. FTP, name this term for the
binding of several ligands to one metal ion.
ANSWER: chelation (or chelates; accept chelation-control after "stereoselectivity")
For constant NVT simulations, the Widom test particle method can be used to calculate this value for
a system. According to the Thomas-Fermi approximation, this value equals the sum of the local (*)
Fermi energy and potential energy for a cloud of trapped fermions. It appears in the Euler equation for
internal energy, and the Gibbs-Duhem equation relates the change in this quantity for components of a
system. For 10 points, name this quantity that is equal for components in equilibrium and represents the
molar Gibbs free energy, mu.
ANSWER: chemical potential
This quantity may be found directly for a component by the Widom insertion method. Negative S dT plus V
dp is equal to the sum over all components of a system of mole number times this quantity in the GibbsDuhem equation. For the grand canonical ensemble, this quantity is given by Boltzmann's constant times
temperature times the natural log of fugacity. An analogous concept that applies to electrons in a
semiconductor is called the Fermi level, and this quantity measured at absolute zero is called the Fermi
energy. The particle number derivative of the Gibbs free energy, for 10 points, name this quantity, the
additional energy derived from the addition of an infinitesimal substance.
ANSWER: chemical potential
When referring to electrons, it is approximately equal to the Fermi energy when the temperature is
substantially less than the characteristic temperature. When equated with the electrical potential, it can be
used to derive the Nernst equation and it is defined as the partial derivative of the free energy of a system
with respect to the amount of a substance. For a substance in phase equilibrium the gas and liquid phase
values for this quantity are equal. Sometimes known as the partial molar Gibbs Energy, for 10 points, name
this "energy" that explains diffusion as particles flow from higher concentrations to lower concentrations.
ANSWER: chemical potential
The most common way to derive this quantity in computer simulations is with Widom's insertion method.
Although not electronegativity, this quantity can be approximated as the negative of the arithmetic mean of
the first ionization energy plus electron affinity, which is the opposite of the Mulliken electronegativity. In
semiconductor physics, it is the highest energy occupied by an electron at absolute zero and is called the
Fermi level. This quantity can be related to temperature and pressure by the Gibbs-Duhem equation. This
quantity is the slope of a graph of Gibbs free energy versus number of moles of substance added to a
mixture, which is why it is sometimes called the partial molar Gibbs energy. For 10 points, name this
quantity usually symbolized mu that is the change in energy when particles are added or removed from a
system.
ANSWER: chemical potential of the particle sort [prompt on partial molar Gibbs free energy or Fermi level]
Along with temperature and volume, this quantity is held constant in the grand canonical ensemble.
This quantity for a component in solution is equal to a standard value of this quantity plus the
product of the gas constant, temperature, and the natural log of the activity. The Gibbs phase rule
can be derived by noting that this quantity is equal in all phases. It's not (*) concentration, but
diffusion occurs along gradients in this quantity. When temperature and pressure are constant, this quantity
is defined as the derivative of the Gibbs free energy with respect to the number of particles. For 10 points,
name this thermodynamic quantity which represents the change in energy when a particle is added to the
system, commonly symbolized mu.
ANSWER: chemical potential [do not accept or prompt on "potential," prompt on "mu" before read]
This property is changed by the Walden inversion. Changing only this property for an alcohol involves
using tosyl chloride and pyridine, then adding sodium acetate and THF, and finally adding potassium
hydroxide and water. This property is not possessed by meso compounds, and it can be visualized using
Fischer projections. Pasteur found this property in tartaric acid, and glycine is the only amino acid lacking
it. A mixture of products with this property is said to be racemic. Molecules with this property are
designated R or S in the CIP system. Name this concept of a compound's "handedness," which describes
compounds with a non-superimposable mirror image.
ANSWER: chirality [prompt on optical isomers or enantiomers, but nothing else]
This property is possessed by reagents like the Crimmins thiazolidinethione and the Evans
oxazolidinone, both auxiliaries in the aldol reaction. Transitions within a p or d set are allowed
according to the Laporte selection rule if molecules have this property, the axial form of which is
possessed by many binapthyl derivatives. Tartaric acid is used to separate some pairs of molecules with
this property, and such molecules rotate plane-polarized light. Despite their local possession of this
property, meso compounds lack it overall, much like racemates. For 10 points, name this property of pure
enantiomers, which denotes that they cannot be superimposed on their mirror images.
ANSWER: chirality [or lacking inversion symmetry; accept equivalents]
Syntheses of molecules with this property often employ auxiliaries via asymmetric induction. The
fact that Mosher's acid has this property allows it to be used as a derivatizing agent to change the
NMR shift of other molecules with this property. Meso compounds notably do not have this property
due to a plane of symmetry, and it was first studied in crystals of tartaric acid by Louis Pasteur.
Molecules with this property are labeled as R or S using the (*) Cahn-Ingold-Prelog rules. Molecules
with this property rotate plane polarized light, meaning they are optically active. For 10 points, name this
property of some molecules which makes them distinct from their mirror images, which can be roughly
defined as handedness.
ANSWER: chirality [accept word forms; accept things like they have a chiral center; accept word forms of optical activity until mention, prompt after; prompt on "stereochemistry" or word forms; prompt on "stereoisomers" or word forms; prompt on "enantiomers", "diasteromers", "epimers", "anomers" or word forms]
1,3-dichloroallene exhibits the axial version of these property, and (E)-cyclooctene has the planar variety.
Walden inversion, which involves this property of a molecule, can occur in reactions with an SN2
mechanism. First discovered in tartaric acid, this property is not exhibited by meso compounds, and it can
be tested by a polarimeter. It occurs in tetrahedral molecules in which all four substituents are different.
Describing molecules that are non-superimposable on their mirror images, it results in enantiomers. FTP,
identify this concept in chemistry often conceptualized as "handedness."
ANSWER: chirality
P/M notation is used to classify biaryl compounds that display the axial version of this property. Substances
with this property are named according to the Cahn-Ingold-Prelog rules, and meso compounds notably lack
this property, whose occurrence in thalidomide caused birth defects in thousands of children around the
world. First observed by Pasteur in tartaric acid, it is associated with optical activity, leading to rotation of
plane-polarized light. For 10 points, name this property, a molecule's lack of a plane of symmetry and
hence possession of non-superimposable mirror images, with a name from the Greek for "handedness."
ANSWER: chirality
Brucine can separate molecules with this property. Delta/lambda conventions are used to name some allenes
and biaryl compounds exhibiting a special case of this. Meso compounds, unlike some of their isomers, do
not exhibit this property denoted by CIP-priority with an R or an S. Racemic mixtures contain molecules
with this property, which Louis Pasteur demonstrated with the polarization of light by tartaric acid. A
carbon atom with four different groups bonded to it in a tetrahedral configuration has this property, denoted
with a prefix D or L. For 10 points, name this property of enantiomers that cannot be superimposed on their
mirror image, from the Greek for "handedness."
ANSWER: chirality [accept word forms; accept enantiomerism before mention; accept optical isomerism; prompt on isomerism or stereoisomerism]
In SN2 reactions with compounds that posses this property, Walden inversion occurs and this property was
first accounted for by van't Hoff as a consequence of bond structure. The group with the lowest priority is
positioned away from the observer in order to classified this property as R and S based on Chan-IngoldPrelog priority rules. Glycine is the only amino acid to lack this property while in sugars the D conformer is
most favorable for the formation of peptide bonds. Due to this property, the morning sickness drug
thalidomide is a racemic mixture of two enantiomers, one of which is teratogenic. For 10 points, name this
property of molecules that possesses a non-superimposable mirror image.
ANSWER: Chirality
In physics, the "bag model" named for this improves the MIT Bag Model in modeling the nucleon. Gleiser
et al recently hypothesized that high intensity and long duration events can induce it in a paper unifying it
with punctuated equilibrium. The Cahn-Ingold-Prelog priority rule is used in the RS system to distinguish
molecules with this property.. First discovered to have a molecular basis by Louis Pasteur in tartaric acid,
this property distinguishes enantiomers from one another. For 10 points, what chemical property makes two
molecules non-superimposable and gives "handedness"?
ANSWER: chirality [prompt on handedness; prompt on isomerism]
In IR spectroscopy, the stretching frequency of the bond between carbon and this element is between 600
and 800 inverse centimeters. When this element is present in a compound, the M+ to (M+2)+ peaks in its
mass spectrum will have an intensity ratio of three to one. A common NMR solvent consists of a carbon
bonded to deuterium and three atoms of this element. This element, which possesses the highest electron
affinity, forms an acid with hydrogen that can be combined with nitric acid to create a mixture that can
dissolve gold, aqua regia. For 10 points, name this halogen commonly used to kill bacteria in swimming
pools.
ANSWER: chlorine
This element is formed in a reaction for which a ruthenium (IV) oxide catalyst was introduced by
Sumitomo, who sought to revive interest in the Deacon process, which predates electrolytic methods
to form this element. This element is formed at the anode in the Castner-Kellner process and at the
anode of a Downs cell. This element acts as a leaving group to allow the DNA-binding activity of both
the platinum chemotherapy drug cisplatin and (*) mustard gas. This element can attack acetal resin and
polybutene used in pipes, causing them to develop a brownish residue. One oxide of this element forms an
anion present in bleach, and it is used as an additive to water principally in swimming pools. For 10 points,
name this element, whose anion forms, with sodium, table salt.
ANSWER: chlorine
One compound that contains three atoms of this element forms phosgene [FAHSS-"jean"] and a strong
acid when in contact with oxygen. Compounds containing this element will have a M + 2 peak
appear at a 1-to-3 ratio to the M peak in mass spectrometry. A mixture of nitric acid and an acid
containing this element is known for dissolving gold and is called aqua regia. This element has the
highest electron affinity, and on the periodic table is found directly below the element with the highest
electronegativity. Name this halogen, atomic number 17, that is used to clean swimming pools, and
comprises table salt along with sodium.
ANSWER: chlorine [prompt on Cl; do not accept chloride]
Two atoms of this element coordinate to platinum along with ammonia in the chemotherapy drug
cisplatin. In one strong acid, this element has a +7 oxidation state. Along with fluorine and carbon, this
element is part of a group of compounds called Freon that were banned because they depleted the ozone
layer. This element is part of another strong acid that aids protein digestion in the stomach. For 10 points,
name this halogen found in swimming pools and table salt.
ANSWER: chlorine [or Cl]
The most commonly used Lewis acid contains three atoms of this element bonded to aluminum.
Compounds containing this element, fluorine and carbon were banned by the Montreal Protocol for causing
ozone depletion. In gaseous form, it was used as a chemical weapon before mustard gas. It is used to purify
drinking water and has the highest electron affinity. For 10 points, name this second-lightest halogen that is
found in table salt and has chemical symbol Cl.
ANSWER: chlorine [accept Cl before it is read]
Besides CO2, recent studies suggest that molecules containing this element have caused destruction in
the ozone layer. Halogenation of alkanes using this element is less selective due to it having an earlier
transition state. In its diatomic form, it is a gas and the Chemical Weapons Convention categorizes
this gas as a schedule 3 pulmonary agent. Legitimate uses include bleaching and disinfectants and these
are commonly used in swimming pools. Named after the Greek word for pale green, FTP, identify this
chemical element whose atomic number is 17.
ANSWER: Chlorine
Two ammonia groups and two atoms of this element act as ligands to platinum in the cancer drug cisplatin.
Each monomer of neoprene contains one atom of this element. An atom of this element exists on each end
of mustard gas, and this element's gas is called bertholite. Aqua regia consists of nitric acid and an acid of
this element, and two atoms of this element appear in an atom of phosgene. An oxide of this element is
sometimes used in bleach. This halogen has the highest electron affinity of any element. For 10 points,
name this halogen with atomic number 17 that is often added to swimming pools and that bonds with
sodium to form table salt.
ANSWER: chlorine [or Cl; or Cl2; prompt on "chloride" or "Cl_"]
The Miller process of gold purification involves blowing this substance into the impure mixture, and
a radioactive isotope of this element can be generated by muon capture in calcium-40. In mass
spectrometry of compounds containing this element, an M plus 2 compound peak of one-half the
intensity of the M peak is obtained. The Deacon oxidation process is one method of producing this
element, which is produced on a large scale by performing electrolysis on brine, which also produces
caustic soda and hydrogen gas. This element is incorporated into organic compounds by a reagent which
contains five atoms of it bonded to a single phosphorous atom, and mixing acids and bleach can release the
gaseous form of this compound, which was the first chemical weapon used. For 10 points, name this
element with atomic mass 35.45, atomic number 17, and symbol Cl.
ANSWER: Chlorine (Accept Cl2 or chlorine gas at any time)
Sumitomo used a ruthenium (IV) oxide catalyst to produce this element in the Deacon process, and
this element forms at the anode in the electrolytic Castner-Kellner process. This element is bonded to
metals in sylvite and carnallite, and along with sulfur, it is bonded to a hydrocarbon in mustard gas,
which, like this element, was used as a (*) chemical weapon in World War I. Molecules containing
hydrogen, fluorine, carbon, and this element have contributed to ozone depletion, and this diatomic element
is also present in bleach and in disinfectants for swimming pools. For ten points, identify this element, a
poisonous green gas that bonds with sodium to form table salt.
ANSWER: chlorine
In the Miller process, this element is used to purify a mixture of gold. This element forms at the anode in the
Castner-Kellner process, and it was originally produced by the Deacon process. This element has the
highest value for electron affinity, and an acid made up of the anion of this element mixes with nitric acid to
form aqua regia. Compounds made up of this element with carbon and fluorine have been shown to cause
destruction of the ozone layer, and this element is used to kill bacteria in swimming pools. For 10 points,
name this element whose anion combines with sodium to make table salt.
ANSWER: Chlorine
In its natural form, this element is also called berthelite. The binary acid of this element is commonly
used to pickle steel. It has the greatest electron affinity of any element. Bleach is the sodium salt of an
anion containing this element and oxygen. The acid of this element is found with nitric acid in aqua regia.
As a radical, it reacts with ozone in the stratosphere. At room temperature, it is a poisonous yellow-green
gas. For 10 points, name this halogen found with sodium in table salt.
ANSWER: chlorine [or Cl; do not accept "chloride"]
They were first developed in the 1930s as an alternative to Sulfur dioxide, and became popular because they
are generally non-flammable, non-toxic, and non-reactive. Inhalation of them will affect the nervous system
and may lead to sudden death, a method by which many teenagers committed suicide. In 1987 the Montreal
Protocol was signed in an effort to reduce the production of these substances, and the 1997 Kyoto Protocol
identified their replacement as one of the leading greenhouse gasses. DuPont has trademarked the name
Freon which contains these types of materials. FTP, name these chemicals found in refrigerator coolant, air
conditioners, and in plastic foams and aerosols that are responsible for 80% of ozone depletion.
ANSWER: ChloroFluoroCarbons (do not prompt on aerosols as these clues are specific for CFC and don't apply to aerosols)
Due to research on the impacts of these compounds, Nobel Prizes were awarded to Mario Molina and Frank
Rowland. All five Class One Group One compounds in the Montreal Protocol are this type of organic
compound. These compounds replaced sulfur dioxide, methyl chloride, and ammonia for some industrial
uses after their discovery in the 1920s, but these are now banned. These were used as aerosol propellants,
foam-blowing agents, and refrigerants, and the most common one was Freon. Name these compounds which
after breaking down caused ozone depletion.
ANSWER: chlorofluorocarbons or CFCs
A mixture of this compound and potassium hydroxide is used to formylate phenols in the ReimerTiemann reaction. Bottles of this substance usually contain ethanol or amylene as a stabilizer,
because this compound reacts with oxygen to form phosgene. A 25 to 24 to 1 mixture of phenol, this
substance, and (*) isoamyl alcohol is used in DNA extractions. A version of this compound containing a
single deuterium atom is a common solvent in NMR spectroscopy, and this substance is also used it was
widely used as an anesthetic before the discovery that it causes liver failure. For 10 points, name this simple
halogenated hydrocarbon with formula CHCl3.
ANSWER: chloroform [or trichloromethane]
This compound is industrially used to synthesize R22, a major intermediate in Teflon production. This
compound must be kept in dark bottles or amber because it forms phosgene in the presence of oxygen and
UV light. Nucleic acid extraction is commonly performed via mixtures of phenol and this. It is the choice
solvent for NMR spectroscopy when deuterium is substituted for its lone hydrogen and can form
dichlorocarbene for use in organic syntheses. For 10 points, name this compound which replaced ether as an
anesthetic throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries and which has formula CHCl3.
ANSWER: chloroform
This compound is usually stored in a solution stabilized by ethanol or amylene because oxygen
exposure converts it to phosgene. In DNA extraction protocols, this compound serves as the organic
phase, while phenol serves as the aqueous phase. A residual peak at 7.26 ppm is present in NMR
experiments when the deuterated form of this molecule is used as the solvent. A common industrial
use of this compound is adding it to two equivalents of HF to form CHClF2, which can then be
converted to Teflon precursors. It is produced by the free-radical halogenation of methane, although
overshooting creates carbon tetrachloride. It replaced ether as the anesthetic of choice until it was
determined to be toxic. For 10 points, name this compound with formula CHCl3, which in popular culture is
used in rags that knock people out.
ANSWER: Chloroform
The first few steps in MudPIT protein analysis involve this process. Van Deemter's equation can be used to
find the optimal velocity of this process, and one form of this technique is done on glass coated with
absorbent material. One variety of this technique has dry and wet methods, and a material often used in this
process is sepharose. These procedures rely on a ratio known as partition coefficient, and they involve
stationary and moving phrases. For 10 points, name this laboratory technique which can be used to separate
the different pigments of a pen's ink.
ANSWER: Chromatography
Perath and Flodin introduced the use of dextran gels in one form of this process. Another form of this
process can be coupled with the Snyder index, which describes the polarity of some compounds. Resolving
power is related to the kinetic parameters of this process in the Van Deemter equation. Sepharose beads are
used in the size exclusion form of this process, another form of which utilizes a silica-packed column. An
Rf value is determined following the capillary-action driven movement of the mobile phase across the
stationary phase in the thin-layer form of this technique. Name this separatory lab technique whose name
means "color-writing."
ANSWER: chromatography [accept specific forms of chromatography, like size exclusion chromatography, thin-layer chromatography, gas-liquid chromatography, and high-performance liquid chromatography]
Resin or gel is employed in one variety of this process, while high pressure and a long column characterize
another. In yet another type of this procedure involves an alumina- or silica-coated sheet of iron, glass or
plastic, which is examined with a UV lamp for parts of the tested substance lifted by capillary action. In
addition to those ion exchange, HPL and thin layer varieties, an early form of this process displayed plant
pigments on the namesake material, paper. FTP, name this lab procedure for separating a mixture between
mobile and stationary phases.
ANSWER: Chromatography
The countercurrent form of this analytical process, which requires a column of two liquids, involves
variable gravity, imposed to observe one partitioning step per revolution of the analyte between both
solvents. The size-exclusion and ion-exchange forms of this analytical technique are generally used to
separate proteins based on charged and bulky R-group prevalence. High-performance liquid, gas, column,
and thin layer forms of this analytical technique are used to calculate retention factor values and to separate
a mixture into its components based on polarity. For ten points, name this analytical technique consisting of
the partition of a solute into a mobile phase and a stationary phase.
ANSWER: Chromatography
Multi-angle scattering is used in conjunction with a dextran-based polymer in the size-exclusion
type of this technique. Dividing the migration distance of the analyte by the migration distance of the
solvent gives the retention factor in this technique. Iodine vapor is used as a developer in a simple
version of this technique, and mass spectrometry relies on initially using the gas or (*)
high-performance liquid versions of this technique. All forms of this technique rely on the differing
partition coefficient of an analyte for a stationary phase versus a mobile phase. Silica plates are used in the
thin-layer version of this technique, which is used to determine the components of dyes. For 10 points,
name this chemical technique used to separate mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography [accept more specific answers, eg thin-layer chromatography, HPLC, liquid chromatography, gas chromatography, etc]
A silica plate is usually used for the thin-layer type of this, and in the affinity type of this a salt solution is
used to separate the desired molecules from ligands. In the gas type of this, helium is usually used to carry a
solute through a column. When you put paper in water just below some colored dyes in chem class, you
used, for 10 points, paper as the stationary phase and colored dye as the mobile phase in what technique for
separating a mixture.
ANSWER: chromatography
The so-called 'fast-protein' type of this process is an important method for protein-purification, and often
the associated resin contains Ni(II) ions that bind to His residues. The size-exclusion type of this chemical
procedure is also used for proteins and is a low-resolution process that separates based on size. The highperformance liquid type of this process, along with other types, involves a mobile phase and a stationary
phase. In the thin-layer type, retention factors can be calculated as the ratio of the migration distance of the
mobile phase over that of the solvent front. For 10 points, name this procedure in chemistry involved in the
separation of mixtures based on polarity.
ANSWER: chromatography [Accept more specific answers, i.e. thin-layer chromatography, affinity chromatography, column chromatography, size-exclusion chromatography, ion-exchange chromatography, etc.]
Proteins can be analyzed using the "size-exclusion" form of this process. One form of this process often
uses a silica gel. The retention and retardation factor are usually calculated as the quotient of two distances
in this procedure. This process comes in "high-performance liquid", "gas", and "thin-layer" forms, but
always uses a stationary phase and a mobile phase. For 10 points, name this method of separating two
substances by their relative speeds at traveling through a solvent.
ANSWER: chromatography [or any specific type of chromatography]
Blue dextran is used as a void volume marker in a form of this technique. Lipids are transferred to a
membrane after this technique is performed in a far-eastern blot. In this technique, the theoretical plate
height is calculated using the van Deemter equation. In one form of this technique, the Kovats index and a
flame ionization detector are used. In another form of this technique, the distance traveled by a sample is
divided by the distance traveled by a solvent front to calculate the retention factor. This technique, which
makes use of stationary and mobile phases, has size exclusion and thin-layer forms. For 10 points, name this
method of separating mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography [accept specific forms]
Lipids can be analyzed using a PVDF membrane after performing the HPTL form of
this technique, and that variety frequently uses silica gel as the adsorbent. The Eddydiffusion parameter and HEPT are related to the optimal velocity for this process
by Van Deemter's equation. A ame ionization detector is used in one form of this
technique, which in forensics is coupled with mass spectrometry. The(*) retention
factor is used in the column and planar forms of this process, whose paper variety separates
pigments. A gas may be used as the mobile phase in, for ten points, this chemical laboratory
technique used to separate mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography
The UCM hump appears in a form of this procedure which is often followed by mass spectrometry. Acetic
acid and water are at the far end of the eluatropic series, which describes this technique. It often involves
calculating retention times and the retardation factor. This technique is called "high-performance" when it
occurs at high pressures. Silica gel is used in the "thin-layer" form of this technique. It relies on differences
in polarity between solute particles, giving the mobile phase differential affinity for the stationary phase.
For 10 points, name this technique which can be used to separate pigments on paper.
ANSWER: chromatography [or gas chromatography; or high performance liquid chromatography; or thin-layer chromatography; or paper chromatography]
One form of this technique analyzes the output using thermal conductivity or flame ionization detectors. All
forms of this technique measure some sort of retention time or retention factor. Another form of this
technique uses a tube packed with silica gel and works because more polar components will take longer to
pass through the tube. A third form of this technique "spots" drops of liquid on a plate and uses capillary
action to draw solvent upwards. This technique involves the use of a mobile phase moving over a stationary
phase to separate a mixture. For 10 points, name this lab technique that comes in gas, column, and thinlayer varieties and is named for the colors it can create.
ANSWER: chromatography [accept more specific answers as well, such as gas chromatography]
Results of this technique for organic molecules can be used to calculate the Kovats index. The molar mass
distribution of polymers can be found with the size-exclusion type of this technique. The retention factor of
this technique can be calculated as the migration distance of the analyte divided by the migration distance of
the solvent. Pigments can be analyzed in the "paper" type of this technique, which also comes in highperformance liquid and "thin layer" types. For 10 points, name this chemical technique that separates
mixtures based on polarity.
ANSWER: chromatography [accept word forms and more specific answers]
This method was first applied to blood analysis in the Zenalb process. Detectors for one type of this
procedure include "flame ionization" and "photoionization" detectors. A "countercurrent" form of
this procedure may be used in conjunction with an automated "high-pressure" technique promoted
by Csaba Horvath. One type of this procedure frequently uses stains like permangeanate to visualize
the distribution of spots; apart from that "thin-layer" form, another type uses a silica-packed column. For 10
points, name this procedure which separates different components of an analyte based on characteristics like
polarity, originally named from the pigments used in its early forms.
ANSWER: chromatography
In one form of this technique, analytes are said to elute from the apparatus. In a modern version of that
form, liquids are forced through a sorbent column at high pressure. One common setup applies it to a gas
before performing mass spectrometry. The retention factor measures the relative distance traveled by an
analyte in one variety of this technique, in which a thin adsorbent layer often made of silica acts as a
stationary phase. Another variety of it was seminally used to separate plant pigments for the first time; in
that variety, various components of a plant extract rise up a paper at different speeds. For 10 points, name
this powerful class of techniques for separating mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography [accept more specific answers, including thin-layer chromatography, paper chromatography]
Dowex resin is used in one form of this technique, while another type can be carried out using isocratic or
gradient conditions. One type of this technique can be normal phase or reverse phase depending on the
polarity of the surface used. This technique makes use of a substance's retention factor, which can be
calculated using the distance traveled by the substance and the eluent. This technique involves creating a
mobile phase and a stationary phase, and comes in liquid, gas, paper, and thin layer types. For 10 points,
name this laboratory technique used to separate and analyze mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography
The optimal velocity for running this technique can be found using the van Deemter equation, and
certain values for it can be found using the Kovats index. One useful value for this technique, the
retardation factor, can be found by taking the ratio of two migratory distances. In the "gas" type of it, an
inert gas like helium is often used as the mobile phase, which along with the stationary phase is used in
this technique to separate components of a mixture. For 10 points, name this technique with column
and thin-layer varieties.
ANSWER: chromatography
In one variation of this technique, ligands reversibly react with proteins which may be tagged with
polyhistidine residues. That is usually followed by CIPP. Another form of it is performed on glass coated
with an adsorbent material like silica gel, which can also line the insides of capillary tubes useful in this
technique after vaporizing the gas. In addition to the thin layer and capillary gas types, this can be
performed through a stationary phase of charged particles in the ion exchange type. For 10 points, identify
this technique separating substances based on their chemical properties, such as the pigments of a plant into
its constituent colors in the paper type.
ANSWER: chromatography [accept column chromatography until "glass"]
Van Deemter's equation for this process accounts for Eddy-diffusion and mass transfer, and the Kovats
index describes the time taken for one form of this process. Another form of this process uses high pressures
to improve performance. The extent of the solvent front is used to calculate the retardation factor in the
thin-layer form of this technique. Often performed in a silica-packed column, it involves mobile and
stationary phases. A common demonstration of it involves using filter paper strips to separate pigments. For
10 points, name this group of techniques for separating mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography
The results of this test are interpreted using the Van Deemter [DAYM-ter] equation, and some liquid types
of this process use eluents [EL-yoo-ents] as carriers and follow filtration. One type of this method, which
uses a solvent and a sheet coated with silica [SIL-i-kah], is the thin layer type. The output of this process
can be a graph with several peaks, with the different peaks showing the concentrations of various ions or
other constituents in the original mixture. Name this process with mobile and stationary phases used to
separate liquid or gas mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography
The Purnell equation analyzes this procedure which can be quantified in terms of theoretical plate number
and graphically depicted with van Deemter plots. The overlap of peaks in this procedure is measured by
resolution, and each component has a unique ratio of two concentrations called a partition coefficient.
Differences in charge are exploited in the ion-exchange variant, and adsorbent materials are used in the
thin-layer type. Performed by passing a mobile phase through a stationary phase, For 10 points, name this
method of separating mixtures named for its initial application to colored dyes.
ANSWER: Chromatography
A Van Deemter plot is used to determine the minimum theoretical plate height necessary to perform
this procedure. One type of this procedure often uses agarose as an "affinity matrix", while proteins are
separated by charge in the "ion exchange" variety of it. Forensic analysis of gel pens is one application
of the "high-performance-liquid" type of this procedure, which also comes in thin-layer, gas, and paper
varieties. For 10 points, name this lab technique in which a mobile phase passes through a stationary
phase, from the Greek for "color writing."
ANSWER: chromatography [accept column chromatography before "affinity"]
One type of this process utilizes ligand binding specificity of proteins and is known as the affinity type,
while another type uses porous beads to differentiate volumes of polymers, and is the size exclusion
type. Another type which relies on the calculation of Rf values is the "thin layer" type that uses a polar
solvent as the mobile phase. Also commonly performed using a silica gel matrix as a stationary phase,
for 10 points, identify this process which sometimes separates components of a mixture based on their
color.
ANSWER: chromatography
This process can be characterized for organic compounds by the Kovats index, which uses the peaks of two
known alkanes to determine the retention index of a sample. One type of this technique exploits capillary
action on an activated glass plate, while in another type of this process, pressurized gas forces the elutant
through small grains of silica to increase the flow rate. That "flash" type of this method is an example of the
"column" type, which uses a solid stationary phase and a solvent as the mobile phase. For 10 points, name
this analytical technique used to separate mixtures, often into differently-colored layers.
ANSWER: chromatography [accept gas chromatography in the first sentence]
One problem associated with this technique is known as tailing, but can be avoided by increasing the
polarity of the solvent. The flash type of this technique uses air pressure, and the most common variety
usually begins with spotting and is used to calculate the retardation factor, or the R-sub-f value. In general,
this technique uses two phases, one of which is stationary and the other moving, in order to separate
components of a mixture. For 10 points, name this laboratory technique, types of which include column and
thin-layer.
ANSWER: chromatography
In one form of this process, unwanted silanol interactions can be prevented by using end-capping. Another
form of this technique may employ a layer of sand to absorb the shock of pouring in the eluent. The
retardation factor is calculated as the ratio of the distances traveled by the analyte and the solvent front in
the thin-layer form of this technique. With liquid, gas, and column types, this term describes any technique
wherein a mobile phase is passed through a stationary phase, such as a strip of filter paper. For 10 points,
name this method of separating mixtures, which may be used to separate the pigments in a colored marker.
ANSWER: chromatography [accept reversed-phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography within first sentence]
Csaba Horvath did pioneering work on the high performance liquid version of this technique. Other
variants include gas and thin layer. Affinity beads or an ion exchange resin are common components in the
column family of this technique. Commonly a stationary and mobile phase is used. An easy to do version
involves putting a strip of paper partially in a solvent like water. Its name comes from its initial use in
separating out plant pigments producing different colored bands. For 10 points, name this chemistry
technique used in separating mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography
Lathe and Ruthven developed a version of this technique that uses a gel-bed that allows large particles
through but retains small particles; that is the size-exclusion form. This technique comes in gas-liquid and
thin-layer varieties, and most forms of this technique require the calculation of retention time. It typically
utilizes a stationary phase and a mobile phase. This technique is sometimes performed in chemistry classes
whilst utilizing a solvent along with a paper colored with markers. For 10 points, identify this technique
which separates mixtures, whose name means "color-writing."
ANSWER: chromatography [accept early buzz of size-exclusion chromatography]
C8 and C18 are commonly used in a variety of the process with reversed phase, while dynamic light
scattering can be combined with absolute size-exclusion to determine the size of molecules in this
process. Using a pump in place of gravity and gradient elution are two differences in the highperformance variant of this technique. Affinity tails such as His-tags or antibodies can be used in this
process to select specific biological compounds, and an (*) ion-exchange variant works similarly.
Zeolite, silica gel and activated alumina are commonly used to slow elution in this process, wherein each
element of a mobile phase percolates through the stationary phase at a different rate. For 10 points, name
this laboratory technique used to separate mixtures that comes in both gas and liquid varieties.
ANSWER: Column Chromatography
One type of this uses potassium permanganate to stain molecules with functional groups sensitive to
oxidation, while another type relies on a partition based on a range of distribution coefficients. Described
in a classic text by Braithwaite and Smith, they include reversed-phase and countercurrent varieties, and the
study of them usually begin with rate theory and plate theory. A Long wave UV lamp is used in the type
that utilizes a silica gel stationary phase, while a so-called high performance type uses higher pressure and a
long column. First demonstrated by Mikhail Tsvet to German botanists, they include gel filtration, ion
exchange, as well as liquid and gas mobile phase varieties. FTP name this class of general analytical
methods used for separating the components of a mixture, exemplified by paper and thin-layer versions.
ANSWER: chromatography
One problem encountered during this process is called tailing and is caused by a lack of an isotherm.
One type of this process is governed by an equation which sets the HETP equal to the sum of terms
representing mass transfer, eddy diffusion, and longitudinal diffusion. Several forms of this process
calculate the ratio of the distance traveled by the analyte to the distance traveled by the solvent as the
retention factor. Types include ion-exchange and high-performance liquid forms. The gas form of this
technique is performed prior to mass spectroscopy. In another kind of this technique, the eluent is drawn up
a column of a namesake kind of paper. For 10 points, name this lab technique which uses a stationary phase
and a mobile phase to separate chemical mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography
There exist chiral, countercurrent, simulated moving-bed, and reversed-phase versions of this scientific
technique. More common varieties include the gas type, which uses a detector, a carrier gas, and a column,
the size-exclusion type in which larger molecules avoid pores in the stationary phase, and the thin-layer
type, which relies on capillary action. The paper variety of this technique is often used to separate pigments,
and along with the thin-layer variety, calls for the calculation of Rf values. FTP, name this technique for
separating the parts of a mixture that commonly employs both stationary and mobile phases.
ANSWER: chromatography
Chitin may be used for one form of this, and another, when followed by a transfer to polyvinylidene fluoride
and mass spectrometry, is referred to as far-Eastern blotting. The fast protein form often relies on histidine
tags, and the size exclusion type is often used to calculate the polydispersity of a synthesized polymer.
Another kind uses either packed or capillary columns for a stationary phase, through which a gaseous
analyte flows. FTP, name this analytical technique whose best-known variety is the paper form often used to
separate the pigments of a pen's ink.
ANSWER: chromatography
Gas and liquid forms of this process differ because of the state of the stationary medium involved. In one
form of this process, dividing the distance moved by a substance by the distance moved by the front gives
the r-f value for a component. Name this laboratory technique, commonly performed with paper, that
separates a mixture into its components based on their affinities to the cellulose in the paper as a solvent
carries them.
ANSWER: chromatography
In one variety of this process, proteins are tagged with polyhistidine and glutathione-s-transferase. Eddy
diffusion and mass transfer are related in Van Deemter's equation for this technique. Centrifuges are often
used in countercurrent varieties of it, and size exclusion and ion exchange are among the high performance
liquid type of this technique. Kovat's index of retention times is used to compare relative elution times in
one type. For 10 points, name this technique which comes in column, planar, gas, and liquid varieties and is
used to separate mixtures of stationary and mobile phases.
ANSWER: Chromatography (take column chromatography until "Centrifuges")
Organic modifiers are used to control one variety of this technique used on small molecules, the high
performance liquid type. Increasing solvent polarity can avoid tailing in this technique, which was first used
by Mikhail Tsvet. One variety of it relies on the calculation of the retardation factor and has a liquid and a
solid phase. Gases and liquids are common mobile phases in this technique, which also has paper and
thin-layer types. For 10 points, name this laboratory technique in which components of a mixture are
separated by affinity to a stationary phase.
ANSWER: chromatography
B over u is equal to the longitudinal diffusion of particles undergoing one type of this process in
the hyperbolic Van Deemter equation. One version uses silica gel and chloroform and is an a
modification of the variety invented by Mikhail Tsvet known as the (*) partition type, to which was
later added a glass plate. In addition to the ion-exchange and high-performance liquid types employed
today, other common varieties include the paper and thin-layer varieties. For 10 points, name this
method for separating solutes into mobile and stationary phases.
ANSWER: chromatography
One variety of this procedure uses the relationship between mass transfer and eddy diffusion found in
the Van Deemter equation, while another uses ion-exchange resins. Those varieties sets the mobile and
stationary phases in columns. Another type uses a silica plate and separates dyes based on polarity. For 10
points, identify this technique of separating mixtures that comes in thin-layer and paper varieties.
ANSWER: chromatography
A recently developed type of this process involves the exertion of pressure on the tube, resulting in
facilitated transport and the omission of the initial step centrifugation, and is the "flash point" type
of this process. A more common approach to this method involves the use of helium gas as the
"mobile phase," the "gas" type of this process. Also consisting of "thin layer" and "liquid" types, for 10
points, name this technique in which a mixture is passed through a stationary phase, resulting in the
separation of different components.
ANSWER: chromatography (accept flash point chromatography before "flash point" is read)
One equation associated with this procedure includes the Eddy-diffusion parameter and calculates the height
equivalent to a theoretical plate, the Van Deemter equation. Lathe and Ruthven developed one version of
this procedure that isolates macromolecules, the size-exclusion type. Dividing the sample distance by the
migration distance of the solvent calculates this procedure's retention factor. Commonly performed with
silica gel, this procedure's mobile phase flows through a column containing the stationary phase. For 10
points, name this laboratory technique with gas, paper, and thin-layer varieties that is used to separate
mixtures.
ANSWER: chromatography
Simulated moving beds are often used in the size exclusion form of this technique. The "rule of ten"
governs the ratio between volume injected and volume of the sample in the gas-liquid form of this. Another
version of this has dry and wet methods, with the latter often requiring a separating funnel on top of its
namesake column. Non-polar components of the analyte travel highest in the paper form of this technique,
which characteristically includes a stationary phase and a mobile phase. For 10 points, name this method of
separating mixtures whose name comes from the Greek for "color writing."
ANSWER: chromatography [accept answers that include the specific types to which the clues allude]
One problem associated with this technique is known as tailing but can be avoided by increasing the
polarity of the solvent. This technique can be performed through a stationary phase of charged particles in
the ion exchange type in addition to the capillary gas and thin layer types. In general, this technique uses
two phases, one of which is stationary and the other moving, in order to separate components of a mixture.
For 10 points, name this method for separating solutes into mobile and stationary phases whose name comes
from the Greek translation of "color writing".
ANSWER: Chromatography
Excluding sample preparation, two of these processes make up the first two phases of MudPit protein
analysis. This process can be described with an equation that contains terms for eddy-dffusion, longitudinal
diffusion and mass transfer called the van Deemter equation. A common material used in these setups is
sepharose. It uses antibodies or other binding molecules in its affinity variant and a charged resin in its ion
exchange form. The retention time is used to characterize this technique, which typically makes use of a
column in its gas, liquid or high performance liquid variants. For 10 points, name this chemical technique
which involves passing a mobile phase through a stationary phase to separate a mixture.
ANSWER: chromatography
Proteins are purified by a ligand interaction in the affinity version of this technique, and peak area is
proportional to concentration in another variant of this procedure. Quantities important in this technique
include retention time and retardation factor, which is commonly abbreviated as the R.F. value. Those
values are important in the gas and thin layer types of this procedure, and this technique involves a mobile
phase traveling through a stationary phase. For 10 points, name this chemical technique used to separate the
components of a mixture, which is often utilized to separate the pigments in ink.
ANSWER: Chromatography
To correct for beds of porous particles, Rodrigues and his colleagues added a function of the Peclet number
to the Van Deemter equation for plate height in this process. This technique commonly uses a
spectrophotometer with vessels 4.6 mm in diameter, but mass spectroscopy may be used to find peaks at
smaller scales. Retention time typically varies with a solute's hydrophobicity, which dictates how well it
adsorbs on a stationary phase. For 10 points, identify this technique that uses a vertical tube to separate
dissolved substances, a bulk process contrasted with thin-layer methods.
ANSWER: column chromatography (accept high-performance liquid chromatography)
The coupling between radial dispersion and velocity fluctuations in this technique can be described
by the Giddings equation. Good resolution for all peaks in this technique can be achieved using
temperature programming or gradient elution. Eddy diffusion, longitudinal diffusion, and mass
transfer between phases are the three main contributors to (*) band broadening in this technique,
according to the van Deemter equation. Alumina and silica gel are common phases used in this technique,
which distinguishes between components based on retention time. For 10 points, name this technique in
which a mobile phase is passed through a column packed with a stationary phase, which is used to separate
mixtures.
ANSWER: column chromatography [accept the following more specific answers: liquid chromatography, high-performance liquid chromatography, gas chromatography. If they give ANY abbreviation with the letter C in it, prompt them]
One important value given by this technique is derived by considering the linear relationship
between the log of t sub r and the number of carbon atoms, known as the Kovats retention index, and
this technique commonly uses an autosampler and an injector in order to pass the sample through either
a capillary column or a packed column. thermal conductivity detectors or flame ionization detectors are
commonly used in this technique, which is often used immediately before a mass spectrometry experiment
to separate a heterogenous sample. For 10 points, name this type of chromatography in which both phases
are vaporized.
ANSWER: Gas chromatography
N-alkenes can be used as a reference in the Kovats index which is useful in this technique, and the
van Deemter equation was originally developed to explain the band broadening in this technique. It
requires an inert carrier such as argon or carbon dioxide, and it can be followed up by passing the
product through a large electric potential and burning them. The injection of the mixture can be done via
a split or a splitless injector, and this process can used either a capillary column or a packed column. For 10
points, identify this procedure in which more volatile compounds travel more quickly through the stationary
column, a type of chromatography.
ANSWER: gas-liquid chromatography
Methods for using this procedure's "inverse" form to find solid surface energy were developed by
Dorris and Gray and by Schultz. This procedure's results can be summarized for a pair of
compounds as a Kovats index. Common detectors for this procedure include hot wire detectors and
flame ionization detectors. Some devices used for this technique have walls coated with a progression of
stationary phases. The retention time in this technique depends on boiling point and solubility, both of
which affect its partitioning behavior with the mobile and stationary phases. For 10 points, name this type of
procedure where the vaporized analyte is separated and often carried through by helium.
ANSWER: gas-liquid chromatography
This technique uses Dragendorff's reagent when it is applied to alkaloids. One object used in this
technique can be impregnated with zinc silicate to visualize the results under UV light. When
studying cell membrane lipids, the results of this process are transferred to a PVDF membrane in a
far-eastern blot. When applied to amino acids, this technique can use ninhydrin as a derivatizing
agent. In this technique, iodine vapor is used to develop the sample and the distance the sample
travels is divided by the (*) solvent front to calculate the retention factor. For 10 points, name this type of
chromatography in which capillary action draws a sample through a silica plate, commonly used on plant
pigments and pen ink.
ANSWER: Thin-layer chromatography [or TLC]
Selection of reagents in this technique is often performed using the Prisma model, and for
particularly complex samples multiple gradient development is often employed. In far-eastern
blotting, this technique precedes a transfer to a PVDF membrane. Adding ninhydrin to the samples
in this technique is a method to detect amines. Samples are commonly applied by using a small
capillary tube. Commonly used on a panel of analgesics in introductory chemistry classes, this
technique can use an iodine vapor as a developer. The retention factor is equal to the sample distance
divided by the solvent front distance in this technique. It is also commonly used to separate the components
of plant extracts. For 10 points, name this type of chromatography commonly performed on silica gel plates.
ANSWER: Thin-layer chromatography or TLC
Instrumentation for a recently developed, automated form of this method is currently developed by
the CAMAG group. A systematic approach to solvent optimization in this technique is the PRISMA
model. Iodine is the most commonly used stain, but others include ceric ammonium molybdate and panisaldehyde. A process developed in Tokyo Medical for the analysis of lipids involves this technique;
that is the Far-Eastern blot. (*) Almost all amines and carbamates can be detected by the use of ninhydrin
in this technique. Just like in a similar technique using paper, dividing the solute propagation by the solvent
front propagation gives the retardation factor. For 10 points, name this form of chromatography in which
the stationary phase is often silica gel spread on a glass or plastic plate.
ANSWER: thin-layer chromatography or TLC (prompt on "chromatography"; prompt on "planar chromatography")
It was first discovered in 1797 by a French pharmacist who produced the oxide of this element by mixing
crocoites with hydrochloric acid, and he was later able to retrieve the metallic element by heating its oxide.
Its +3 oxidation state is the most common, and can be obtained by dissolving its elemental form in
hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid, though it also comes in +4, +5, and +6 varieties. Trace amounts of this
element replace aluminum in corundum to form rubies, and it is mixed with iron to form stainless steel
alloys. FTP, what is this transition metal with atomic number 24 which is known for the bright colors of its
compounds and complexes?
ANSWER: chromium
Franz Hein reacted a chloride of this non-iron element with phenylmagnesium bromide to synthesize
its bis-benzene form, which was the first arene-containing sandwich compound. A chloride of this
element is used in an alternative to the phosphorus-using Wittig reaction in order to create alkenes;
that reaction is named for Takai. A mixture of pyridinium and another chloride of this element
makes up the (*) Corey-Suggs reagent, which is an alternative to another compound containing this
element named for Jones. For 10 points, name this highly toxic metal whose hexavalent form is used as a
strong oxidizing agent, with atomic number 24 and symbol Cr.
ANSWER: Chromium [accept Cr before mention]
One substance containing this element catalyzes the oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols to
carboxylic acids and ketones, and is called the Jones reagent. Uvarovite garnet contains this element, and
stichtite is an alteration product from serpentine that bears this element. With potassium, its hexavalent ion
forms a potent oxidizing agent, sometimes used to clean glassware. Two atoms of this element can form a
quintuple covalent bond. Stainless steel contains this element, and metal things are plated with it to make
them shiny. For 10 points, name this namesake of some green and yellow pigments, with atomic number 24
and symbol Cr.
ANSWER: Chromium (accept Cr before mentioned, prompt on "chrome")
A compound of this element is found is Cornforth's reagent, and the first carbene characterized by Fischer
contained this metal, as did the first carbyne. The Takai olefination uses a compound with this metal bound
to two halogen groups. This metal is found in the active compounds of the Corey-Suggs Reagent and the
Collins reagent, where it is mixed with pyridine. This metal is able to create a quintuple bond with itself,
and another reagent that contains two atoms of it and seven oxygen atoms is used to oxidize alcohols when
mixed with sulfuric acid - this is the Jones reagent. FTP, name this silvery metal found in stainless steel with
atomic number 24 and symbol Cr.
ANSWER: Chromium
Six equivalents of a compound containing this element and chlorine are used to convert an aldehyde to an
E-alkene in the Takai olefination. E.J. Corey and Bill Suggs discovered a pyridinium salt reagent in which
this element is bound to oxygen and chlorine. This metal's trioxide is combined with acetone and sulfuric
acid in a reagent which is used to convert primary alcohols to carboxylic acids. This metal, which is used in
organic chemistry as part of the PCC and Jones reagents, imparts a red color to corundum. For 10 points,
name this metal which is named for its ability to change the color of many metal compounds.
ANSWER: chromium [or Cr]
The height of these structures was found by Graf to be the strongest predictor of whether they are
empty. William White suggested that the primary force acting on these entities is floor deepening
rather than headward sapping, noting that cols, or passes, rarely form in them. Parallel to the back
wall of one of these there can form a randkluft or a bergschrund. These objects are bounded on two
sides by the headwall and the sill, and many contain lakes called (*) tarns, which form from icemelt.
The erosion of two of these structures towards each other can form an arete. For 10 points, name these
amphitheatre-shaped rock formations that form at the head of valley glaciers.
ANSWER: cirques [or corries; or cwms]
These clouds were photographed in the Martian atmosphere by the NASA rover Opportunity. On Earth, the
scarcity of water vapor where they are usually located gives them their namesake shape. These clouds'
presence can signal the approach of precipitation, but the clouds themselves do not yield any. Their wispy,
strand-like appearance lends them the nickname "mare's tail", and they signal wind direction via their
orientation. Identify these highest of clouds, with a Latin name meaning "curl of hair."
ANSWER: cirrus clouds [prompt on mare's tail before it is mentioned; do not accept or prompt on "cirrostratus" or "cirrocumulus"]
The Phoenix Mars Lander observed this type of cloud, which absorb outgoing infrared radiation but
fail to deflect incoming sunlight, leading to a net heating effect. They can originate from the
glaciation of other clouds, and (*) jet contrails are a man-made form of these clouds. They are generally
found in the upper atmosphere and are often associated with fair weather. For 10 points, identify this wispy
type of cloud made of ice crystals.
ANSWER: cirrus clouds (prompt on clouds)
Two answers required. These two terms denote "acting elements" which are promoter sequences of DNA
that complex with transcription factors and transcription factors produced remotely that bind to the
promoter sequences. The ends of the Golgi body that are towards the endoplasmic reticulum and the plasma
membrane are referred to by these two names. Though fatty acids always have one of these properties, they
may acquire the other upon partial hydrogenation. The E/Z notation is applied to molecules when this
notation is ineffective. For 10 points, give these terms that describe substituents that are on the same or
opposite sides of a carbon-carbon double bond.
ANSWER: cis and trans [need both; accept cis/trans acting elements or cis/trans isomerism or cis/trans faces at any point]
The allyl ester of a carboxylic acid is used instead of an allyl vinyl ether in the Ireland modification of this
man's namesake [3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangement. One form of another reaction named after this man has
high yield only if one of the reactants has no alpha hydrogen, that being the "crossed" version, and another
form of that reaction competes with cleavage via ring scission and is named after Dieckmann. That reaction
produces a beta-ketoester from two esters in basic solution. For 10 points, name this German with a
namesake condensation reaction.
ANSWER: (Rainer) Ludwig Claisen (accept early Claisen rearrangement, be nice and accept later "Claisen condensation")
This man's eponymous rule relates acidity to enolisation, and a dye precursor is formed from silver cyanide
and ortho-nitro-benzoyl chloride in his eponymous isatin synthesis. Another reaction named for him has
modifications named for Bellus, Eschenmoser, and Ireland, and it requires heat to form an o-allyl-phenol
from an allyl vinyl ether via a pericyclic mechanism. In addition to that rearrangement, another eponymous
reaction forms a tetrahedral intermediate before expelling an alkoxide group to leave an acyl substitution
product. For 10 points, identify the namesake of the reaction that forms beta-keto esters from two ester
molecules, which is known as his condensation.
ANSWER: Rainer Ludwig Claisen
This man invented and names a flask with two still heads, one holding a capillary and the other a
thermometer. With Shadwell he used silver cyanide and orthonitrobenzoyl chloride in a synthesis of isatin,
and A reaction involving aromatic aldehydes to create cinnamate is named after this man. Another reaction
named for him has Bellus and Ireland variations and involves heating an allyl vinyl ether to form an
unsaturated carbonyl, a [3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangement. An intramolecular variation on another reaction
named for him forms a cyclic version of its product and is named for Dieckmann, and that reaction's product
is a beta-keto ester. For 10 points, identify this German chemist, the namesake of a condensation.
ANSWER: Rainer Ludwig Claisen [or Claisen flask, reaction, rearrangement, condensation, etc.]
One modification of a reaction developed by this scientist reacts an allylic ether or thioether with a ketene to
form an unsaturated ester or thioester. Another modification of the same reaction developed by this man
forms gamma, delta-unsaturated carboxylic acids from the rearrangement of deprotonated allylic acetates,
and is named for Ireland and this scientist. This man also names a reaction used in the first step in the
mevalonate pathway, which forms the molecule acetoacetyl-CoA. Unsaturated ketones are formed from
allyl vinyl ethers in this man's rearrangement, a variant of the Cope rearrangement. Dieckmann names an
intramolecular version of this man's most famous reaction. For 10 points, name this German chemist whose
namesake condensation of two esters forms beta-keto-esters.
ANSWER: Rainer Ludwig Claisen
The Stobbe reaction is a modification of this reaction specifically for diethyl succinate, which requires a
weaker base to react. In reactions with ethyl esters, ethoxide is used as a base since nucleophilic acyl
substitution occurs but will only result in formation of starting material. One equivalent of ethoxide catalyst
is commonly added to the reaction mixture to drive the reaction toward the less stable products. This
reaction requires the ester starting material to have at least two alpha-hydrogens, to account for the two
ionization events that occur. An intramolecular analog of this reaction is known as the Dieckmann
condensation, forming a cyclic beta-keto ester from a diester. FTP, identify this eponymous base-promoted
condensation of two ester molecules to give a beta-keto ester.
ANSWER: Claisen condensation
The FabH enzyme catalyzes this reaction between malonyl-ACP and acetyl CoA in E. Coli. A variation of
it using weaker reagents on a succinic acid derivative is named after Stobbe. Because of the formation of a
doubly alpha position, it mandates that a base in a stochiometric amount must be used, and this base is not
regenerated by the reaction. This neutralization of the base also allows the addition of acid at the end of the
reaction without competition from the reverse reaction. An intramolecular version of this reaction, which is
possible with diesters, is known as the Diekmann condensation. FTP, identify this carbon-carbon bond
forming reaction which creates a beta-keto ester or beta diketone.
ANSWER: Claisen Condensation
Citrate synthase operates via conducting a close analogue to this reaction between acetyl-CoA and
oxaloacetic acid, while this reaction occurs on glyoxylate during pyruvate metabolism, giving Smalate, thanks to the enzyme malate synthase. A derivative of succinic acid reacts via a lactone
intermediate in a modification of this reaction named for (*) Stobbe. Common base catalysts include
alkoxide ions, to prevent transesterification. Crossed ones commonly employ ketones or nitriles, and an
intramolecular variation of this reaction is named for Dieckmann. For 10 points, identify this reaction
between an ester and an ester enolate, which yields a beta-ketoester and can be contrasted with aldol
condensation.
ANSWER: Claisen Condensation
Among the enzymes that can catalyze biological versions of this reaction is polyketide synthase. In
the mevalonate pathway, two reactions of this sort are performed on acetyl-CoA in order to form
HMG-CoA. A modification of this reaction that uses succinic acid derivatives is named for Stobbe,
and a classic laboratory demonstration of it is a synthesis of acetoacetate. An intermolecular form of
this reaction creates (*) five or six-member rings and is named for Dieckmann. This reaction, which often
uses the harpoon base LDA, begins with the deprotonation of the alpha carbon of an ester, which then
attacks the carbonyl group of another ester. For 10 points, name this reaction that produces beta-ketoesters,
a condensation named for a German.
ANSWER: Claisen condensation [prompt on "Claisen", there's more than one reaction named for him]
In the degradation of threonine to glycine, the PLP aided reverse of this reaction liberates a sulfur
containing compound. The reverse of this reaction is also carried out by thiolases in the primary pathway
that compounds like oleic acid and this reaction occurs between acyl synthase and malonyl-CoA in fatty
acid synthesis. One version of this reaction creates Ethyl 2-oxocyclopentanecarboxylate from Diethyl
hexanedioate. Unlike mechanistically similar reaction, in this reaction the OR group is expelled to collapse
the tetrahedral intermediate. A version of this reaction occurring within a molecule that is useful in making
five and six membered rings is named for Dieckmann. For 10 points, name this base catalyzed reaction
between two esters that yields a beta-keto ester.
ANSWER: Claisen condensation
Enzymatic instances of this reaction are catalyzed by bacterial type II fatty acid synthesis enzymes, and by
Chalcone synthase, which contain a Thiolase fold. A modification of it replaces a reactant with succinate,
while a classic version of it occurs between ethyl benzoate and acetophenone, the former of which is not
enolizable. It is driven by the removal of a doubly-alpha proton in the final product and the subsequent
resonance stabilization of the negative charge, and its modifications include the Stobbe and crossed
varieties. An intramolecular version of this reaction is used to create five- or six-member rings and is named
for Dieckmann. For 10 points, name this condensation reaction that forms beta-keto-esters, the ester
counterpart of the aldol condensation.
ANSWER: Claisen condensation
An empirically obtained version of it uses three substance-specific components and is called the
Antoine equation. A general version of this relation does not assume a constant change in enthalpy or
entropy over a temperature range, and it is derived by assuming no change in Gibbs free energy. It states
that the latent heat divided by the temperature times change in volume is the slope of a coexistence curve
describing a phase change. For 10 points, identify this equation named for a German and French scientist.
ANSWER: Clausius-Clapeyron equation
In meteorology, a modification to this equation is known as the Magnus-Tetens approximation.
Another modification of this equation features the term B over T+C and is called the Antoine
equation. It can be derived by assuming the difference in Gibbs free energy between two points are
the same, and can be written with the right hand side as latent heat over temperature times (*)
volume change. This equation gives the slopes of the tangents to the coexistence curve. For 10 points, name
this equation that characterizes pressure and temperature along phase boundaries.
ANSWER: Clausius-Clapeyron relation
By the Third Law of Thermodynamics and a magnetic equivalent of this law, the critical magnetic field for
a superconductor approaches a constant as temperature approaches absolute zero. This equation can be
derived by showing that a Carnot engine run between two phases at two close temperatures has the same
thermal efficiency. It can also be derived by finding the infinitesimal change in chemical potential for each
of two phases in equilibrium with each other; that form of this equation says that the derivative of vapor
pressure with respect to temperature equals the change in entropy over the change in volume. For 10 points,
name this doubly-eponymous equation which gives the slope of the coexistence line in a pressure versus
temperature plot.
ANSWER: Clausius-Clapeyron equation [or Clausius-Clapeyron equation before "vaporization"]
An analogue of this expression for superconductors can be used to relate the difference in entropy per unit
volume to the product of the magnetic field and the derivative of the field with respect to temperature. This
equation can be derived by noting that the Gibbs free energy in two phases must be equal and rearranging
terms to obtain the derivative of pressure with respect to temperature as equal to latent heat divided by the
product of temperature and volume differential. For 10 points, identify this doubly-eponymous equation
from thermodynamics that is useful in drawing the coexistence curves between simultaneous phases.
ANSWER: Clausius-Clapeyron equation
This equation was derived in a work that gave the first visualization of the Carnot [kar-NOH] cycle
and an early version of the ideal gas law. Its first derivation was correct because it applies to a
situation in which heat change equals enthalpy change. In one version of this equation, temperature
squared is multiplied by the ideal gas constant, while in another version temperature is multiplied by
specific volume change. Both versions can be used to find the derivative of pressure with respect to
temperature. Name this equation that uses latent heat to calculate a slope on a phase diagram.
ANSWER: Clausius-Clapeyron equation or relation
The integration of this equation typically assumes the temperature-independence of a quantity whose
temperature dependence can be given by the Watson correlation. One empirical alternative to this
equation is the Riedel equation. It's not the Gibbs-Duhem, but this equation can be derived by
taking the definition of the differential of Gibbs free energy and noting that the Gibbs free energy
does not change. That derivation eventually sets the change in entropy divided by the change in (*)
volume equal to the derivative of pressure with respect to temperature. The final form of this equation sets
the natural log of the pressure equal to minus the change in enthalpy divided by RT plus a constant. For 10
points, name this equation which gives the slope of a coexistence curve on a phase diagram.
ANSWER: Clausius-Clapeyron equation
Minerals associated with them are aluminium phyllosilicates and the four divisions of them are Illite,
Kaolinite, smectite, and Chlorite. A common type is Bentonite and most have a plastic state when in contact
with water. The neoformation of them occurs through the chemical weathering of rocks and soil. On the
Wentworth scale, they have a grain size less than 4 micrometers, which makes them smaller than silt and all
others on the chart. For ten points identify this type of material which can be turned to ceramics in a kiln.
ANSWER: Clay
The Haworth phenanthrene synthesis can utilize two of these reactions, and pinacol(*) formation can often
be observed during this reaction. This process has been employed to reduce vanillin compounds using
toluene as an auxiliary solvent to yield creosol. It can be used to convert a Friedel-Crafts acylation product
to an alkyl side-chain, and requires the use of amalgamated zinc which functions in part as a metal
activation surface. It is not particularly effective with alicyclic and aliphatic ketones and such acid-labile
molecules should be reduced using the complementary Wolff-Kishner reaction. For 10 points, identify this
chemical process requiring a strong acid substrate which allows for the deoxygenation of aldehydes or
ketones to produce hydrocarbons.
ANSWER: Clemmensen reduction (accept Wolf-Kishner until *)
A group of reagents named for and using this paradigm were developed by Life Technologies for use
in bio-orthogonal labelling. MG Finn and Hartmuth Kolb helped develop this paradigm. The
prototypical method used in this paradigm occurs in copper-catalyzed and metal-free variants, and
produces 1,2,3-triazoles; that is the Huisgen cyclization, in which an azide is added to an alkyne. This
paradigm emphasizes modularity, high (*) atom economy, and green solvents. This paradigm was
discovered by the same scientist who names a method using one of two AD-mixes for asymmetric
dihydroxylation, as well as an epoxidation reaction using diethyl tartrate. For 10 points, name this synthetic
chemistry paradigm that emphasizes connecting small units to make complex molecules in imitations of
biological systems, developed by Nobelist K. Barry Sharpless.
ANSWER: click chemistry
Continentality is the difference in this concept between land and ocean environments, and in urban areas,
this concept is disrupted by the thermal inversion caused by air pollution. Prevailing westerlies are the
dominant regulator of this concept in northern Europe, and El Nino is the periodic shift in this concept
around the Pacific. Systems for classifying this concept include the Thornthwaite, which incorporates
evapo-transpiration, and the Koppen, which is based on precipitation and temperature and has examples like
monsoon, tundra, and desert. Often used as evidence in support of the global warming theory, name this
meteorological concept defined as the weather in a particular region averaged over a long period of time.
ANSWER: climate [prompt on weather before it is mentioned]
The bases of some of these structures are home to "tuba" and "mamma" formations, and their own
formation is described by the Bergeron process. A notable "arcus" feature in one of these things
found near the Gulf of Carpentaria is called Morning Glory, and the addition of silver iodide or dry
ice can induce (*) nucleation in these objects. One type of these structures can form from contrails and are
given the nickname "mares' tails," and the term "nimbus" is used to describe a darker type of these objects
that form prior to precipitation. For ten points, identify these atmospheric formations that come in cirrus,
stratus, and cumulus varieties.
ANSWER: clouds
These objects cannot form in the absence of CCNs, some of which are believed to be produced by
phytoplankton. The necessary conditions for the formation of these objects are described by a law
which combines Raoult's law and the Kelvin curvature effect, known as the Kohler equation. Cold
ones may grow by riming, leading to the formation of graupel. They begin to form when enough
nuclei are activated by achieving ambient saturation sufficient to pass the critical peak. When these
objects are electrified, forming a main charging zone at intermediate altitude, they may discharge via a
process that forms a stepped leader and is followed by J streamers. Nacreous ones are a rare stratospheric
example of these, which are believed to facilitate ozone depletion. For 10 points, name these
agglomerations of droplets and crystals which come in noctilucent and cumulus varieties.
ANSWER: clouds
Fallstreak holes can appear in these objects. Extreme cold near the north or south pole can cause the
nacreous type of these, which are iridescent. A pileus is one of these objects that "caps" another of
these objects, and (*) contrails are a man-made type of these objects that can be formed from jet engine
exhaust. Stratus, cirrus, and cumulonimbus are types of, for 10 points, what skyborne masses of condensed
water droplets?
ANSWER: clouds
One type of these objects forms at the crest of a lee wave after undergoing orographic lift. That type has
multiple layers which together form a mushroom shape and is termed "lenticular." One emanation from
these objects is called virga, which never reaches its normal destination. The CLAW hypothesis posits that
their formation can be triggered by sulfate aerosols, the "seeds" or "nuclei" around which they condense
below the dew point. Electric potential differences between their lower regions and upper anvil-shaped
portion result in lightning. For 10 points, name these masses of water and ice suspended in the atmosphere,
such as stratus and cirrus.
ANSWER: clouds [accept lenticular clouds]
One type of these entities appear like spokes on a wheel and are "actiniform." The "arcus" or "shelf"
type of these entities indicates an approaching temperature change. These entities, which may be stratifom,
ciriform, or cumuliform, always form in the stratosphere. For 10 points, name these masses of water
droplets that are suspended in the earth's atmosphere, which come in varieties like cumulus and stratus.
ANSWER: clouds
Richard Hamblyn's book The Invention of these objects is about Luke Howard, who developed their
classification system. A pileus is called the cap type of these objects, and the mammatus type has a pouchlike appearance. A modulated beam of light is used in measuring the lowest height of these objects with a
ceilometer. The introduction of large hygroscopic nuclei or silver iodide is used in the seeding of these
objects in order to promote the release of precipitation. FTP name these collections of water droplets or ice
particles that are suspended in the troposphere, types of which include cirrus, cumulus, and stratus.
ANSWER: clouds
One rare type of these formations can be understood as solitons and are known as the "Morning Glory"
type of them. The bases of these formations are home to "tags" or "scuds," which are considered the
"fractus" type of these entities. One type of these formations are informally known as "mare's tails."
Contrails are artificial versions of these formations, which may be "seeded" using silver iodide. For 10
points, name these formations that come in cirrus, cumulus, and nimbus types.
ANSWER: clouds
The inside of these objects is where the Bergeron [BER-guh-ron] process takes place, and the artificial
creation of conditions similar to the ones inside these was done by C.T.R. Wilson. When one of these
objects forms below another one, it can be a mammatus [meh-MATE-us], while if one of these forms on top
of another one, it is a pileus [PIE-lee-us]. The four common types of these objects have Latin names that
translate as pile, layer, wisp, or rain. Name these objects made of drops of water or ice, better known as
cumulus, stratus, cirrus, or nimbus.
ANSWER: clouds
The classification scheme for these objects was developed by Luke Howard. The highest variety of these
objects glow electric blue and are called noctilucent (noc-tuh-LOO-sent). The lenticular variety of these
objects can display iridescence and is shaped like a flying saucer. Silver iodide can be used to "seed" these
objects. These objects form when the air reaches its dew point and are associated with precipitation. For 10
points, name these objects that come in cirrus and cumulus varieties.
ANSWER: clouds
Much of the theory behind this technique was developed by Tor Bergeron and Walter Findeisen, though
the technique itself was pioneered by Vincent Schaefer. Bernard Vonnegut discovered that silver iodide
could be used for this technique. Chinese authorities claimed that this technique successfully prevented rain
during the 2008 Summer Olympics opening ceremony. For 10 points, name this weather modification
technique in which chemicals are sprayed into clouds to induce them into releasing precipitation.
ANSWER: cloud seeding [prompt on weather modification or equivalents before read]
Lithotypes of this material include clarain and durain. Cannel is a non-banded type of this
material. Vitrinite, liptinite and inertinite are three maceral groups found in this material. Heating
this material in the absence of air can create coke. Ranks of this material include (*) bituminous and
anthracite and the precursor to this material's formation is peat. For 10 points, identify this combustible
material composed primarily of carbon.
ANSWER: coal
Ganister, a quartzose sandstone, is usually found in the seatearth, or underclay, that underlies
this rock. This rock is "treasured" by paleobotanists because nodules in it can be "peeled" by
slicing, etching with acid, coating with acetone, and applying a cellulose acetate film to give a
detailed view of fossilized plants, including cell nuclei and chloroplasts. Those nodules are
namesake "balls" of petrified plant matter. Like kerogen-bearing shales, its composition can be
divided into three maceral groups: inertinite, liptinite, and vitrinite. The rank of this rock
increases from its lignite type to its anthracite type and is a measure of its percent amount of
carbon. For 10 points, name this rock whose formation begins with the burial of peat.
ANSWER: coal
Hilt's law describes how depth affects the quality of this substance, and iron sulfide catalysts were
originally used in the Bergius process of hydrogenating this substance. Another form of this
substance used in Wootten fireboxes is produced under metamorphic conditions, and a large quantity
of substance is found in the Powder River Basin. (*) Sub-bituminous and anthracite are varieties of this
substance, much of which originated from the Carboniferous period. It can be mined from namesake seams
and beds. For ten points, identify this group of black, carbon-based sedimentary rocks commonly burned to
produce energy.
ANSWER: coal [reverse prompt on specifics such as "peat" or "lignite" or "bituminous" or "anthracite" before mention]
To prevent these places from being reshaped, tetrapods can be deployed. Ammophila grass has historically
been used to stabilize certain fluvial structures in these places. This habitat is characterized by vertical
zonation, and is where most limpets are found. Mandelbrot introduced the study of fractals in a paper about
the length of one of these places. The movement of sediment at an angle relative to these places is called
littoral drift, causes swash, and gives rise to spits and barrier islands, which serve as natural breakwaters.
Beneath the high-water mark, these places may contain tide pools. For 10 points, name these sometimessandy locations where land meets sea.
ANSWER: coastlines [or seashores; or shorelines; or coastal zones; accept beaches; accept littoral zones before "littoral" is read; accept intertidal zones before "tide" is read and prompt afterwards]
The Pauson-Khand cycloaddition utilizes this element in the perparation of cyclopentenone, and this
element can be extracted from erythrite, a hydrated arsenate of this element known as its namesake
"Bloom." A compound containing this element plays a primary role in the formation of methionine by
methylation of homosysteine while another compound containing this element combines with carbon
monoxide to give the acetyl group of acetyl coenzyme A. Isotope 60 of this element is radioactive and is
often employed in place of X-rays, and in biological systems it is found surrounded by a corrin ring in a
coenzyme that operates with folic acid in DNA synthesis. For ten points, identify this transition metal which
is found at the center of vitamin B12, and which along with iron and nickel makes up the "iron triad".
ANSWER: cobalt
A carbony complexed with this element was the original catalyst in the Pauson-Khand reaction, although
Wilkinson's catalyst, which uses iridium, is now more common. Along with iron, this element is the most
common catalyst used in the Fischer-Tropsch process. Ingestion of this element represents a poisoning
threat since this element can decrease synthesis of enzymes such as cytochrome P450 while inhibiting
aminolevulinic acid synthase, and its sulfate is widely used in electroplating. C.S. Wu's parity-violation
experiments used this element's isotope 60, and its isotope 57 is widely employed in Mossbauer
spectroscopy, though most of this element is used up in magnetic alloys such as Alnico. For ten points,
identify this element with atomic number 27, which takes its name from the German word for "goblin."
ANSWER: Cobalt [prompt on Co]
This element has been shown to bind with Hypoxia Inducible Factor alpha. One complex with this metal at
its center is required for the functioning of methionine synthase, and a deficiency of that complex can occur
as a result of a purely vegetarian diet. Along with chromium, this is the primary element in stellite alloys,
and it is combined with samarium in one class of magnets. In radiation therapy, the isotope 60 of this
element is used to treat cancer. This metal is found in vitamin B12. This element is often used in blue
pigments, and, like iron and nickel, this element is ferromagnetic. For 10 points, name this element with
atomic number 27 and symbol Co.
ANSWER: Cobalt
Skutterudite is an arsenide ore of this element, and its hexammine chloride was a common topic of
study for Alfred Werner. Its acetate salt is used to create a starting compound for polyester synthesis,
terephthalic acid. The basis for CP violation was studied by Chieng-Shiung Wu in an isotope of this
element, and the Mossbauer effect can arise from its (*) 57-isotope. The Schilling test utilizes both
isotopes 57 and 58 to diagnose pernicious anemia, though radiotherapy often uses its 60 isotope. For 10
points, name this element which can confer a blue color to glass, and is found in vitamin B12.
ANSWER: cobalt
The oxo process uses a catalyst containing this metal bonded to four carbonyl groups, which is
useful for hydroformylations. To prove parity violation, the Wu experiment used atoms of this
element. The first Werner coordination complex contained this metal bonded to four ammines. This
element's chloride forms a hexahydrate that is purple in color, but is blue when desiccated. This
element is found in a (*) corrin ring in a biological compound required for the synthesis of odd-chain fatty
acids. That vitamin, which requires intrinsic factor for its absorption, is B12. This element, iron, and nickel
are ferromagnetic. For 10 points, name this transition metal which forms a namesake blue glass, and which
lies right after iron on the Periodic Table.
ANSWER: cobalt [or Co]
It was in an isotope of this element that Chien-Shiung Wu gave the first definitive evidence of CP violation,
and the Leksell gamma knife uses 201 sources of that isotope in a ring to treat brain tumors. Another
isotope of this element yields the gamma ray source Iron-57 for many applications of Mossbauer
spectroscopy. A corrin ring surrounds this metal atom in vitamin B12, and several medical applications,
such as sterilization and radiotherapy, utilize its 60-isotope. For 10 points, identify this chemical element
which gives a deep blue color to ceramics and is ferromagnetic along with its neighbors on both sides of the
Periodic Table, iron and nickel.
ANSWER: cobalt [prompt on Co]
The Swedish chemist Georg Brandt isolated this element in 1735. Its 57 nuclide is used as a tracer in
Schilling's test for pernicious anemia because this element is a central component of Vitamin B12. Its 60
isotope finds extensive use as a radiation source for cancer treatment and the sterilization of medical tools
and instruments. This element's compounds are used as oxidation catalysts in electroplating, while the
element's ferromagnetism is used in the production of corrosion-resistant magnetic and high-strength alloys.
FTP, name this metal that, when used in pigments, gives glass, ceramics, and other surfaces a deep blue
color.
ANSWER: Cobalt
Raoult's Law, which states that the partial pressure exerted by the solvent vapor is equal to the product of
the mole fraction of solvent times the predetermined vapor pressure of pure solvent, governs one of these.
The last of these only occurs near semipermiable membranes, but can be found by multiplying the molarity
of the solution times the Ideal gas constant times the temperature in Kelvin. The Van't Hoff factor, i, or the
number of particles into which compound will dissociate into solution, greatly affects two others. FTP,
name these properties of solutions that depend on their concentration, which include Vapor pressure
lowering, boiling point elevation, freezing point depression, and osmotic pressure.
ANSWER: Colligative Properties
Raoult's law describes one of these properties. Osmotic pressure, another of these properties, was
discovered by a Dutch chemist J. H. Van't Hoff, whose namesake factor, symbolized i, is also found in the
equations that use two more of these properties, freezing point depression, and boiling point elevation. For
10 points, name these properties of solutions which only depend on the number, not the type, of solute
particles.
ANSWER: colligative properties
One of these phenomena was discovered by Jean Antoine Nollet using a pig bladder, and they can be used
in determining molecular weight if the chemical potential of all phases is the same. One law concerning one
of these phenomena only applies to mixtures where fugacity can be replaced by simple pressures, which are
termed ideal mixtures. That example of these properties is dependent on mole fraction as described by
Raoult's law. Aside from vapor pressure, these properties involve the use of the van't Hoff factor. For 10
points, name these concentration-dependent properties of mixtures which include boiling point elevation
and freezing point depression.
ANSWER: colligative properties
One of these concepts may be modeled as being equal to the universal gas constant multiplied by
temperature and concentration, and was extensively studied by Harmon Morse. Solute effects on them
are measured by the van 't Hoff factor, and Raoult's Law describes how one of them is affected by mole
fractions of different solutes. For 10 points, name these properties that depend only on the number of
solute particles in a solution and not the mass of those particles, examples of which include osmotic
pressure and boiling point elevation.
ANSWER: colligative properties
One quantity exhibited by these substances can be measured by propagating an ultrasound wave and
creating a namesake "vibration current." Opposite charge type and high charge number are the two
conditions for the Schulze-Hardy rule for them. A theory of these substances has been modified to account
for anomalies by taking into account their pair potential. One property possessed by them is measured at the
radius of shear relative to the bulk medium. The stability of these substances is increased by peptization.
They possess an electrical double layer and are described by DLVO theory. Flocculation is the disruption of
these substances, which are scattered by light in the Tyndall effect. For 10 points, name these substances
dispersed in other substances, such as sols and emulsions.
ANSWER: colloids
The stability of this type of mixture is explained by DLVO theory. They can be described as lyophobic
(LIE-oh-FOE-bik) or lyophilic (LIE-oh-FILL-ik). They undergo flocculation, which is similar to
precipitation, in solutions. Micelles (MEE-sells) are structures that can exist in these mixtures. They consist
of a continuous and dispersed phase, and the Tyndall effect can be observed in them. Examples of this class
of mixtures include aerosols and emulsions. For 10 points, name these mixtures of one substance dispersed
in another, an example of which is milk.
ANSWER: colloids
The formation of these substances due to the cocultivation of microalgae and fungi of the genus Aspergillus
is a potential method to increase efficiency of algal biodiesel production. A quantity which is equal to the
difference between the potential of the medium and the substance on the surfaces of other components of
these mixture is called the zeta potential. When these substances have a high zeta potential, their contents
are prevented from coming out of suspension due to flocculation. A beam of light is scattered when it is
shone through one of these substances in the Tyndall effect. For 10 points, name these mixtures in which
particles of one substance are dispersed in another, which are exemplified by foams and emulsions.
ANSWER: colloids
Pectizing and peptizing are forms of producing these substances. These substances can be classified
as lyophilic or lyophobic. Its components can be put into categories such as fibrillar or corpuscular
based on their size. A namesake cone of polarized (*) light is characteristic of one property of these
substances. Categories of this substance include emulsions and aerosols. Light that is shined through these
substances is scattered through the Tyndall effect. For 10 points, name these mixtures containing a
dispersed phase and a continuous phase, examples of which include jelly, milk, smoke, and paint.
ANSWER: colloids
The process in which polymers form bridges between flocs of these compounds is called flocculation
(FLOCK-yu-LAY-shun). Scattering of light by these compounds is the Tyndall (TIN-doll) Effect.
Classifications of them include gel, foam, sol, and emulsion. This term denotes a mixture that is neither a
solution nor a suspension. For 10 points, name this heterogeneous mixture of particles dispersed in a
continuous phase, examples of which include mayonnaise and paint.
ANSWER: colloids
The three-dimentional stability of these systems is governed by DLVO theory, and the electrokinetic
potential at a particular double layer interface in these systems is called the zeta potential. These systems
undergo flocculation and peptization, and in some cases, micelles can form in these systems. These
substances have continuous and dispersed phases, and these systems scatter light in the Tyndall Effect.
Examples of these systems include emulsions and aerosols. For 10 points, identify these specific types of
mixtures, in which one component is completely and equally dispersed throughout another.
ANSWER: colloids
The interaction between two particles in one of these substances can be modeled as the sum of the repulsive
double-layer electric force and the van der Waals force. They stabilize in a process called peptization and
destabilize in a process called flocculation. Classifications of these substances include foams, aerosols, and
gels, depending on the states of the continuous and dispersed phases. For 10 points, the Tyndall effect
describes scattering off of the particles in what kind of mixtures, in which one substance is microscopically
dispersed throughout another?
ANSWER: colloids [do not accept more specific answers]
Particles of this type of substance are removed from emissions by Cottrell precipitators. The Tyndall
effect is the scattering of light by these substances. Emulsions, or liquids dispersed in liquids, and aerosols,
or liquids dispersed in gases, are categories of this type of mixture. Examples of these substances include
fog, milk, and butter. For 10 points, name this type of mixture whose particles fall between those of
suspensions and solutions in size.
ANSWER: colloids [or colloidal dispersions]
The study of these types of substances led Thomas Graham, who wrote that they do not follow ordinary
chemical relations and do not have crystallinity, to develop dialysis [dye-AL-uh-sis] using semipermeable
[sem-i-PER-mee-uhbul] membranes. Examples include pumice [PYOO-mis] and opal, and their color is
often near the blue end of the spectrum because of the way they scatter light, known as the Tyndall [TINdahl] effect. These substances include gels, foams, sols, aerosols, and emulsions. Name these substances
in which particles of one substance are dispersed throughout another substance.
ANSWER: colloids (accept sols before pumice is mentioned)
Polymerization in one type of these entities was first modeled by Smith, Ewart, and Hawkins. These
entities exhibit maximum viscosity at their point of zero charge. These entities may be described by a
number first calculated rigorously by Dukhin and Semenikhin, whose simplified computation
typically assumes a thin double layer and neglects surface conductivity. These entities are destabilized in a
process called flocculation, and that stability can be measured by the zeta potential. For 10 points, name
these entities, which scatter light according to the Tyndall effect and whose liquid-liquid examples are
called emulsions.
ANSWER: colloids
Otto Stern proposed a slipping plane in these systems, at which ions with non-negligible volume adsorb to a
surface, modifying the Helmholtz and Gouy-Chapman models. These systems are stabilized through the
addition of a salt, called peptization. Because these materials effectively scatter light with low wavelengths,
they often appear blue when light is shined through them in the Tyndall effect. Flocculation disrupts these
systems, which are defined to be dispersions with particle diameter between a nanometer and a micrometer.
For 10 points, name these systems of in which one substance is dispersed throughout another, exemplified
by foams, emulsions, and aerosols.
ANSWER: colloids [prompt on "dispersions"]
The negative sixth power of a counterion's charge determines the CCC of these systems,
according to the Schulze-Hardy rule. A critical parameter for these systems is proportional to the
square root of permittivity times temperature over density times ionic strength. A model for these
thermodynamically unstable, kinetically stable, systems proposes they have electrostatic repulsions
from a shell of mobile ions which form a (*) double layer. Peptization stabilizes these systems, though, at
high separations, they also have local minima in energy due to flocculation. Blue light is strongly reflected
by them in the Tyndall effect. For 10 points, name these systems in which particles are dispersed in another
medium, which include sols, gels, and emulsions.
ANSWER: colloids [prompt on dispersions; prompt on emulsions; prompt on gels; prompt on sols or aerosols; prompt on foams]
Pair potentials in these systems can be calculated by an equation which uses the Hamaker constant.
The earliest model for a charged metal plate in these systems was developed by Helmholtz, and has
been replaced by a modification of the Gouy-Chapman theory named for Stern. Richard Zsigmondy
invented a microscope to observe these systems, which can be modeled by DLVO theory. Induction of
clumping in these systems is termed flocculation, whereas the dispersion of light in these systems is known
as the Tyndall effect. For 10 points, identify these systems wherein small particles are suspended in a
medium, exemplified by aerosols and emulsions.
ANSWER: colloids
Michael Faraday created a red colored one of these substances using gold that has
remained stable to the present. These substances are most viscous when uncharged,
and they do not follow Gibbs' Phase Rule. A quadruply eponymous theory of these
entities describes interactions between double layers of counterions; that theory is
abbreviated DLVO, and when subjected to voltages below the zeta potential they
undergo (*) occulation. Blue light scatters in the Tyndall Effect in, for ten points, these
substances which consist of continuous and dispersed phases, examples of which include aerosols,
emulsions, and gels.
ANSWER: colloids
In 2004, Li and Rothberg showed that one kind of this state can colorimetrically detect specific DNA
sequences, and it has also been shown to detect and relieve rheumatoid arthritis. Porphyrins can selfassemble into this state as an intermediate on the way to becoming nanosheets. The theory that describes
them balances surface charge and thermal motion in terms of the Bjerrum length and a Yukawa potential,
and is the quadruply-eponymous DLVO theory. Scattering in them is often governed by the Mie theory, and
they can be dispersed by adding depletants or salts to cause flocculation. For 10 points, name these systems
that exhibit the Tyndall effect and consist of suspensions of very small particles.
ANSWER: colloid [accept colloidal gold or gold nanoparticles before "porphyrins"]
Entropic forces form hard spheres in these substances that names a vibration current formed from
an ultrasound in a fluid that can be used to measure the zeta potentials of this substance. One subset
of these types of mixtures is subject to the Bancroft rule, that subset is an emulsion. These materials
scatter light in a phenomenon called the Tyndall Effect. For ten points, name this type of mixture in which
one component is dispersed equally throughout the other.
ANSWER: colloids
Crystals of this type include the close-packed silica formations that give rise to opal. These structures
destabilize at voltages under the zeta potential in processes called coagulation and flocculation. Some of
these structures scatter light in the Tyndall effect. A type of this structure exemplified by milk and
mayonnaise is called an emulsion. For 10 points, name these stages intermediate between suspensions and
solutions, where a dispersed phase is spread evenly throughout another.
ANSWER: colloids
The nature of these substances was studied by Richard Zsigmondy with an ultramicroscope. The stability of
the lyophobic type of these substances is described by the quadruply-eponymous DLVO theory, and the
addition of electrolytes to them causes flocculation. The scattering of light by these substances is known as
the Tyndall effect, and types of them include foams, emulsions, and aerosols. For 10 points, name these
mixtures in which one solute-like component is dispersed as very fine particles in a solvent-like substance,
examples of which include smoke and milk.
ANSWER: colloids [accept colloidal dispersions]
Brownian motion was discovered in this type of system. These systems can classified as lyophobic
or lyophilic. These systems can be stably formed in peptization, or formed through large clusters in
flocculation. These systems scatter incident light in the Tyndall effect, and they are composed of (*)
continuous and dispersed phases. For 10 points, identify this type of mixture in which smaller particles are
dispersed throughout a medium, examples of which include aerosols and emulsions.
ANSWER: colloids [or colloidal system; prompt on aerosol]
These substances are broken apart when ferric chloride turns into ferric hydroxide in the presence of
water. One type of these substances can be produced by Bredig's Arc Method, and, when they
contain water, peptization can be performed. Adding surfactants stabilizes one type of these
substances, which generally scatter light in the (*) Tyndall Effect. Particles from these substances
aggregate in flocculation, and specific types of them include gels and emulsions. For ten points, identify
these substances like blood and milk, in which small particles are dispersed, but not dissolved, in a
continuous phase.
ANSWER: colloids
Similarly to Rayleigh scattering, the intensity of the scattered light is proportional to the fourth
power of the light's wavelength when a light beam is passed through this kind of system. That
phenomenon is known as the Tyndall Effect. Particles separate from this state via flocculation
(FLOCK-"you"-LAY-shun). This system consists of a (*) dispersed phase and a continuous phase, and
this type of mixture includes aerosols and emulsions. For 10 points, name this type of mixture that includes
fog and mayonnaise, in which dispersed particles are larger than in solutions and smaller than in
suspensions.
ANSWER: colloids [accept Tyndall Effect before "system"]
Thomas Graham launched the study of these and did a study of ones involving silicic acid.
Components are surrounded by a electric double layer, and their stability is partially indicated by
the zeta potential. The hydro types of them are used to dress wounds. They are classified based on
their continuous and dispersed (*) phases. These can appear bluish under certain lighting conditions
because of the Tyndall effect. They include foams, aerosols, and emulsions. For 10 points, name these
mixtures in between solutions and suspensions, an example of which is milk.
ANSWER: colloid [ or colloidal dispersion]
Before silver processing, photographic development required an organic one of these substances to be
treated with bichromate. Francesco Selmi extensively studied inorganic examples of these substances,
including the pigment Prussian blue, and those containing radionuclides are usually the eigen-type. A
Cottrell precipitator will prevent one of these from forming in a smokestack, while Liesegang rings are the
result of coagulation in the gel-type of this substance. Tyndall scattering of light is characteristic of this kind
of mixture, which has foam, aerosol, and emulsion varieties. Consisting of a continuous and a dispersed
phase, identify this term for mixtures like ruby glass and milk, whose suspended particles are too small to
settle out of the solution.
ANSWER: colloids
The Kirkwood-Alder transition describes the transition of these substances into crystals, which can
occur to polystyrene molecules. One theory that describes them approximates the force on a curved
surface as simply curvature times the unit area free energy on a planar surface. That theory is often
approximated by the Derjaguin Approximation and it features terms with the Hamaker interaction
constant and the electrostatic double layer repulsion, which is balanced by the (*) Van der Waals
force. These substances can only be separated after small particles aggregate together. Described by the
DLVO theory, they can undergo flocculation. For 10 points, name these substances exemplified by milk that
undergo the Tyndall effect, which are made of very small particles dispersed throughout another substance.
ANSWER: colloids
Bentonite acts as an extreme barrier for this class of substances, limiting their mobility due to ultrafiltration.
The zeta potential describes electric potential at the double layer interfaces seen in this class of substances.
Their stable formation, termed peptization, is opposed by the formation of large clusters of particles in these
systems, a process known as flocculation. The Tyndall effect describes light scattering through this type of
substance, which is characterized by separate continuous and dispersed phases. For 10 points, name this
type of chemical mixture where particles of one substance are dispersed throughout another, examples of
which include foams, gels, and emulsions.
ANSWER: colloids
The stability of these substances is related to the voltage drop at the double layers that surround the
components of these substances. These substances destabilize when particles aggregate, a process
called flocculation ["flock"-yoo-LAY-shun]. These substances often appear blue due to scattering
caused by the Tyndall effect. When these substances are made up of a solid within a liquid, they
are called sols, and when made up of two liquids, they are called emulsions. Unlike suspensions,
these substances do not settle. Name this type of substance consisting of one substance dispersed in
another, exemplified by milk and smoke.
ANSWER: colloids [prompt on sols or emulsions before each is mentioned]
Regional shifts in concentration in these substances occur in a process called creaming, and the
formation of stable aqueous ones is called peptization. The drop in electric potential between the
slipping plane and a point in the bulk of these substances is called the zeta potential. These entities
destabilize in a clumping process called (*) flocculation, and the scattering particularly of blue
wavelengths within them is known as the Tyndall effect. Unlike suspensions, the particles in these
substances do not spontaneously settle over time. For 10 points, name these substances that include sols and
emulsions, examples of which include paint, milk, and smoke.
ANSWER: colloids
The first attempt to calculate two-dimensional interaction energy between two particles in this
system was made by Horvolgyi, while its stability in three dimensions is given by the DLVO model.
Gibbs' Phase Rule does not apply to systems of this type. When a beam of light passes through this
kind of (*) mixture, it scatters in the Tyndall effect. Depending on the phases involved, it may be called a
sol, an emulsion, or an amalgam. For 10 points, name this kind of mixture in which the dispersed
particles are smaller than in a suspension and larger than in a solution.
ANSWER: colloid
The processes that occur beyond the CCC in these compounds are irreversible, and these compounds
are described by the Schulze-Hardy rules. The stability of these systems is described as a sum of its
electrostatic repulsions and Van der Waals attractions by one theory, and these compounds are
classified as lyophilic or lyophobic. The electric potential at double layers in these compounds is
quantified as its (*) zeta potential. The aggregation of destabilized particles in these systems occurs during
flocculation. The dispersal of light in these compounds is called the Tyndall effect. For 10 points, name
these systems whose types include aerosols, gels and emulsions, exemplified by milk.
ANSWER: colloids [accept specific types like aerosols, gels, or emulsions before mentioned]
The zeta potential is an electrokinetic measurement for this substance. Flocculation occurs when
particles in it clump together, and emulsions are a specific type of this entity along with sols and gels.
It displays the (*) Tyndall effect by scattering light. For 10 points, name this term for substances like fog
and milk, where components of a mixture are dispersed in one another.
ANSWER: colloid
Crystal field theory explains why many coordination complexes of transition metals have this property.
Organic substances with this property include indoles. Spectrophotometry is usually applied to solutions
which have this property. Solutions of zinc and aluminum almost never have this property, but chromium
solutions do. Compounds with this property absorb electromagnetic radiation between four hundred and
seven hundred nanometers. pH indicators change in this property to distinguish between acids and bases.
For 10 points, name this property which water does not have because it is clear.
ANSWER: color [or clear equivalents]
The lowest temperature at which this reaction can occur is called the flash point. NOx is formed at
sufficiently high temperatures for this reaction even though nitrogen gas is not involved in it. When this
reaction is incomplete, carbon monoxide is formed. Two, four, and six stroke machines are varieties of the
"internal" "engine" in which it takes place. This reaction takes a hydrocarbon and forms water vapor and
carbon dioxide. For 10 points, name this reaction that produces heat and light, often in the form of fire.
ANSWER: combustion [or burning; prompt on ignition]
Unusually, singlet oxygen and both hydrogen and hydroxyl radicals form during this type of reaction.
Enthalpies of reaction are usually calculated by using substance-specific enthalpies of formation or
enthalpies of this process. The Otto and Diesel cycles extract work from the enthalpy of this type of
reaction. Carbon monoxide is generated in the incomplete form of this reaction, which occurs at low
external oxygen concentrations. For 10 points, name this exothermic reaction in which hydrocarbons
produce water and carbon dioxide by burning.
ANSWER: combustion [or word forms; prompt on burning until it is read]
With insufficient oxygen, this chemical process will be incomplete and carbon monoxide will be
produced. Bomb calorimeters are used to measure the energy of this reaction, which comes in rapid,
(*) smoldering, and spontaneous types. Water and carbon dioxide are common products of this process,
which happens internally in motor engines. For 10 points, name this exothermic reaction that consumes an
oxidant and fuel and usually causes a flame.
ANSWER: combustion
Acetylaldehyde is typically produced when ethanol undergoes this type of reaction. The reaction of
hydrogen gas and oxygen gas to form water is another example of this reaction. There are complete and
incomplete forms of this reaction; the complete type releases water and carbon dioxide but not carbon
monoxide. For 10 points, name this type of exothermic chemical reaction between an oxidant and a fuel
like gasoline.
ANSWER: combustion reaction
In the cumene process, this is done to cumene in order to form cumene hydroperoxide. Georg Stahl first
proposed the phlogiston theory of this process. The maximum efficiency of a common machine that uses
this process can be attained by the Carnot cycle. Surpassing the (*) flash point will allow this type of
oxidation reaction to occur, while surpassing the autoignition temperature will cause it to occur
spontaneously. In the complete form of these reactions, oxygen reacts with a hydrocarbon to produce
carbon dioxide and water. For 10 points, name these reactions which can be simply described as blowing
things up.
ANSWER: combustion reactions (prompt on "oxidation" before it is read)
In solid compounds, this class of reactions occurs in three distinct phases in which preheating leads to a
second distillation stage. At the molecular level, these types of reactions can only be initiated if a heat-
induced spin-paired state is achieved, which subsequently reacts to produce the heat that propagates the
reaction. Certain types require consideration of the air to fuel ratio, while liquid fuels used in these have to
above the flash point temperature. They come in complete, incomplete, and smoldering forms, and are used
in devices like the calorimeter and diesel engine. FTP, name this reaction type in which a hydrocarbon
reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water.
ANSWER: combustion reactions
Ilkovic solved a partial differential equation involving derivatives of this quantity for a semi-infinite space.
Another PDE involving this quantity was transposed to Lagrangian coordinates by Taylor and Aris and says
that the time derivative of this quantity is proportional to its second spatial derivative. The molar flux is
equal in magnitude to the molecular diffusivity times the gradient of this according to Fick's Law, and it can
be measured in normality, molality, or percent by volume or weight. For 10 points, name this measure of
how much of a given substance exists within a given volume, most often measured in molarity, or moles per
liter.
ANSWER: concentration
In graph theory, this refers to a process of treating each strongly connected component of a graph as a single
vertex. This term also refers to a Wilson cloud that can accompany a mushroom cloud and that is caused by
a temporary cooling of the air. This term is also associated with chemical reactions in which two large
molecules combine and lose a small molecule, such as an enol [EE-nawl] and a carbonyl [CAR-bahn-EEL]
combining to form an aldol and a water molecule. This process typically occurs towards the end of
distillation, and this term is used in the name of the fifth state of matter, following the names of Bose and
Einstein. Give this term commonly used to name the phase transition from gas to liquid.
ANSWER: condensation [accept word forms such as condensate or condense]
One reaction of this type involves an alkoxide intermediate formed by enolate reacting with an ester and
results in a beta-ketoester; that reaction has an intramolecular version named for Dieckmann. Besides the
Claisen and aldol varieties, other examples include phosphorylation, glycosylation, and polypeptide
synthesis. Used to describe reactions between two molecules to form a single larger molecule combined
with the loss of a smaller molecule, for 10 points, give this term which also describes a change of matter
from the gaseous phase to the liquid phase.
ANSWER: Condensation (Take Claisen condensation until it is mentioned)
A reaction of this type has an intramolecular version named for Dieckmann and converts two esters into a
beta-keto ester. Polyesters and polyamides are made by this reaction type, which is often contrasted with
addition. In meteorology, this process names cloud nuclei divided into hygroscopic and hydrophobic types.
This reaction is the inverse of hydrolysis and results in the combination of two molecules with the
elimination of water. This term also refers to the reverse of vaporization. For 10 points, name this process in
which a gas changes into a liquid.
ANSWER: condensation
A reaction of this type results in the formation of triaryl halides and is named after Fritz Ullman. The
Carothers equation suggests that a high fractional monomer conversion is required in order to achieve highmolecular weights in this type of polymerization reaction. In another other reaction of this type, a carboncarbon bond is formed between two esters in the presence of a strong base, which is named after Rainer
Claisen. For 10 points, name this type of reaction, the opposite of hydrolysis, which involves the creation of
one larger molecule from two smaller molecules, usually involving the loss of water.
ANSWER: condensation reaction
Famous examples of this type of reaction include an intermolecular one named for Dieckmann, and another
type which creates a namesake beta-hydroxy-carbonyl compounds. In addition to the Claisen variety, this
type of reaction occurs in the combination of two amino acids during protein synthesis. It shares its name
with a process occurring for gases in air at the dew point. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in which
a small byproduct like water is released in the combination of two molecules, which is also called
dehydration synthesis and is named for the phase transition from a gas to a liquid.
ANSWER: condensation reactions
Strong luminescence in organic polymers with this property means that they are viable for making
LEDs. Compounds such as azo dyes and many food colorings contain a chromophore with this
property. One form of this property is also called no-bond resonance and sees filled sigma orbitals
share electrons with empty pi orbitals. In UV-spectroscopy, Woodward-Fieser rules predict that
carbonyls with this property have a peak at 215nm. This property, which has a (*) hyper form, is
related to a similar property in which resonance causes certain molecules to have a stronger stabilization
than would be expected from just this property by itself. A subclass of this property for planar molecules
can be determined through Huckel's rule. P-orbitals are delocalized and overlap in, for 10 points, what
property that is essential for aromaticity and is seen in compounds with alternating single and multiple
bonds?
ANSWER: conjugated [prompt on aromatic or aromaticity; accept conjugation; accept word forms]
Many chemical pigments have this phenomenon as their origin. For example, in hydrocarbons, isolated
double bonds cannot contribute color to the material. However, when single and double bonds alternate in
these molecules, intense coloration can occur, as electrons can be excited to relatively-low energy molecular
states and subsequently relax, emitting visible photons. For 10 points name this overlapping of one p- or dorbital with another across an intervening sigma bond, leading to a delocalization of pi electrons.
ANSWER: conjugation
One way to analyze this property for a molecule is to treat the entities at the center of it as though they were
particles in a box the same length as the molecule. The wavelength of maximum absorption for systems with
this property can be calculated using Woodward-Fieser rules. This property decreases the energy difference
between the HOMO and LUMO. Those aforementioned rules are used in UV-vis spectroscopy, which can
be used to analyze beta-carotene and other compounds whose pigmentation is a result of this property. This
property is destroyed by an intervening sp3-hybridized carbon. Dienes with this property produce two kinds
of products from electrophilic addition, instead of one, and have high stability. That stability is attributed to
delocalized electrons. For 10 points, identify this property of molecules that have alternating single and
double bonds.
ANSWER: extended conjugation [or conjugated (pi) systems; accept word forms of extended; prompt on electron delocalization or word forms before it is read; prompt on double bonds, pi bonds, sp2 hybridization or other answers referring to individual bonds in a conjugated system; antiprompt on color or related answers; do not accept hyperconjugation]
This term refers to a property whose extension causes the UV absorption wavelength of an organic
compound to decrease by 30 nanometers according to the Woodward Feiser rules. Only dienes which
exhibit this property can participate in the Diels Alder reaction, and it is associated with delocalization of
electrons. This word also describes the species in the numerator of the logarithm function in the
Henderson Hasselbalch equation. For 10 points, identify this word which describes the type of base that
results from the deprotonation of an acid.
ANSWER: conjugate [accept word forms; prompt on "electron delocalization" until mentioned]
One intermediate output of this process is described as "fuming," and it ideally runs at 450 degrees
centigrade. To ensure a purer end product, the gaseous products pass through absorption towers multiple
times in this process's DCDA portion. Platinum catalysts were abandoned in favor of less efficient
vanadium oxide catalysts to reduce the risk of poisoning in this process, byproducts of which process
include oleum and sulfur trioxide. It is much more efficient than the previously used lead-chamber process.
For 10 points, name this chemical process developed by a vinegar merchant which can use pyrite as an
input, the preferred industrial method of producing sulfuric acid.
ANSWER: catalytic contact process
This particular region of the solid earth contains the Conrad discontinuity, above which lies felsic sial.
Ophiolites are foreign bodies that may be emplaced here at fore-arcs. Collisional orogenies only occur here.
Broad areas of it that have undergone little tectonic modification are called cratons or shields, and often
contain exposed Precambrian basement rock. This part of the lithosphere, which was mostly formed about 3
billion years ago, is characterized by decreased maficity and hence decreased basalt content. Because it is
relatively low-density, it cannot be subducted. For 10 points, name this part of the crust that is generally
exposed to the atmosphere
ANSWER: continental crust [prompt on "crust"]
An early version of this theory was proposed by Frank Bursley Taylor, and this idea was opposed
by James D. Dana. Patrick Blackett's invention of the magnetometer led to a revival of interest in this
idea, as did (+) APWPs constructed by Runcorn and Irving. A theory used to support this idea was
provided evidence in 1963 when Vine and Morley noticed certain symmetric patterns of (*)
magnetization reversals. It is supported by the formation of oceanic crust at mid-ocean ridges or seafloor
spreading. For 10 points, name this idea, proposed in 1912 by Alfred Wegener, that certain large land
masses move relative to each other.
ANSWER: continental drift [or plate tectonics]
Alexander Du Toit contributed to the evidence put forth by the main proponent of this hypothesis. First
observed by Abraham Ortelius, it was later poorly explained by a centrifugal pseudo-force. Specimens of
Lystrosaurus and Mesosaurus provide evidence for it, as do widespread permo-carboniferous glacial
sediments. Incorrect explanations for this include increased lunar gravity during the Cretaceous and the
expanding earth theory, but it is more accurately justified by plate tectonics. For 10 points, name this term
for the movement of large landmasses advanced by Alfred Wegener.
ANSWER: continental drift
This theory was originally suggested by Abraham Ortelius in 1596, and was later opposed to another
theory based on paleomagnetic evidence, the polar wandering theory. This process is thought to be driven
by another process whereby magma seeps out on ocean bottoms to form new crust, seafloor spreading, and
its most notable proponent was Alfred Wegener. For 10 points, name this theory that was built on by the
concept of plate tectonics, the idea that namesake land masses slowly move.
ANSWER: continental drift
A since-discredited hypothesis of Archie Carr used this theory to explain the migration of the
green sea turtle from Brazil to Ascension Island. The concentration of the Megascolecidae family of
earthworms was used to support this theory. The major animal fossils that were analyzed to support
this theory belonged to Mesosaurus, Cynognathus, and Lystrosaurus. An early supporter of this
theory, Alexander du Toit, presented evidence for it based on the (*) distribution of tillite overlaid by
coal beds overlaid by basaltic flows. Those coal beds often contained Glossopteris fossils, which had
extremely large seeds - preventing their dispersal by sea or air. This theory was built on to develop plate
tectonics. For 10 points, identify this theory proposed by Alfred Wegener in which the Earth's continents
move relative to each other.
ANSWER: continental drift [or plate tectonics until it is read; or obvious equivalents, such as the fact that continents move until "continents move relative to each other" is read]
One way in which certain features of this region are thought to be formed is by dense, sediment-laden
currents that are triggered by earthquakes and called turbidity currents. Those features of this region are
also thought to be formed by rivers flowing into this region when sea level were depressed and are
submarine canyons. This region marks the boundary between the continental crust and oceanic crust. For
10 points, name this steep section of the continental margin that ends in the continental rise.
ANSWER: continental slope
Design for the "wet" types of these devices is based on Merkel theory, which explains the heat and
mass transfer between the two phases. That theory limits the lowest possible temperature to that of
the wet bulb temperature of incoming air. (*) "Dry" versions of these devices make use of a heat
exchanger in cooled by air, but most are "wet", which take advantage of the high heat of evaporation of
falling water going counter-current to a natural draft of air. Small-scale versions often use fans to force air
upward, but industrial ones are typically columns with hyperbolic sides to encourage natural convection.
Most commonly associated with nuclear power plants, for 10 points, name these devices that remove heat
from water through evaporation.
ANSWER: cooling towers [prompt on "heat exchanger"; "evaporator" is wrong]
These compounds, examples of which include Prussian Blue and Copper Vitriol, were only first elucidated
at the end of the 19th century by Alfred Werner, who also determined that they could be chiral in 1914.
Theories used to model their electronic structure include Crystal Field Theory and Ligand Field Theory.
The most common types also come in tetrahedral, linear, and square planar varieties, and form when
ammonia, chloride ion, or other Lewis bases are added to solutions of silver, cobalt, chromium, or other dmetal of f-metal ions. For ten points, name these compounds, which consist of multiple ligands bonded to a
central metal ion.
ANSWER: Coordination Complex (Accept Complex Ion, Coordination Ion, Coordination Compound, etc.)
In 2009, Brown et. Al showed that a naphthalene-derived structure catalyzed one type of this reaction,
yielding the highest enantioselectivity to date induced by the chiral cavity of a supramolecular assembly.
Degenerate forms of this reaction are responsible for the single peak at 4.2 ppm of the fluxional molecule
bullvalene. This observation is due to diradical transition state that preserves orbital symmetry. Proceeding
only when surpafacial on all components of the reaction, this reaction also occurs in aza and oxy varieties,
the latter of which produces an enol or enolate product that does not equilibrate to the regioisomer. Its
diradical mechanism is both concerted and pericyclic, explaining the 300 Celsius reaction conditions
needed for this process to occur. For 10 points, name this [3,3] sigmatropic thermal isomerization of a 1,5diene yielding a regioisomeric 1,5-diene that is not the Claisen rearrangement.
ANSWER: Cope rearrangement
This reaction is responsible for the constant fluctuations in connectivity characteristic of bullvalenes, while
its aza variant, when carried out in tandem with the Mannich reaction, is useful to alkaloid synthesis.
Another variant of this reaction may be used to create enantiopure tetrahydropyrans from chiral aldols,
while palladium control causes it to have a zwitterionic intermediate. Depending on substitution, its
mechanism is either concerted or stepwise with a diradical intermediate. In its oxy- variant, the reaction is
driven by its product being an enol, while its oxa- variant is named for Claisen. For 10 points, identify this
pericyclic isomerization between substituted 1,5-dienes, which forms a sigma bond between carbons one
and six and breaks one between three and four.
ANSWER: Cope rearrangement
A salt of this element is required for Sonogashira coupling. Its zero-valent form is used to couple aryl
halides. Adding silicon dioxide and five equivalents of oxygen results in the very pure "blister" form of this
metal. Adding formaldehyde to ethyne is accomplished by using its acetylide as a catalyst. Zinc dust
activated by a small amount of it catalyzes the Simmons-Smith reaction. The aryl diazonium salt formed in
the Sandmeyer reaction reacts with a halide of this element. Its iodide is added to an organolithium
compound to form a Gilman reagent. This is the lightest metal to have one s-orbital electron above a filled
d-electron shell. Aqueous solutions containing this metal are often blue or green. For 10 points, name this
element which alloys with tin to make bronze and has an atomic number of 29.
ANSWER: copper [or Cu; or cuprum]
In physiology, this element has been seen to prevent degradation of HIF-1 alpha, leading to
transcription of hypoxia response genes. Accumulation of this element in humans can produce
Kayser-Fleishcher rings around the iris. It is not iron, but in molluscs and crustaceans, this element is
part of a molecule used to transport oxygen. Chalcopyrite and chalcocite are the two main ores of this
element, from which this non-lead element is often extracted by froth flotation. This element gives
malachite its distinctive colour. Corrosion of this element, seen in architecture, can produce verdigris. FTP,
name this malleable element used in electrical wiring with symbol Cu.
ANSWER: Copper
This metal is coordinated to four ammonia groups and two water molecules in a reagent that is used to
dissolve cellulose and is named of Schweizer, while another solution containing it is an alternative to
Tollen's reagent that tests for only alipathic aldehydes. One solution that contains this metal is used to find
monosaccharides and reducing sugars in solution by creating a brick-red precipitate. In addition to Fehling's
solution and Benedict's reagent, this metal is the central atom in a reagent used to make 1-4 additions to
unsaturated ketones named for Gilman. Its also found in azurin and cytochrome c proteins. FTP, name this
metal often found in wire and whose +2 ion appears blue in solution, with atomic number 29 and symbol
Cu.
ANSWER: Copper
This element is used as a catalyst in the Sandmeyer reaction, and is combined with zinc to catalyze the
Simmons-Smith reaction. This element and zinc are cofactors in superoxide dismutase. This element can be
extracted from chalcocite by reacting it with oxygen gas, which creates sulfur dioxide. When in its +1
oxidation state, an atom of this element has a filled 3d orbital and an empty 4s orbital. This element
accumulates in the body in Wilson's disease. With zinc, this element forms brass, and with tin, it forms
bronze. For 10 points, name this transition metal with atomic number 29 and symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper
Although it's not Chromium, this element's electronic structure is an exception to the Aufbau
principle, as it has only 1 electron in the 4s subshell. This element lies above silver on the periodic
table, and it is second to that element in having the highest (*) thermal and electrical conductivity. After
exposure to air or seawater over a long period of time, this element develops a patina called verdigris,
which lends a green color to the Statue of Liberty. Often used in piping and electrical wires, for 10 points,
identify this red-orange transition metal element with symbol Cu.
ANSWER: Copper
It's not palladium, but a catalyst of this transition metal is used in Sonogashira coupling. The most common
method of extracting this element from ore involves separating it from iron and sulfur in chalcopyrite.
Muntz metal, an alloy of zinc, iron, and this metal, is used in shipbuilding to prevent biofouling. This
element's anomalous electron configuration features a full 3d orbital and a half-filled 4s orbital. For 10
points, name this transition metal whose most common industrial use is in electrical wire.
ANSWER: copper
In Daniell cells, forerunners to the modern battery, zinc was oxidized by this element. Along with
yttrium, barium, and oxygen, this element was found in the first high-temperature superconductor.
Reducing sugars can be detected when this metal's plus-two cation is reduced in Benedict's solution,
causing this element's (*) blue form to turn into its red oxide. It has the second-highest thermal and
electrical conductivity of any element other than silver. Its alloys include brass and bronze. For ten points,
name this metal with atomic number 29 and symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper (or Cu before mention)
This is the only transition metal in which both +1 and +2 oxidation states are common. The electron
configuration of atoms of this element is anomalous in that it has a full 3d subshell and a half-filled 4s
subshell. This element makes up 75% of U.S. nickels by mass. Alloys of this metal and zinc are called
brass, and bronze is an alloy of this metal and tin. Used in electrical wiring, for 10 points, name this
transition metal with atomic number 29 and symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper [or Cu until is read]
In April 2012, it was discovered that large quantities of this element can be intercalated into bismuth
selenide nanoribbons without disrupting the host lattice. Along with magnesium, this metal may catalyze the
Diels-Alder reaction and increase the amount of hetero product rather than the ene product. It's not
ruthenium, but it can catalyze the Huisgen cycloaddition by forming a pi-complex with the alkyne, lowering
the alkyne's pKa. The halide of this element can be a substitute in the place of an aromatic amine group
through a diazonium salt in the Sandmeyer reaction. One compound with this element changes colors to
brick red when in solution with reducing sugars. That compound is Benedict's solution, and Fehling's
solution also contains it. Its most common oxidation state causes it to appear blue in solution. For 10 points,
name this metal that has symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper [accept Cu before mention]
Gilman reagents contain lithium and this element, and Egyptian blue, the first synthetic pigment, contains it.
Rochelle salt and sodium hydroxide are the components, along with this element's sulfate, of Fehling's
solution. One of its oxides precipitates in a positive test from Benedict's reagent. This metal forms a
common galvanic cell with zinc. For 10 points, name this ductile conductor, popularly used in wiring, which
turns green when oxidized and has symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper
A highly effective catalyst for many C-C and C-X bond-forming reactions is this element complexed with a
bis(oxalozine) ligand. 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles can be created by an azide-alkyne cycloaddition
catalyzed by this element in a seminal reaction of click chemistry developed in the labs of Fokin and
Sharpless. Diazonium salts are treated with the chloride of this element to create aryl halides in the
Sandmeyer reaction. In hemocyanin, this element binds reversibly to oxygen molecules. This element
"borrows" an electron from the 4s orbital to completely fill its 3d orbital, making it paramagnetic. This
element's citrate or tartrate is used to test for reducing sugars and aldehydes in Benedict's and Fehling's test,
respectively. This element is found with lithium in Gilman's reagent. For 10 points, name this element with
symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper [or Cu before it is read]
This transition metal is found in Fehling's solution, used to test for the presence of monosaccharides.
This metal has the unusual valence electron configuration of three d ten four s one. Weathering of this
metal produces verdigris. Brass is an alloy of zinc and this metal, while bronze refers to any alloy of this
metal, usually involving tin. For 10 points, name this metal whose high conductivity makes it ideal in
electrical wires, and which has atomic number 29.
ANSWER: copper [or Cu]
A coordination compound with this element in the center is produced by Fehling's (Fye-lings) test, used
to test for different sugars. This is the lightest element with one s orbital electron above a filled d shell.
Organisms like horseshoe crabs have blue blood because they have a blood protein that contains this metal
instead of iron. Additionally, aqueous solutions of this element are blue in color. This element alloys with
zinc in brass and with tin in bronze. For 10 points, name this transition metal with symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper [or cuprum; or Cu prior to mention]
Besides Raney nickel, another catalyst named for Raney that dehydrogenates alcohols is named
after this element, and the sulfate of this element is used in a chemical reagent that detects the
presence of monosaccharide and disaccharide sugars. Benedict's solution contains ions of this
element. It can be extracted from coveline and chalcosine, and its oxide is found alongside (*) yttrium
and barium in a superconductor. For 10 points, name this metal that alloys with zinc to form brass and tin to
form bronze, an element with chemical symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper
This element violates the Madelung rule by having ten electrons in the 3d orbital. Speculum metal is
composed of tin and this element. The sulfate of this element is commonly used along with steel wool to
demonstrate exothermic reactions. On the periodic table, it is in the same family as silver and gold. When
exposed to air, it can form a green patina known as verdigris. For 10 points, name this element with symbol
Cu.
ANSWER: copper [accept Cu before mentioned]
One coupling reaction links an aryl halide with an acetylide of this metal, while in another reaction it
is used as a catalyst to link an alkyne and a bromoalkyne. In addition to the Castro-Stephens and the
Cadiot-Chodkiewicz coupling, alkenyl compounds of this element can be created via the Normant
reaction. The iodide of this element is a catalyst in the (*) Gatterman-Koch reaction, and this element is
present in the A solution of the Fehling test. Gilman reagents contain lithium and this other metal, while the
2+ ion of this element forms a bright blue solution. For 10 points, name this element, a metal used in
electroplating and plumbing, with atomic number 29 and symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper [accept Cu before it is read]
This element is used as a catalyst in a reaction that, via oxidative coupling of arylboronic acids with
atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen, creates carbon heteroatom bonds. A similar reaction using this
element creates biaryl compounds from aryl halides at high temperature, but can also be used on a
phenol with aryl halides to make diaryl ether. In addition to its use in Chan-Lam coupling and the
Ullmann reaction, this element is used with lithium in a reagent that can replace (*) halide groups with
an R group and this metal is used in the A type of a solution that can determine whether a carbonyl is an
aldehyde or ketone. In addition to its use in Gillman's reagent, this metal's sulfate is used in Fehling's
solution. Its aqueous solution is blue. For 10 points, name this metal that forms patinas , symbolized Cu.
ANSWER: copper [accept Cu before mention]
A cyanide of this element is used to convert aryl halides to aryl nitriles, while two aryl halides can be
coupled using this element in the Ullman reaction. An acetylide of this element couples with an aryl
halide in the Castro Stephens reaction. The use of this element is replaced by tetraflouroborate in
the Schliemann reaction, a modification of another reaction in which halides of this element reacts with
aryl diazonium salts; that reaction is named for Sandmeyer. A negative ion of this element bonds ionically
to lithium in a halide-replacing reagent named for Gilman, and this element causes the change in color in
both Fehling's and Benedict's reagents. For 10 points, name this metallic element with atomic number 29
and symbol Cu.
ANSWER: Copper [accept Cu before mention]
A deficiency of this element results in the weakness of elastin, and can promote the formation of aneurysms,
and retention of this element in the liver causes Wilson's disease. This element's sulfate salt is reduced to its
corresponding oxide in the presence of aldehydes in the Benedict's test. Along with arsenic, this element is
found in compounds such as Paris green, and is found along with tin in bronze. For 10 points, identify this
element whose latin name is cuprum.
ANSWER: copper [accept Cu; accept cuprum before it is read]
This region contains the Earth's only siderophile (sid-AIR-oaf-eye-el) elements not bonded to oxygen.
Eddy currents in one subsection of this region likely interact with its solid layer to create the earth's
magnetic field, a theory known as the geodynamo. The topmost portion of this region borders the D-doubleprime layer. The border between this region and a cooler, more viscous layer is called the Gutenberg
discontinuity. For 10 points, name this layer of the earth's interior that consists of "inner" and "outer" parts
and lies below the mantle.
ANSWER: the Earth's core [prompt on outer core until "solid layer"; prompt on inner core until "eddy currents"; do not accept or prompt on either after those words are read]
The hypothesis that this structure consists of two separate parts was put forth by Inge Lehmann. Some
scientists believe that it rotates at a different speed than the rest of the Earth. S-waves cannot travel through
one part of this structure. Convention in one part of this structure creates a magnetic field which deflects
the solar wind. That part of this structure consists of nickel and iron and lies beneath the mantle. For 10
points, name this innermost layer of the Earth.
ANSWER: core
The smaller part of this body might be undergoing super-rotation and J.A. Jacobs proposed that
constituent is freezing. It lies below D" (D double prime) or the Gutenberg discontinuity and its two
constituents were differentiated by Lehmann. Shear waves cannot travel through the liquid part of this
body, even though primary waves can. For ten points, name this part of the earth that lies under the mantle,
featuring an inner and outer section.
ANSWER: core (do not accept outer or inner core)
Upward sliding avalanches occur in this region. This region is composed of dense iron and nickel left from
the accretion of the planet. Convection currents that cause tectonic plates to shift originate in this layer of
the Earth. Those same convection currents combined with the Coriolis effect create the Earth's magnetic
field according to Dynamo theory. S waves do not pass through the outer part of this layer of the Earth
because it is liquid, and P waves are slowed in the inner solid part. For 10 points, name this innermost layer
of the earth.
ANSWER: Core [accept outer core until "inner solid part"]
One part of this layer was discovered by Inge Lehmann, and just above this layer is the Gutenberg
Discontinuity. S waves are completely absent in this region, which lies beneath the D-Double-Prime
layer. Part of this layer is made of nickel-iron fluid whose (*) eddy currents are responsible for the
Earth's magnetic field. The lowest part of this layer is solid because of intense pressure. It is divided into
inner and outer parts. For 10 points, name this layer of the Earth that is beneath the mantle and forms the
planet's center.
ANSWER: the core
With Wipke, this man created the first organic synthesis planning program; he himself later created
the LHASA synthesis program. Suggs and this man's name are attached to the oxidizer PCC. With
Seebach, he names a reaction where the reactivity of acyl carbon atoms, which normally only
combine with nucleophiles, can be reversed in a process known as (*) umpolung. He developed a
method of organic synthesis where one logically deconstructs a target molecule until a commercially
available or simple molecule is achieved. This man known for retrosynthetic analysis also co-names a
reaction whose first step is similar to the Wittig reaction and whose intermediates include a ylide. For 10
points, name this man who names a reaction that changes an aldehyde into an alkyne with Fuchs.
ANSWER: Elias James Corey
Along with Eduardo Martinez, this man developed the first large-scale process to synthesize the anti-cancer
drug Ecteinascidin. A lactone named for him is the precursor to several prostaglandins for which he
developed total-synthetic routes. This man's namesake ylide is used in a reaction converting a carbonyl to an
epoxide, which is co-named for this man and Michael Chaykovsky. A reaction in which terminal alkynes
can be produced by the homologation of an aldehyde through a triphenylphosphine is co-named for this
American chemist of Lebanese descent and Philip Fuchs. For 10 points, name this 1990 Nobel Laureate in
Chemistry, a professor at Harvard best known for his contributions to retrosynthetic analysis.
ANSWER: Elias James Corey
A Wieland-Miescher ketone is the first step in a 14-step process formulated by this man including the
Wittig Reaction and Michael Addition to create longifolene. This man's work on the symmetrization of
reactivity was streamlined into the German word umpolung by Dieter Seebach. He is the first namesake of a
reaction that reacts NCS with dimethyl sulfide to eventually produce aldehydes and ketones. That reaction
is also named for Choung Un Kim. He names a reaction that combines a diol and thiophosgene to
synthesize olefin with Roland Winter. This winner of the 1990 Nobel Prize in Chemistry developed the
reagent PCC with Suggs. For 10 points, name this American chemist, the co-namesake a reaction that forms
an alkyne from an aldehyde with Philip Fuchs.
ANSWER: Elias James Corey
Along with RR Leleti, this scientist used a series of Dess-Martin oxidations to synthesize
Salinosporamide A from threonine ester. A recent reaction developed by him involves using Indium-3
catalyzed cationic cascades to form polycycles. This man popularized the use of PCC as a gentle
oxidizing agent, and he developed a series of total syntheses of prostaglandins early in his career. He
also developed a method of using sulfonium ylides to from epoxides. This chemist developed a series
of versatile oxazaborolidine catalysts, which can catalyze a reduction named for him, Bakshi, and Shibata.
Along with Woodward, this man pioneered the field of total synthesis, and also developed a method of
visualizing a synthetic pathway by working backwards from the product. For 10 points, name this Harvard
organic chemist and 1990 Nobel prizewinner who developed the method of retrosynthesis.
ANSWER: Elias James Corey
Chromium and ferric oxides are used in a flame fusion process to create one form of this this mineral
in a technique named after Verneuil. Rutile silk cause a notable asterism in one form of it, and
Gaudin's synthetic creation of it was the first for any gemstone. An orange form of this substance is
known as padparadscha, and it is comprised of (*) aluminum oxide. This gemstone can get a red color
due to chromium impurities, and its forms include emery, sapphire, and ruby. For ten points, identify this
mineral which has a hardness of 9 on the Mohs scale.
ANSWER: corundum (accept aluminum oxide or Al2O3 before mention; accept ruby until "padparadscha")
Synthetic varieties of this mineral were made by Auguste Verneuil using the flame-fusion process. Asterism
in this mineral is caused by the inclusion of rutile. One variety of this mineral has a shade known as
Kashmir blue, and another variety has a shade called pigeon's blood. The material emery consists of
magnetite and this mineral. Aluminum oxide occurs naturally in large deposits as this mineral, which has a
value of nine on the Mohs scale of hardness. For 10 points, name this mineral whose transparent varieties,
such as sapphire and ruby, are used as gems.
ANSWER: corundum
Titanium inclusions in this mineral can form a "silk" pattern. This mineral names and is the basis for
the structure of ilmenite. Star stones are most commonly composed of this mineral. The creation of
this mineral is the primary use of the Verneuil process. When this mineral is mixed with magnetite or
other iron compounds, it forms (*) emery. This mineral makes up adamantine spar. One form of this
mineral can have a color known as pigeon's blood. The basic unit of this mineral consists of three oxygens
and two aluminium atoms. For 10 points, name this mineral that is a 9 on the Mohs scale and forms the
basis of sapphires and rubies.
ANSWER: corundum [prompt on Al2O3; prompt on aluminum oxide]
The Verneuil flame-fusion process was invented to create artificial versions gemstones composed of
this material. This and magnesium are found in spinel. Emery is mostly composed of this. Iron and titanium
make this blue, while chromium makes it red. This is a nine on the Mohs scale. This is aluminum oxide.
For 10 points, name this crystal that makes up rubies and sapphires.
ANSWER: corundum [or aluminium oxide before mentioned; or ruby before spinel]
A form of this mineral was the first gemstone to be synthesized, a process completed by Gaudin in 1837.
This mineral can be synthesized in the flame fusion Verneuil process and is the chief component of emery.
This mineral's chemical formula is aluminum three oxide or Al2O3 and its hardness is rated at nine on the
Mohs scale. Marked with traces of chromium, titanium, and iron, for 10 points, name this mineral with
gemstone varieties like red ruby and blue sapphire, the second hardest naturally occurring substance, which
unfortunately isn't as hard as diamond.
ANSWER: corundum
Unfamiliar "hyper" forms of this phenomenon help explain apparent violations of the octet rule and are
given designations like tau and nu. The theory of these entities was described by Linus Pauling in a classic
work. One specific type of these entities forces substituents to remain planar; that type results from
overlapping p orbitals and is denoted "pi." These entities are classified as "polar" or "nonpolar" based on
the relative electronegativity of the atoms involved. For 10 points, name these stabilizing interactions
between atoms.
ANSWER: covalent bonds
Heitler and London were the first to provide a quantum mechanical explanation of this type of bond,
using the bond between the two atoms of molecular hydrogen. Varieties of this type of bond include sigma
bonds, the strongest variety, and the weaker pi bonds. Depending on the electronegativity of the atoms
involved, this type of bond can be polar or non-polar. For 10 points, name this type of bond in which
electrons are shared, contrasted with ionic bonds.
ANSWER: covalent bonds
The strongest type of this interaction is the sigma one, which is found with the pi one in sp2
hybridization. The repulsion between lone pairs and this type of interaction forms the basis for
VSEPR theory. This interaction can be depicted on Lewis dot diagrams. Zero to very small
electronegativities divide this type of (*) bond into non-polar and polar. For 10 points, name this type of
chemical bond in which valence electrons are shared between two atoms.
ANSWER: covalent bonding [prompt on chemical bonding; do not accept "ionic bonding"]
Hans Hellman argued that these entities are stabilized due to a lowering of kinetic energy. The gauche and
anomeric effects determine the spatial orientation of these entities, and IR spectroscopy detects their
scissoring, rocking, and wagging behavior. High melting points are a result of the presence of these entities
in certain crystalline structures, and compounds containing them may exhibit resonance. These bonds
contain sigma and pi orbitals, and Lewis structures use lines to represent them. For ten points, name this
type of bond formed by the sharing of electrons between atoms which can be rated as single, double, or
triple.
ANSWER: covalent bonds (prompt on "bonds" before mention)
The carbon residue of the input to this process is measured using RCR. This process was first developed
by Vladimir Shukhov, whose ideas were improved upon by William Burton. One form of this process uses
a slurry settler, which acts as a centrifuge. Alteration is an alternative to this process, which can be reversed
in a process that uses a platinum-rhenium catalyst. One type of this process uses aluminosilicates known as
zeolites as catalysts. Another type occurs at high temperatures and results in residue known as coke.
Fractions are created from this process, which often takes place in an oil refinery. For 10 points, name this
industrial process used to break large carbon molecules into smaller ones.
ANSWER: cracking [prompt on answers like "oil refining"; prompt on fractional distillation"]
The catalyst in this process is flushed through a vertical pipe called a riser. Hydrogen sulfide is removed
from the outcome of this process using hydrodesulfurization. The currently used method of this process uses
Y zeolites. Vacuum flashing is used with this process. Shukov invented an early version of this process,
whose side products include coke. Its currently used type is the fluid catalytic version. Common outputs of
this process include LPG and naphta. It occurs in pyrolysis chambers within refineries. For 10 points, name
this process by which long hydrocarbons are broken down into smaller ones, commonly used in the
processing of petroleum.
ANSWER: fluid catalytic cracking [prompt on fractional distillation]
The maar type of these objects results when groundwater comes into contact with hot magma. A landform
sometimes referred to by this name is formed by erosion in the Negev desert of Israel. That object is also
called a makhtesh. These objects frequently have a "breccia lens" at their base, composed of rocks broken
during their formation. Mimas, one of Saturn's moons, features a distinctive one of these objects named
Herschel. The collapse of Mount Mazama in Oregon created one of these objects that now holds a lake. For
10 points, name these large bowl-shaped depressions in the ground which commonly result from volcanic
eruptions or meteor impacts.
ANSWER: crater
Reduced temperature and pressure are defined to be pressure and temperature divided by their values at
this state. At this state, the derivative of pressure with respect to volume is zero. Carbon dioxide in this
state is used to decaffeinate coffee beans. At this point, a dashed line is usually drawn vertically and
horizontally on a P-T diagram, and it occurs at the end of a coexistence curve. For water, it occurs at 647
Kelvin and 218 atmospheres. For 10 points, name this state above which a substance cannot exist as a
liquid.
ANSWER: critical point [or supercritical fluid]
In conformal field theories, it is at this point the correlation length becomes infinite. At this point
both the first and second derivatives of pressure with respect to volume are zero. At this point for a
binary mixture, density fluctuations of increasing wavelength cause the mixture to become cloudy. A
popular solvent used in decaffeination reactions is carbon dioxide pushed past this point, and at this
point that the enthalpy of vaporization becomes (*) zero. This point, which occurs at 647 kelvin in
water, is the endpoint of the liquid-gas boundary. For 10 points, name this point on a phase diagram at
which a substance is neither a liquid or a gas, but a homogenous mixture of both.
ANSWER: critical point [or supercritical]
Both the first and second derivative of pressure with respect to volume is zero at this point. For a
binary mixture approaching this point, the correlation length becomes infinite, resulting in the
solution becoming opalescent. This point is at the end of the gas-liquid (*) coexistence curve, and for
water its 647 kelvin and 218 atmospheres. For 10 points, name this point on a phase diagram where a gas
and a liquid can no longer be distinguished from each other.
ANSWER: critical point
State functions like pressure, volume, and temperature are often normalized to a "reduced" form based
on their values at this point, which can calculated using the Joback and Lydersen methods. Below this
point, the Van der Waals equation gives a region where pressure increases as volume increases; that
problem is fixed with the Maxwell isotherm. According to the Guldberg rule, a liquid's boiling point is
about two thirds its temperature at this point. Above this point, carbon dioxide is often used as a green
alternative method to remove caffeine from coffee. This point is also characterized by a nearly vertical line
on a phase diagram. For 10 points, name this point seen on a phase diagram at which a liquid and gas cease
to be separate phases.
ANSWER: critical point [or critical temperature]
A constant linked with this property is in the denominator of a term that is square-rooted in the
alpha constant of the Soave modification. The Baron de la Tour made observations of this property
by listening to the sound of a flint ball rolling around in a sealed cannon. For solutions, this property
bifurcates into an upper consolute and a lower consolute version. For pure substances, the first and
second partial derivatives of (*) pressure with respect to volume are both zero at the namesake isotherm
of
this property. A common method of decaffeination exploits this property of carbon dioxide. For water, this
property is 647 Kelvins and 22 megapascals. For 10 points, name this point above which the liquid and gas
states of matter are indistinguishable.
ANSWER: critical point [or critical temperature; or critical pressure]
Pecoro and Lah synthesized a metallic analogue of these compounds, which are commonly used as
single-molecule magnets. TETA is used as the starting point of the synthesis of an aza analog of these
compounds. Adding one of these compounds to a two-phase system of benzene and potassium
permanganate generates "purple benzene". Originally discovered by Pedersen while working for
Dupont, these chemicals are commonly used as phase transfer (*) catalysts because of their ability to
complex with cations in their central cavity. These macrocyclic compounds are commonly synthesized by
reacting oligoethylene glycols in a modification of the Williamson synthesis. For 10 points, name these
molecules with alternating carbon and oxygen elements single-bonded in a fixed ratio, a special type of
either.
ANSWER: crown ethers [prompt on ether]
Jean-Marie Lehn synthesized double cyclic ones of these compounds, in which the bridging moiety contains
nitrogen atoms. Commonly used ones include the 18-6 and 12-4 types, while the former ones are called
cryptands. These compounds have lone pairs that point towards their center, which allows cations to
complex with them and fit in their central cavity and their complexation make them excellent phase transfer
catalysts. Their outsides are made of non-polar C-H bonds, and these compounds are made up of repeating
-OCH2CH2- groups. For 10 points, name these compounds made up of repeated functional groups that
resemble a certain headgear.
ANSWER: crown ethers [prompt on ethers]
Green's method of synthesizing these compounds takes advantage of the template effect. Zza analogues of
these compounds include cyclen, and Lehn synthesized a three-dimensional version of one of these
compounds called a cryptand. Polyglymes are linearized versions of them, and along with quaternary
amines they can be used as phase transfer catalysts. Initially synthesized by Charles Pedersen, they are a
simple example of a macrocyclic compound. For 10 points, name this class of compounds that can complex
with cations, which consists of carbon and oxygen groups arranged in a ring, and are a specific type of
ether.
ANSWER: Crown ethers [prompt on ethers; accept crown after "ether"]
Some parts of this region are internally divided by the Conrad discontinuity. The prevalence of
granitic and basaltic rock separates the continental and oceanic types of this region. Parts of this
region can be subducted and it is broken up into units called (*) tectonic plates. The Mohorovicic
(moe-hoe-ROV-itch-itch) discontinuity separates this region from the asthenosphere, with which it forms
the lithosphere. For 10 points, name this outermost layer of the Earth, which is located above the mantle.
ANSWER: the crust [prompt on lithosphere until it is read]
This layer's strongest part contains cataclasite breccias and is called the brittle-ductile transition zone.
Over three-quarters of one part of this layer of the earth is silicon and aluminum oxide. This layer is
separated from the one below it by the Moho discontinuity, and it is one component of the lithosphere.
Directly below this layer, convection in the asthenosphere breaks it up into tectonic plates. For 10 points,
name this outermost layer of the Earth, that sits on top of the mantle.
ANSWER: the crust
A theory named for these structures splits the five degenerate d orbitals into the e sub g and t sub 2g energy
levels, and is an alternative to ligand field theory. The term twinning is used to describe the union of these
structures, which are grown in the process of epitaxy. The maximum intensity of a scattered X-ray in these
substances is given by Bragg's law. Vacancy defects occur in these structures when there are empty lattice
sites. For 10 points, name these homogenous solids, such as diamond and table salt, which have a regular
arrangement of atoms, ions, or molecules.
ANSWER: crystals [or crystal lattices; or crystalline solids; or other obvious equivalents]
The Czochralski (cho-KROLL-skee) technique is a way of synthetically making these. The intercepts of
the axes of the structure of these can be used to determine their Miller indices, and fourteen structures
named for Bravais (bruh-VAY) can be used to describe these. The packing factor of these indicates the
percent of space used by matter. Their structure can be classified using terms like orthorhombic (OR-thoROM-bick), monoclinic, and face-centered cubic. For 10 points, name these solids made of repeating
patterns of atoms or molecules, examples of which include ice and quartz.
ANSWER: crystals [prompt on lattices; accept crystal lattices]
These objects can be created by the Czochralski process. One notation system for these objects is the
Miller index system. The Nobel in Chemistry in 2011 was awarded for work on the quasi form of these
objects. One arrangement that atoms in these objects can take is zincblende, which is equivalent to two
interpenetrating face-centered cubic unit cells. The phenomenon of twinning occurs in these objects. For 10
points, name these periodically repeating, ordered structures that include diamond.
ANSWER: crystal
Particles in these materials have quasimomenta proportional to their wavevectors, which exist in
the reciprocal space used to describe their structure. The Hall-Petch relationship describes how to
strengthen these materials by altering their grain boundaries. Symmetries of these materials are
described by space groups, while Burgers vectors describe the magnitude and direction of
dislocations in them. Miller indices denote planes in the Bravais (*) lattices that describe translational
symmetries in these substances. Their fundamental unit is called the unit cell, and may be body- or
face-centered cubic. For 10 points, name these solids which are made up of ordered arrangements of atoms.
ANSWER: crystals [or crystal lattices; prompt on periodic media; prompt on lattices until it is read]
Each of these substances has three numbers associated with it, the Miller indices. One law concerning these
substances states that twice the distance between their layers times the sine of the angle of incidence of light
equals a whole number of wavelengths. Particles within them have associated quantities describing how
many nearest neighbors they have, the coordination number; and depending on whether their corners are
identical to their centers, these structures can be simple, body-centered, or face-centered. The
aforementioned law is named for a father-and-son pair, the Braggs. Comprised of unit cells forming a
lattice, name these types of solids that consist of a regular pattern of constituent molecules, exemplified by
quartz.
ANSWER: crystals [or crystalline solids, etc.]
These objects may be described by terms like "stellate" and "enantiomorphic", which describe their habits.
Pure ones may be produced by dissolving the products of a reaction in a minimal amount of solvent,
heating, and slowly cooling, often using glass particles as seeds. This form of tartaric acid was used by
Pasteur when he performed the first chiral resolution. Miller indices describe the structure of the unit cells
of these objects, which may have orthorhombic and cubic lattices. Franklin's use of X-ray diffraction to
study DNA required it to be in this form. For 10 points, name these solids such as quartz which have a
definite, repeating arrangement of atoms.
ANSWER: crystals [accept word forms like crystalline; prompt on "minerals"; do not accept "rocks"]
Ion displacement in these entities occur due to the Jahn-Teller effect, and their Miller indices are integral by
definition. They can develop vacancies in the Frenkel defect, and their configurations are described by
arrays named for Bravais. An "interpenetrating" type is displayed by caesium chloride. Percent volume
occupied by atoms per unit cell is their atomic packing factor, which is 0.74 for hexagonal close-packed and
face-centered cubic. With "liquid" forms used in televisions, for 10 points, name these solid materials with
atoms arranged in an ordered pattern, such as diamonds and table salt.
ANSWER: crystals
Directions in these things can be described using Miller indices. Daniel Shechtman won a Nobel for his
discovery of the "quasi-" form of these things. These things can undergo twinning. The external shape of
these things is their namesake habit. Solids can be divided into amorphous, a poly form of this class and
this class. These things tend to split along certain structural lines, a property known as cleavage. For 10
points, identify this solid form whose atoms or molecules are arranged in a repeating, periodic pattern.
ANSWER: crystalline solids
In the study of these objects, the Miller index defines planes and direction. Van der Waals forces
allow their hexagonal shape, while scattering from these objects is described by Bragg's law. The unit
cell of these objects may display the (*) body-centered or face-centered arrangement of atoms. Usually in
lattice form with repeating geometric patterns, for 10 points, name these solids which include quartz and
table salt.
ANSWER: crystals
Vacant pairs in these structures create an anomaly named for Schottky ["SHOT-key"], and when
particles in these structures occupy interstitial sites, it causes an issue named for Frenkel. In
semiconductor production, these substances are often formed by the Czochralski ["choke"-RAHL-skee]
process. They are often classified into one of fourteen structures named for Bravais [brah-vay],
examples of which are monoclinic and triclinic. Study of these substances uses the laws of rational
indices and constancy of interfacial angle. These structures consist of a repeated unit cell which
forms a lattice. Name these structures which consist of particles arranged in a uniform pattern, an
example of which is quartz.
ANSWER: crystals
Scattering in these materials is subject to the equation n theta equals two d times sine of theta, and the
structure of these materials can be visualized with diagrams named for Bravais. Each of these materials has
an associated Madelung constant, and these materials are the subject of Bragg's law. At absolute zero,
entropy is also equal to zero in a perfect one of these according to the third law of thermodynamics, and the
energy required to separate one of these into a gas is its lattice energy. For 10 points, name these materials
in which atoms or ions are arranged in a repeating three-dimensional pattern.
ANSWER: Crystals
Anomalies in these structures may include ones which obey the conservation of charge that are named for
Frenkel and Schottky. Their analysis invokes the reciprocal k-space, which is the Fourier transform of the
real space describing them. In one technique used to analyze them, the incident angle that gives the
maximum constructive interference is the inverse-sine of the wavelength multiple divided by twice the
spacing in them according to Bragg's law. They are studied using X-ray diffraction. For 10 points, identify
these structures whose constituent materials are found in repeating patterns, and whose three-dimensional
arrangement is called a "lattice."
ANSWER: crystals [accept crystal lattice at any point]
Phonons are the quantization of the vibration of these entities. The intercepts of the three axes of one of
these entities are used to determine its Miller index. The coordination number describes how many nearest
neighbors a constituent of one of these structures has, and they are described by one of fourteen structures
studied by Bravais, which include hexagonal and face-centered cubic. The highest atomic packing factor for
one of these structures is 74 percent. Bragg's law is used in conjunction with X-ray diffraction when
studying these objects. For 10 points, name these solids that consist of a regular pattern of molecules,
exemplified by quartz.
ANSWER: Crystals [accept Crystal Lattices]
According to this theory, nonlinear molecular systems in unstable degenerate states will produce
Jahn-Teller distortions. When the stabilization energy exceeds the pairing energy, as in the case with
strong (*) field ligands, the formation of a low-spin state is favored. Ligands are viewed as point charges
and this theory can be extended to tetrahedral and square planar systems. For 10 points, name this
electrostatic model used to describe bonding in complexes of d-block metals in which ligand electrons
produce an electric field around the metal center.
ANSWER: crystal field theory
A namesake parameter of this theory is normalized by the Racah parameter on the x-axis of
Tanabe-Sugano diagrams. That parameter's relation to the pairing energy determines whether
complexes are "high spin" or "low spin" in this theory. Oddly, the neutral molecule carbon
monoxide induces the largest value for that parameter, placing it rightmost on the
spectrochemical series, which reveals the limitations of this theory as it predicts the opposite due
to being an ionic model that disregards covalent interactions. This theory is used to explain the
color and magnetic properties of coordination compounds. For 10 points, name this Hans Bethedeveloped
theory that describes the electronic structure of d-block transition metals.
ANSWER: crystal field theory [or CFT]
One type of energy important in this theory is directly proportional to the mean of the fourth power of a
certain radius and inversely proportional to the fifth power of another radius, and a normalized version of it
is found on the x-axis in a Tanabe-Sugano diagram; that energy is its namesake stabilization energy. This
theory, which unlike a similar theory does not attempt to describe bonding, states that nonbonding electrons
on negative ligands cause the d-orbitals in a cation to split into e-sub-g and t-sub-2g orbitals, which explains
the colors exhibited by coordination complexes. It is combined with molecular orbital theory to form ligand
field theory. For 10 points, name this model of chemistry, developed by Hans Bethe, which explains the
electronic structure of d-block metals.
ANSWER: crystal field theory [or CFT; prompt on ligand field theory or LFT until "bonding"]
The kinetics of this process can be modeled using the Avrami equation, and one method of doing this
is Laser-Heated Pedestal Growth. One method of increasing the yield of this process is to move a
molten zone through the sample; that's called zone refining. When this process occurs in polymers,
spherulites are formed. This process is used as part of resolution by entrainment to separate
enantiomers, a method used by Pasteur to separate tartaric acid stereoisomers. Impurities can be
removed from the product of this process by decanting, and in introductory labs this process is often
performed in a watch glass. A method of improving the yield of this process is to add heated solvent and
then cool it down. This process occurs via nucleation around a seed. For 10 points, name this process in
which an ordered solid is created from a dissolved substance, used to create pure solids.
ANSWER: Crystallization [or recrystallization; accept crystal formation or crystal growth or crystal nucleation until mention]
This process can be carried out with semiconductors using the Bridgman method. The quality of this
process's output can be improved by zone refining. This process can be antagonized by oiling out. When
small amounts of material are involved, this is carried out in a Craig tube. Leftover material from this
occurrence is called mother liquor and impure precipitates during this can be removed by decanting. The
purity of the resulting material can be improved by repeating this process, which is accomplished by
dissolving the product in solvent, heating, and then cooling. This process can be induced by using a seed
material. For 10 points, name this process by which ordered solids precipitate out of a solution.
ANSWER: crystallization [or recrystallization]
The rate of this process varies with the exponential of the interfacial energy cubed times molecular
volume squared, and the critical radius at which it occurs equals twice the surface energy over the
Gibbs volume energy. Louis Pasteur used this process to separate the enantiomers of sodium
ammonium tartrate. A purification technique making use of this process takes a slurry and dissolves
impurities in a hot common solvent. This process requires a "seed" upon which (*) nucleation can
occur; otherwise, during fusion, supercooling occurs rather than this process. Supersaturated solutions
spontaneously undergo this process. For 10 points, name this process similar to precipitation which forms
ordered, solid products from a solution.
ANSWER: crystallization [or recrystallization; or crystal formation or same-knowledge equivalents; prompt on nucleation before it is read; prompt on precipitation; prompt on freezing]
The kinetics of one form of this process are described by the equation volume fraction is equal to one
minus the exponential of the quantity negative rate constant multiplied by time raised to a constant n.
William Pfann developed a form of this process that does not incorporate carbon or oxygen, by introducing
a moving "float zone." Silicon boules are created with a type of this process named for Jan Czochralski.
This process is described by the Avrami equation. This process involves nucleation around a seed and can
be used to create rock salt. For 10 points, name this process in which a dissolved substance is used to create
a pure solid with an ordered structure.
ANSWER: crystallization [or crystal growth; or crystal formation; or crystal nucleation; or heteregoenous reaction before "William Pfann" is read]
The quality of this process can be improved by zone refining, and it can be performed in Craig tubes.
Decanting is used to remove impurities during this process, which can only occur in a supersaturated
solution. This process causes orderly structured solids to precipitate out of a solution. Induced by a seed
material, this process can create quartz and other minerals. For 10 points, name this process that is used to
make rock candy and salt crystals.
ANSWER: crystallization
One of the mathematical procedures in this field of chemistry is the Rietveld refinement, which
increases the success rate when powder diffraction is used. Some calculations in this discipline are
simplified by the Weiss zone law. An equation in this science sets an integer times wavelength equal to
twice distance times the sine of the incidence angle. That equation, used to analyze X-ray diffraction
results, is Bragg's law. Name this science that categorizes many solids as triclinic, orthorhombic,
hexagonal or cubic to describe their lattice structure.
ANSWER: crystallography
Bright red ashes known as sprites and EMPs are created above these features, and hot towers are a tropical
variant of them. Mammatus formations typically form on the underside of the incus form of these objects,
whose maximum height is limited by the maximum parcel level. Updrafts in these objects can create
overshooting tops, a sign of severity. These anvil-shaped objects are sometimes found at the front of squall
lines, and severe ones can form supercells. For ten points, name this largest variety of cloud from which
thunderstorms are formed.
ANSWER: cumulonimbus clouds (prompt on "clouds", accept thunderstorms before the end of the first sentence)
One person with this surname was the UNICEF volunteer who wrote Journey Among Warriors, and
another found the temperature at which ferromagnetic materials become paramagnetic. Another scientist
with this surname discovered polonium and radium and shared the Nobel Prize with Henri Becquerel for
work with radioactivity. For 10 points, give this surname of French physicists Pierre and Marie.
ANSWER: Curie
One member of this family names a law with Weiss that describes the magnetic susceptibility. Two
members of this family won a Nobel for producing phosphorus-30 by bombarding aluminum with
alpha particles. Jacques and his brother, two members of this family, discovered piezoelectricity,
which was later used in a sensitive electrometer to measure (*) radioactivity. That brother and his wife
discovered radium and polonium. For 10 points, identify this family of mostly Polish scientists that
included Pierre and Marie.
ANSWER: Curie [prompt on Sklodowska; prompt on Joliot]
During World War I, this chemist organized mobile x-ray units for the military. When boron and aluminum
are bombarded with alpha particles, a process discovered by this chemist's daughter takes place; that
process is the artificial variety of a process this chemist is famous for. This chemist used an electrometer to
measure the currents produced by uranium. This chemist frequently worked with materials like torbernite
and pitchblende. This chemist won a Nobel Prize in both Physics and Chemistry, and she died because of
her long-term exposure to radiation. Name this female Chemist from Poland who worked with elements
such as polonium and radium.
ANSWER: Marie Curie
This person was the most prominent alum of the underground "Flying University." This scientist died as
a result of working in mobile units during World War I known as the "little" versions of herself. Her major
work involved separating the components of pitchblende. For 10 points, name this Polish-born discoverer
of polonium and radium who coined the term "radioactivity."
ANSWER: Marie Curie [or Maria Salomea Sklodowska]
This scientist analyzed samples of pitchblende with an electrometer, expanding on the work of Henri
Becquerel by hypothesizing that observed electrical impulses were due to an atomic property of
uranium. This double-Nobel laureate coined the term (*) "radioactivity" for this property, which was
also observed in radium and polonium, elements she discovered. For 10 points, name this scientist whose
early work was performed with her husband, Pierre.
ANSWER: Marie Sklodowska-Curie (prompt on Curie; prompt on Madame Curie)
The combination of this ion [EYE-on] with platinum and possibly potassium creates a good electrical
conductor useful in nanotechnology called Krogmann's salt. This ion also combines with iron to form
Prussian blue, and it is combined with hydrogen using the Andrussow [ahn-DRUSsow] process. In animals,
this ion inhibits cytochrome c oxidase [SIGH-toe-krome see OKS-i-dase], which causes death because it
prevents the body from using oxygen. Name this ion created from methane and ammonia, consisting of a
triple bonded combination of carbon and nitrogen.
ANSWER: cyanide (prompt on "CN" or "CN-")
This ion is combined with iron in Prussian blue. Compounds of this ion are used in the standard process
for extracting gold and silver from ore. When this is not an ion, but instead covalently bonded in an organic
molecule, the molecule is called a nitrile. Since it inhibits cytochrome c (SITE-oh-chrome see) oxidase, it is
capable of stopping aerobic cellular respiration. That is the mechanism behind its most common usages,
including insecticides. For 10 points, name this ion with formula CN minus that is poisonous and is
consequently used in suicide pills.
ANSWER: cyanide [or CN- before it is read]
When compounds with this property are small, they are destabilized by angle strain. Some polymers are
formed by "opening" compounds with this property, such as ethylene oxide, which is an ether with this
property. Some compounds with this structural property are stabilized by a delocalized 6-electron system.
Those compounds are called "aromatic", and one such compound is drawn as a hexagon containing a circle.
Alkanes with this property have twice as many hydrogens as carbons. For 10 points, name these compounds
that contain a series of atoms connected in a loop, examples of which include benzene and a namesake
version of hexane.
ANSWER: cyclic [or word forms; or ring compounds; accept cyclic ethers; accept cyclic alkanes; accept cycloalkanes; prompt on "epoxide"; prompt on "aromatic"]
Four cationic instances of this type of reaction are required for the synthesis of lanosterol, and molecules
such as (2E, 4E)-2,4-Hexadiene can undergo a photochemical variety of this reaction through a disrotatory
path. The thermal occurrence of this reaction in enediynes is known as the Begman variety, while types of
this reaction catalyzed by compounds such as organotin include the Stille and Heck reactions. A reaction of
this type which occurs in divynil ketones and is catalyzed by strong Lewis or Bronstedt acids is known as
the Nazarov one while another example of this type of reaction produces a beta-keto ester through a
mechanism similar to that of Claisen condensation and is called the Dieckmann reaction. For ten points,
identify this type of reaction which results in the formation of a ring compound from a chain.
ANSWER: cyclization
One common application of the Thorpe-Ingold effect is in the acceleration of these reactions by the addition
of a geminal-dimethyl group to the reactant molecule. Concerted examples of these reactions that also have
negative entropies of activation can have conrotatory or disrotatory transition states. A radicalrearrangement of an enediyne is one type of this reaction named for Bergmann. All exo-tet and exo-trig
varieties of these reactions are favored, according to Baldwin's rules. When intramolecular, these reactions
are fastest when reacting groups are five carbons away. One example of this type of reaction is a
condensation named for Dieckmann which forms beta-ketoesters. For 10 points, name these reactions that
form rings from carbon chains.
ANSWER: cyclizations [accept ring-forming reaction before mention; accept Bergmann cyclization; antiprompt on "lactonization", "electrocyclization", "cycloaddition", or "pericyclic reaction"]
An example of a subset of this type of reaction is the reaction of sulfur dioxide with butadiene, a
cheletropic reaction. Photochemically induced examples include the DeMayo reaction. Many
alkaloids are synthesized using the 1,3 dipolar variant of this subtype of pericyclic reactions, the [2+2]
type of which is thermally forbidden. The endo product is preferred in the reaction of this type in which an
alkene reacts with a conjugated diene to produce cyclohexene derivatives. The combination of unsaturated
molecules to form a cyclic product with a reduction in bond multiplicity is, for 10 points, what kind of
reaction exemplified by the Diels-Alder reaction?
ANSWER: cycloaddition [prompt on pericyclic reactions before mention; prompt on Diels-Alder reaction before mention; prompt on DeMayo reaction before mention; prompt on 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition before mention; prompt on cheletropic reactions until mention; prompt on any answer that includes the names Suarez and Sordo throughout]
In a reaction of this type, di-cobalt-octa-carbonyl acts as a source of carbon monoxide to a reacting
alkyne and alkene. An isoxazolidine results from a reaction of this kind between a nitrone and an
alkene. In the first step of ozonolysis, a molozonide forms due to this type of reaction between ozone
and an alkene. A widely-used reaction of this type, between an alkyne and an azide, is the premier
example of click chemistry. In their best-known example, the (*) endo transition state is favored. They
are notated by placing, in square brackets, the number of electrons contributed by each reactant, separated
by
plus signs. In the most famous reaction of this type, a diene and dienophile react together. For 10 points, the
Diels-Alder reaction is a reaction of what type, in which the reactants join together to form a ring?
ANSWER: cycloaddition [prompt on "addition"; anti-prompt on "Pauson-Khand", "nitrone-olefin", "Huisgen", or "Diels-Alder"]
They can be synthesized intramolecularly from propyl sidechains in the Yang reaction, and
difluorodihaloethylene reacts with alkenes and alkynes to produce this molecule. Metallo versions of it are
key intermediates in ring closing metathesis reactions, while silyl versions of make better catalysts than
other alkanes in Hiyama coupling due to enhanced Lewis acidity. It can be synthesized in the presence of a
strong base from malonic ester and 1,3-propyl dihalides. Beta-lactams contain it, but with a nitrogen atom
replacing one of its carbon atoms. If this molecule has two double bonds, it becomes antiaromatic. For ten
points, name this cyclic alkane with formula C4H8, often depicted as a square.
ANSWER: cyclobutane
Rhodium on carbon can be used as a catalyst in the hydrogenation of benzene to reduce benzene into this
molecule. Substituent atoms on this molecule are given the designation "axial" or "equatorial" based on
their orientation to this molecule's planar structure. Partial twisting relieves the steric hindrance between its
flagpole hydrogen atoms, and it was Hermann Sachse who first suggested the reason for the lack of angle
strain proposed by Adolf von Baeyer, a theory which was later expanded on by Ernst Mohr, who suggested
that it has a chair conformation which relieves that strain. For 10 points, name this cycloalkane which
contains six carbons.
ANSWER: Cyclohexane
Benzene will reduce to this compound in the presence of hydrogen and nickel at 180 degrees Celsius and
fractional distillation of petroleum can produce this colorless liquid which is a key component in the
production of nylon. Its most notable feature was first noted by Herman Sachse who hypothesized it took a
3-dimensional shape. One conformation of this molecule represents a D-2 symmetry and has three C-2 axes
and no plane of symmetry. That conformation, twist, deforms to another conformation at room temperature,
which represents its lowest total energy. The other major conformation is defined by its eclipsing of some
hydrogens on neighboring carbons. For 10 points name this cyclic hydrocarbon with chemical formula
C6H12, whose aforementioned conformations are boat and chair.
ANSWER: cyclohexane [accept C6H12 before mentioned]
In carbon 13 NMR, this compound has a single peak and 27.1 ppm. Using platinum oxide and hydrogen in
acetic acid will reduce benzene to this compound. Substituted ones try to reduce 1 3 diaxial interaction and
flagpole hydrogens can destabilize one form of this compound. Its most stable conformation is one in which
the carbon-carbon bonds are strained, half of the hydrogens are in an axial position, and the other half are in
the equatorial position making the molecule strain free. Its conformations include the twist, boat, and chair.
For 10 points, name this alkane with a saturated six member carbon ring.
ANSWER: cyclohexane
This compound was initially synthesized via a Dieckmann condensation of pimelic acid followed by
complete reduction of the product. It is typically produced by incubating benzene with a rhodium catalyst or
under very acidic conditions at high temperatures, resulting in complete hydrogenation of the benzene ring
and thus production of this compound. Its substituents are deemed axial or equatorial depending on position
relative to the plane, and steric hindrance is minimized in its partially twisted chair conformation, as
opposed to the boat isomer. For 10 points identify this saturated hydrocarbon, a cycloalkane which consists
of a ring of six carbons with formula C6H12.
ANSWER: cyclohexane [accept cyclohexanone before "complete" in first sentence]
This is the simplest compound having five-carbonyl derivatives of that spontaneously open through a
five, one hydrogen shift to create branched enols. This compound can be synthesized directly by basecatalyzed decarboxylation of pimelic acid, followed by removal of the oxygen substituent.
Substituents to this compound experience large steric hindrance in the (*) equatorial position, so
reactions on derivatives of this compound generally require axial substituents. This molecule can itself be
destabilized by steric strain due when there exist equatorial hydrogens at positions one and four that point
inwards. The aforementioned flagpole effect destabilizes the boat conformation of this molecule relative to
the chair confirmation. Complete hydrogen reduction of benzene is the simplest way to form this organic
compound. For 10 points, name this six-carbon ring alkane.
ANSWER: cyclohexane [prompt on permutations of C6H10]
When two of these are near each other, the Fujiwhara effect occurs, resulting in their centers orbiting
around a point in between the two systems. Their formation is aided by upper-level speed divergence in the
vicinity of the jet stream coupled with weak surface convergence. They must form in high humidity regions
at least 5 degrees from the equator because the Coriolis effect is crucial to their initial rotation. These
systems are classified by winds reaching a 12 on the Beaufort scale. For 10 points name these tropical storm
systems that contain areas of low pressure and warm circulation, an example of which sees a calm at its
center or "eye."
ANSWER: tropical cyclone [or hurricane; cylonic vortex; typhoon; tropical storm until mentioned; tropical depression; prompt on partial answers of any of these; do not accept "low pressure center" or "tropical wave"]
One of these types of systems is defined as a "bomb" when the central pressure drops at least 24
millibars in a span of 24 hours. Tropical ones are warm-core, deriving energy from the latent heat released
in condensation. Mid-latitude ones are known as "wave" ones when developing along the polar front. In the
northern hemisphere, these systems rotate counter-clockwise around a central area of low pressure. For 10
points, name these systems whose tropical varieties are called hurricanes.
ANSWER: cyclone [or low pressure before it is read]
Vilhelm Bjerknes formulated an early theory of these systems, which became known as the Norwegian
polar front model. These systems may form through interactions with local orography through a process
called "lee troughing," in which a column of air descends down the lee side of a mountain. Low-level flow
in baroclinic waves is dominated by the extra-tropical variety of these systems. The better-known tropical
variety of these systems draw their energy from the release of the latent heat of water vapor condensation
and feature a center with low humidity and low wind speeds, and all of these systems exhibit Coriolis
circulation. Capable of developing into hurricanes, for 10 points, identify these closed wind systems that
circulate in the direction of the Earth's rotation and often feature a namesake "eye" at their center.
ANSWER: cyclone [prompt on any specific cyclone such as hurricane or tornado]
When fused to phenyl, this moiety catalyzes substitution reactions much more quickly due to rapid
eta-5 eta-3 rearrangements as part of the indenyl effect. Fp dimer is produced by a retro-Diels-Alder
reaction on a dimer of this, followed by treatment with iron pentacarbonyl. A homogeneous catalyst
with two of these fused to phenyl and bound to zirconium dichloride catalyzes the polymerization of
ethylene in conjunction with methylaluminoxane. A methylated form of this moiety is bound to
manganese in an anti-knock agent that is also a half-sandwich compound. Two of this moiety are
found in the activated (*) Tebbe reagent. In addition to being used in some Ziegler-Natta catalysts, it is
bound to iron in ferrocene. For 10 points, name this aromatic anionic ligand produced by adding strong base
to a conjugated 5-carbon ring.
ANSWER: cyclopentadienyl (anion) [or cyclopenta-2,4-dien-1-yl; or Cp; accept cyclopentadiene]
This type of molecule can be formed from the Corey-Chaykovsky reaction, which reacts trimethylsulfonium
iodide with an enone, or through the Simmons-Smith reaction where it is formed from the reaction of a
cerbenoid with an alkene. A functionalized variant of this molecule can be formed through the reaction of a
titanium reagent with an amine in the de Meijere variation of the Kulinkovich reaction, which uses an ester.
Baeyer strain in this molecule can perhaps be explained by a model that attempts to describe its bonding
using sp2 hybridization, doing away with bent or banana bonds, a model named for Walsh, and the cation of
its alkene is the simplest aromatic compound. This is, for 10 points, what simplest cyclic alkane?
ANSWER: cyclopropane
Pyrethrin contains one of these molecules bridging an ester and an alkene moiety, and 1-1-1-propellene
contains three of these molecules fused together. DBU and a diethyl malonate derivative are used to add
this moeity to a fullerene in the Bingel reaction, and its bonds have partial pi character according to the
Walsh orbital model. Adding a carbene to an alkene is another way of generating it; that same
transformation can be performed via the Simmons-Smith reaction. Bent or banana bonding is used to
explain how it relieves its incredible ring strain, which occurs due to the sixty degree angles between its
carbon-carbon bonds. For 10 points, name this compound consisting of three carbons in a ring.
ANSWER: cyclopropane
High-spin complexes form when the pairing energy is greater than the energy difference between
two of these objects. The interaction of these objects with a carbonyl LUMO weakens the bond
strength of the carbonyl in pi backbonding. These objects split into two classes, t-sub-2g and e-sub-g,
when approached by a donor. Electronic transitions between these objects results in brightly colored
(*) complexes according to crystal field theory. One of these objects has the shape of a dumbbell separated
by a torus and lies on the z-axis. These objects have two nodal planes and correspond to an angular
momentum quantum number of 2. A 4s electron preferentially fills one of these orbitals in copper. For 10
points, name these orbitals first filled by transition metals.
ANSWER: d orbitals
One Tanabe [tah-nah-bay]-Sugano diagram exists for each arrangement of these entities, although
three of the cases are trivial. These entities always contain two planar nodes. These entities split
into different energy levels when they interact with ligands [LY-gaandz] in coordination complexes.
These entities are required to form a quadruple bond as two of them overlap to form a delta bond.
These five entities do not exist when the principle quantum number is below three. They are labeled
xy, yz, xz, x^2 - y^2 ["x squared minus y squared"], and z2. They have an angular momentum quantum
number between those of p and f orbitals. Name these orbitals that are typically partially unfilled
in transition metal elements.
ANSWER: d orbitals [prompt on orbitals before "p and f"]
Coming about 100 years after the Maunder Minimum, the 1795 to 1820 period of low solar activity was
named for this man. He wrote the first published table of atomic weights, which listed only six elements. In
Meteorological Observations and Essays, he proposed that in a mixture of gases, each gas would exist
independently with respect to the others. That proposition supported the idea that the pressure exerted by a
mixture of gases in a fixed volume is equal to the sum of the pressures exerted by each individual gas, his
law of partial pressures. Name the English scientist whose law of multiple proportions formed the basis of
his atomic theory.
ANSWER: John Dalton
He lends his name to an alternate name for deuteranopia, and a period of low solar activity from 1790 to
1830 is called his namesake minimum. He independently discovered the Hadley cell by analyzing his
extensive meteorological diary. The basis of stoichiometry was established by his law of multiple
proportions. One theory that he is credited with discovering states that the namesake particles cannot be
subdivided; though that postulate was incorrect, it was some of the first insights into atomic theory. Name
this man, who gives his name to the law of partial pressures and the atomic mass unit.
ANSWER: John Dalton
A period of low solar activity from 1790 to 1830 is known as this scientist's namesake minimum. This
scientist rediscovered the Hadley cell, and postulated that discoloration of the liquid in the eyeball
caused color blindness. His most influential work is "New System of Chemical Philosophy," and this
scientist expounded the law of multiple (*) proportions. The atomic mass unit is sometimes named for
him, but this man is perhaps better known for developing an early atomic theory. For 10 points, identify this
scientist with a namesake law which states that the total pressure of a gaseous mixture is equal to the sum of
its partial pressures.
ANSWER: John Dalton
This man discovered that rainfall occurred due to reductions in temperature, and also determined
the composition of ether, finding its correct formula. In his Meteorological Observations, this man
observed that air was not a chemical solvent, but rather a mechanical system, where each of the
constituent gases would behave as they would independently. By combining (*) nitric oxide with
oxygen, he also discovered how two elements in a compound will always combine in the same, whole
number ratio, thus establishing his Law of Multiple Proportions as well as his atomic theory. The atomic
mass unit is named after, for ten points, which English scientist who formulated a namesake law of partial
pressures?
ANSWER: John Dalton
This man discovered butylene and showed that rainfall was caused by a change in temperature. In his New
System of Chemical Philosophy, he stated a flawed "rule of greatest simplicity." This man names a result
often used to calculate the pressure of a dry gas collected above water. He stated that elements combine in
ratios of small whole numbers in his law of multiple proportions, and that atoms of different elements have
different atomic weights. This namesake of the atomic mass unit stated the law of partial pressures. For 10
points, name this English chemist who pioneered the atomic theory of matter.
ANSWER: John Dalton
This man's work in meteorology includes a fifty-seven year journal of weather observations and the first
definition of the dew point. His name is sometimes used for color-blindness and his work in chemistry
includes a namesake "law of partial pressures". Errors in his best known theory include asserting that every
particle of the same element was identical. For 10 points, name this English chemist who published an early
version of atomic theory and whose names is often used for the atomic mass unit.
ANSWER: John Dalton
This man theorized that the vitreous humour in his eyes was tinted blue when he discovered his color
blindness. This scientist promoted a theory originally speculated by Democritus in the book New System of
Chemical Philosophy. This scientist's studies of gases revealed that the components of a gas summed
together yield the total pressure of the gas. For 10 points, name this early British chemist who developed an
atomic theory of matter and devised a namesake law of partial pressures.
ANSWER: John Dalton
In his book A New System of Chemical Philosophy, this scientist claimed that chemical affinity and
compressibility created a difference between water and steam. This man formulated the law of multiple
proportions. This man developed a theory that included four postulates, which demonstrated a difference
between elements and compounds and stated atoms cannot be created or destroyed in reactions. This man
also names a law that describes the pressure of a system with multiple gases, his law of partial pressures.
For 10 points, name this English scientist, who lends his name to the atomic mass unit and developed the
first atomic theory.
ANSWER: John Dalton
This man was the first to prove that rainfall was a result of changes in temperature, and he also proposed
that discoloration of the vitreous humor was the cause of color blindness. This man noted that oxygen only
combined with a certain amount of nitrous oxide or twice that amount, but no intermediate amount,
discovering the Law of Multiple Proportions. This pioneer of atomic theory designed the "billiard ball"
model of the atom as an indivisible, indestructible unit of matter. For 10 points, name this English chemist
whose namesake law states that the total pressure of non-reactive gases is equal to the sum of individual
partial pressures.
ANSWER: John Dalton
This man's name is used as an alternate name for the atomic mass unit, especially when describing
proteins. According to one law of his, the masses of an element which go into forming two different
compounds with another element will make a ratio of small whole numbers. This formulator of the law of
multiple proportions also names a law for computing the total pressure of a system with multiple
components. For 10 points, identify this namesake of a law of partial pressures, an English chemist who
proposed the atomic theory.
ANSWER: John Dalton
This man concluded that adding dehydrated salts to a solution does not increase the volume of
solution in a paper grouped with "On Microcosmic Salt." He concluded that when pressure and
temperature are held constant, the heat of a fluid is proportional to its weight, in a section of A New
System of Chemical Philosophy. The unit of (*) atomic mass is named for this man, who concluded that
all elements are made of atoms and that atoms combine to form chemical compounds. For 10 points,
name this chemist with a namesake law of partial pressures.
ANSWER: John Dalton
This man and his brother both suffered from deuteranopia, which led to his theory that colorblindness
was caused by discoloration of the eye's fluid. This man classified substances into binary, ternary, and so
on in his New System of Chemical Philosophy. He published a table of atomic weights, which helped
explain his observations that the ratio of masses of elements in a compound form small whole numbers. For
the point, name this British scientist who developed the law of multiple proportions and the law of partial
pressures.
ANSWER: John Dalton
This person's name is sometimes used to represent one atomic mass unit, and the fact that he had
Deuteranopia led him to write the first paper about color blindness. His rule of greatest simplicity stated, "If
two elements form only one compound, assume the compound atom has only one atom of each element."
This person defined atoms as the ultimate particles that could never be divided. This person's namesake law
states that the total pressure of a gaseous mixture is the sum of the partial pressures of its constituents.
Name this English chemist who is also sometimes the namesake of the Law of multiple proportions.
ANSWER: John Dalton
A Thomson is defined as the quotient of a unit named after this man and the charge of an electron. This
scientist rejected Newton's theory of chemical affinities in his New System of Chemical Philosophy, and he
hypothesized that a discoloration of the aqueous humor caused a loss of color perception, a condition which
he had. Like Maunder and Sporer, he has a namesake minimum of sunspot activity occuring immediately
before the modern maximum. He proposed that atoms cannot be divided to smaller particles as part of his
atomic theory, while he stated that the total pressure exerted by a mixture of gases is the sum of the
individual gases in his law of partial pressures. The atomic mass unit is named after, FTP, which English
chemist who stated that elements combine in whole number ratios in his law of multiple proportions?
ANSWER: John Dalton
One analogue of this law for another quantity is called Amagat's law, and its namesake also names the
atomic mass unit, and contributed to stoichiometry when he stated that elements combine in a ratio of
whole numbers. Used to calculate concentrations of component elements, name, for 10 points, this law of
chemistry named for an English scientist that states that the force exerted by a gas is equal to the sum of the
forces of each component gas.
ANSWER: Dalton's law of partial pressures
This man was a member of both the Royal Society and the Royal Irish Academy, and some of his works
were main resources for knowledge in chemistry during his time. He invented a namesake lamp for miners,
which contained a candle but would not explode in the presence of methane and other gases. He isolated the
elements Sodium and Potassium from potash, which many thought to be an element itself. He also
pioneered the field of electrolysis, which led to the discovery of many of the alkali and alkaline earth
metals. FTP, name this British chemist and teacher of Michael Faraday.
ANSWER: Humphry Davy
This man accused future railway engineer George Stephenson of having copied his design for a safety
lamp that used a fine mesh to prevent firedamp explosions in mines. An accident involving nitrogen
trichloride prompted this scientist to hire Michael Faraday as an assistant. This man used electrolysis
(ee-lek-TROH-loh-sis) to become the first person to isolate sodium and potassium. For 10 points, identify
this English scientist who discovered the elemental nature of chlorine.
ANSWER: Sir Humphry Davy
While he accompanied his wife Jane Apreece to Europe to receive an award from Napoleon, he
was asked to investigate a mysterious substance isolated by Bernard Coutrois that he later identified
as the element iodine. Although Carl Scheele first isolated chlorine, this chemist argued for its
classification as a separate element and named it. He refused to patent an invention that used iron
gauze to prevent (*) methane from leaking from a torch into the surrounding mine, a development known
as his namesake lamp. For 10 points, name this scientist whose work was built upon by Michael Faraday.
ANSWER: Humphry Davy
This man used the sun's rays to burn a diamond, showing that it was composed only of carbon. He
discovered that not all acids contain oxygen, and wrote a text on the applications of chemistry in
agriculture. He proposed that chemical affinities are electrical in nature, and pioneered electrolysis, using it
to discover several new elements. His work in electromagnetism was later continued by his assistant
Michael Faraday. He invented a mesh-covered lamp used in coal mines, and famously inhaled nitrous oxide
and discovered its intoxicating effects. For 10 points, name this British chemist who discovered sodium,
potassium, calcium, and magnesium.
ANSWER: Sir Humphry Davy
This author of Salmonia and Consolations in Travel invented a device that used a mesh screen to prevent
the combustion of firedamp. Temporary blindness from a lab accident prompted him to hire Michael
Faraday as an assistant. Though Joseph Priestley discovered it, this man popularized the recreational
inhalation of nitrous oxide. For ten points, name this English scientist and inventor of a mining lamp who
used electrolysis to discover calcium, magnesium, potassium, and sodium.
ANSWER: Humphry Davy
In 1979, Vinson compared the cuticle compositions of Heliotllis larvae to their susceptibility to this
chemical, determining that scheloritization had occurred in the resistant organisms, leaving behind
more nitrogen after urea extraction. This compound is produced in a reaction of chlorobenzene and
chloral with a sulfuric acid catalyst. It first began to be used during (*) World War II to help
counteract the spread of malaria and typhus among allied troops in the Pacific and Atlantic theatres, but was
later named a carcinogen and banned in the US in 1972. For 10 points, name this pesticide, whose ban was
partially prompted by Rachel Carson's Silent Spring?
ANSWER: DDT [accept Dichloro-Diphenyl-Trichloroethane]
A ratio of the coherent scattering of electrons in a bound state to scattering in a free state is named for this
man and Waller. This man's namesake temperature is equal to his namesake velocity times Planck's
constant divided by Boltzmann's constant. A law used to calculate the activity coefficents of a solution is
named for this man and Huckel. For 10 points, name this Dutch-American scientist who ends his name to a
length used to measure dipole moments.
ANSWER: Peter Joseph William Debye
This equation was motivated by noting that a correction needed to be made to an equation given by
Guldberg and Waage, and it was modified to consider association between oppositely charged ions by Niels
Bjerrum. One alternative to this equation includes a sum over parameters that are derived from experimental
calculations of the osmotic coefficient and is used for higher molarities; that is the Pitzer equation. It states
that the natural log of gamma is proportional to the square of the charge number of the species and the
square root of the ionic strength of the solution. One of its namesakes names a rule for aromaticity and the
other names a unit of electric dipole moment. For 10 points, name this doubly eponymous equation for
calculating activity coefficients.
ANSWER: Debye-Huckel equation or theory
One approximation employed in the derivation of this expression is the reduction to first-order of the
inhomogeneous term in the Poisson-Boltzmann equation for a point charge in a charged medium.
Another approximation used to derive this equation reduces the electronic Helmholtz free energy to
one term and states that the temperature integral of the internal energy divided by the temperature
squared. The first expression introduces a scale that measures the (*) thickness of a Helmholtz
electrical double layer while the second approximation is equivalent solvent incompressibility under to
solute electrical pressure. Combining those approximation results in this equation, which states that the
charge state squared times the square root of the ionic strength is proportional to the logarithm of the
activity coefficient. FTP, name this equation giving the activity of ionic species in solution and that is
named for its two discoverers.
ANSWER: the Debye-Huckel equation [or Debye-Huckel law]
The Jahn-Teller Theorem states that if a molecule this kind of state, it will be unstable, and the independent
particle model perturbation theory predicts an exchange version of this. Lambda-doubling destroys this in
nonidentical diatomic molecules, and ordinary perturbation theory fails in quantum configurations that
exhibit this. States with the same principle and azimuthal quantum numbers, but different magnetic quantum
numbers no longer exhibit this under the Zeeman effect. For 10 points, name this situation, in which there is
more than one level associated with a given energy.
ANSWER: degeneracy [accept word forms]
The number of these entities possessed by a kinematic chain is given by the Chebyshev-GrublerKutzbach criterion. In chemical engineering, a type of analysis named for these entities is used to
determine whether a system is over- or underdetermined. Kinematic coupling is a method of fixing all
of these. The fact that a map from the torus to the sphere ceases to be covering at the zenith and
nadir is the mathematical basis for the loss of one of these things in one phenomenon; (*) that
phenomenon, in which two of these mathematical entities couple to one another in a gyroscope, is called
gimbal lock. Rigid bodies generally have six of these. Each of these things contributes 1/2 times Boltzmann's
constant times temperature at equilibrium to the total energy by equipartition theorem. For 10 points, give
this name for the number of parameters of a system that may independently vary.
ANSWER: degrees of freedom [or modes]
This geological feature retreats in a process known as transgression, and it can grow outward and upward
in progradation and aggradation, respectively. This feature can be described as cuspate, arcuate, bird-foot,
or estuarine. This is the equivalent of an alluvial fan located in water. These features are characterized by
large drainage basins, which deposit sediment. For 10 points, name this geological feature that occurs when
a river flows into a lake or ocean, which is named for the shape of the Greek letter formed by the Nile one.
ANSWER: deltas
G. K. Gilbert names a type of these landforms that contain particularly coarse sediment. These landforms
are sometimes the site of mouth bar creation and channel switching events, which act together to create
networks of distributaries within these landforms. These landforms are created by the same interaction that
creates estuaries, and they are similar in structure to alluvial fans. They are named for the Greek letter that
their shape resembles. For 10 points, name these deposits of sediment that occur where a river flows into the
sea.
ANSWER: river deltas [do not accept or prompt on "alluvial fan"]
The Eberswalde Crater on Mars is largely one of these features, which can also be found in the
Lunae Palus Quadrangle. They were first classified in a scale developed by Orton and Reading, who
examined the influence of tides on them. Avulsion led to the formation of the Head of Passes one, an
example of the "Bird's Foot" type of these structures. Types of them that carry gravel include the
"braided" type. They consist of a (*) topset bed, a foreset bed and bottomset bed. Alluvial fans are
analogous to these structures when water exits onto land or carries coarse grain settlement. For 10 points,
name these regions where a river flows into a lake or an ocean, whose name references their triangular
shape.
ANSWER: river deltas
The Kepler conjecture states that this quantity is maximized for HCP and FCC crystals. The reciprocal of
this quantity is called specific volume. This quantity is the ratio between kinematic and dynamic viscosity.
The melting point line has a negative slope when this quantity is greater for liquids than for solids. The ratio
of it to a reference standard is specific gravity. Among elements, this quantity is greatest for osmium and
iridium. For water, it's maximized at 4 degrees Celsius. If two substances are immiscible, the one with a
greater value for this will form the bottom layer. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to mass over
volume.
ANSWER: density [or packing efficiency before "volume"]
This quantity can be measured for a liquid with a pycnometer, and the maximum value of this
quantity for water occurs at 3.98 degrees Celsius. Due to the lanthanide contraction, platinum-group
metals like iridium and osmium have the highest values of this quantity, while a dimensionless
measure of this quantity that relates it to that of water is (*) specific gravity. If two immiscible liquids
are mixed, the one with the lower value for this quantity will lie on top. If an object in water has a value for
this quantity less than that of water, it will float. For 10 points, name this quantity often measured in grams
per cubic centimeter, the mass of a substance per unit volume.
ANSWER: density [accept specific gravity before it is mentioned]
This value for a substance can be obtained using the Baume scale or a hydrometer. For an ideal gas, it is
equal to the ratio of the product of molar mass and pressure to the gas constant times temperature. It is
symbolized by rho. Among the natural elements, osmium and iridium have the highest value of this. The
difference in this between ice and water is why ice floats. For 10 points, name this ratio of mass to density,
which, for water, is about one gram per milliliter.
ANSWER: density [or specific gravity]
The orthobaric type of this measurement is used for coexisting states of matter. Specific gravity
compares a ratio of these values. Buoyancy uses this concept in order to determine if an object will
(*) sink or float. This measurement for water is given as 1 gram per cubic centimeter. Symbolized by the
Greek letter rho, for 10 points, name this quantity that is equal to mass over volume.
ANSWER: density
This quantity for pure liquids can be estimated using the Girolami method. A device known as a pycnometer
[pik-NOM-ih-ter] is used to determine this quantity. Buoyant force is equal to the product of volume, the
gravitational acceleration, and this quantity, which is symbolized rho. The elements iridium and osmium
have high values for this quantity, whose max value for water occurs at four degrees celsius. For 10 points,
name this quantity equal to mass per unit volume.
ANSWER: density
An exotic energy form of this process is used to manufacture ceramic powders, and it is the easiest method
for vitrifying water. It is also the preferred means of creating high-purity chalcogenide (KAL-kuh-juh-nid)
glass, and synthetic diamonds can be made by the chemical-vapor type of this process. More common
examples of this process include the formation of snow in clouds and frost on windows. The reverse of
sublimation, identify this process in which a gas changes directly into a solid without first becoming a
liquid.
ANSWER: deposition
Processes in this type of environment can be modeled by the Bagnold Formula, which describes saltation
and the formation of Aeolian landforms in these environments. Features in this type of entity include
Hamadas, Regs, and Ergs, and these entities are often categorized together with xeric shrublands. This type
of environment is often situated near mountains due to the rain shadow effect. For 10 points, name this
biome characterized by large day-night temperature disparities and extreme dryness, examples of which
include the Gobi and the Sahara.
ANSWER: deserts [Accept sand dunes.]
This biome is either BWh or BWk in the Koppen system, and these areas typically feature xeric soil
regimes. Temporary lakes in this environment are playas, and this area's high level of evapotranspiration
may lead to salt flats. They are often created due to a rain shadow effect from upwind mountains. For 10
points, name this arid biome which typically experiences less than 10 inches of rain a year, examples of
which include the Gobi and the Sahara.
ANSWER: deserts
Regs and Hamada areas of these entities contain more rock than ergs. Minerals such as laterite determine
the color of these entities, and the Montane variety of these occur at high altitudes. They can be classified as
BWh and BWk based on environmental factors in the Koppen Climate Classification system. They often
form due to the rain shadow effect. The largest one of these is Antarctica, and the Atacama one is the driest
in the world. FTP, name these regions of the earth which receive less than 25 centimeters of rainfall per
year.
ANSWER: deserts
The "Hamada" types of these areas are rockier than other types. One type of landform found in these areas
contains a "slip face" and a trough between peaks known as the "slack." The Koppen classification breaks
these types of areas down into BWh and BWk types. Clay and iron oxide stick to unexposed rocks in these
areas, producing their namesake "varnish." Closely packed rock fragments up to cobble size can form
Gibber plains in these regions, also known as their namesake "pavement." Large open areas in this climate
system are called ergs. They typically form because of the "rain shadow" effect of a mountain range. For 10
points, name this type of climate characterized by dry conditions and occasionally sand dunes, typified by
the Rub al Khali and Sahara.
ANSWER: deserts
In these regions, barite [BEAR-ite] and gypsum [JIP-sum] can form what look like roses. In these regions,
rocks can form patterns called regs or gibber, and one type of valley that forms is called a wadi [WAH-dee].
Welwitschia plants tend to grow in these regions, and plants in general in these regions tend to have small
leaves or no leaves at all. There is some debate as to whether or not frigid regions should be included in this
category, which includes regions with very little plant life. Name these areas that receive very little
precipitation, such as the Gobi [GOE-bee] and the Sahara.
ANSWER: deserts
The Koppen climate classification divides this type of climate into BWh and BWk, depending on the
average temperature of the coldest month, but they can also classified by their geographic location,
such as coastal or polar. The rocky areas in these regions are called hamada, while the regions of (*)
sand dunes are called ergs. Often formed within the rain shadow of a mountain range, name these dry
regions, defined as receiving less than 250 millimeters of precipitation each year.
ANSWER: Deserts
Weather processes in this type of region can result in a surface that consists of closely packed angular
or rounded rock fragments. This type of region lends its name to a coating whose red to black color is
determined by the relative abundance of manganese and iron. That surface and coating are its namesake
pavement and varnish, respectively. An indicator species for one of these regions is the Joshua tree. Due to
the subsidence of air that is part of the Hadley circulation, these areas are commonly found at thirty degrees
latitude. These areas can form on the lee side of mountains as a result of a rain shadow. For 10 points, give
this term for arid regions that receive less than about ten inches of rain per year, commonly home to cacti.
ANSWER: deserts [prompt on xeric]
The Eyring equation predicts that the rate constant of breaking a bond to this is six times less than the rate
constant of breaking a bond to a more common isotope, but experimental evidence shows that the ratio of
rate constants is near unity, a paradox known as its namesake "isotope effect". It is often a component of
solvents in NMR because of its invisibility to NMR spectrometers, and because it is destroyed by
thermonuclear reactions, there is surprisingly little of it in the interior of the sun. Discovered
spectroscopically by Harold Urey, for 10 points, what is this isotope of hydrogen consisting of one proton
and one neutron?
ANSWER: Deuterium (accept heavy hydrogen)
The ultra-dense type of this entity has been suggested as a possible nuclear fuel for inertial
confinement fusion. This entity is widely used as a solvent in NMR spectroscopy because it is invisible
to a spectrometer tuned to protons. The difference in bond length and energy for this isotope,
compared to its parent element, is larger than that of any other isotope. For 10 points, name this isotope
found in higher than normal proportions in heavy water, which consists of a proton and a neutron.
ANSWER: deuterium (or heavy hydrogen)
In one experiment, this chemical's incorporation into a protein's amide groups is used as a measure
of the solvent accessibility of the residues. The rate-limiting step of an enzyme can be slowed down by
the incorporation of this chemical, a process known as the primary isotope effect. Almost all of this
chemical was produced during the Big Bang nucleosynthesis and is also produced in the first step of the
proton-proton chain. The incorporation of this chemical into acidic positions of a molecule can be
monitored by NMR, and solvents for that technique usually contain this chemical since it doesn't show up
on proton NMR. Also found in heavy water, for 10 points, name this isotope of hydrogen with atomic mass
two.
ANSWER: Deuterium or H-2
Experiments involving reverberating isentropic shock to compress this liquid up to 330 gigapacals
provide evidence for a related compound's fusion to form the metallic core of Jupiter and Saturn. Its
oxide is used to enhance boron neutron capture theory because it slows incoming neutrons without
interacting with them. That oxide is also typically used as a solvent in IR of proteins. This chemical
combines with hydrogen in the second step of the proton-proton chain to yield a helium atom. Along
with its elemental counterpart, this isotope is typically used in measuring the kinetic isotope effect, and it
replaces a lighter atom in chloroform in a common solvent for NMR spec. Urey's observation of three faint
spectral lines in the Balmer series served as initial evidence for this isotope's existence. For 10 points, name
this isotope consisting of a proton, a neutron, and an electron, also called heavy hydrogen.
ANSWER: deuterium [accept deuteron or 2H but not "H2"; do not accept "hydrogen"]
Exchange of this substance is used to determine which amino acid residues of a protein are exposed, and
in spectroscopy a lamp containing this substance is used to create a continuous spectrum in the UV range.
Reacting two atoms of this substance together produces four mega-electron volts of kinetic energy, and this
substance formed after the universe cooled below 0.1 mega electron-volts a few minutes after the big bang
in the first step of nucleosynthesis. In IR spectroscopy incorporation of this substance causes absorption to
shift to lower frequencies. It is the first product of the proton-proton chain and is quickly consumed to form
helium. For 10 points, name this substance found in heavy water, an isotope of hydrogen with mass two.
ANSWER: deuterium [or heavy hydrogen or deuteron]
Lonsdaleite is a hexagonal type of this mineral associated with meteor impacts. Individual units of this
mineral are classified based on the amount of nitrogen and boron in the lattice. This mineral is most
commonly found in lamproite and kimberlite. It consists of sp3 carbon bonded in a tetrahedral network.
When sold commercially, it is rated in terms of its color, clarity, cut, and carat. It rates a ten on the Mohs
scale. For 10 points, name this valuable gem that is the hardest known mineral.
ANSWER: diamond
The cubic lattice structure of this crystal is the namesake structure found in silicon and germanium, and
many of this mineral's defects are nitrogen-vacancy centers. This is sometimes produced by either Chemical
Vapor Deposition or High-Pressure High-Temperature synthesis. This substance is often extracted from
kimberlite, which is named after a city in South Africa. This substance can be used for etching a variety of
surfaces. Name this carbon allotrope that is a ten on the Mohs hardness scale.
ANSWER: diamond
Along with spinel and blend, this structure is found in Anderson-Payne refractometers. Lee and Walmsley
demonstrated macroscale quantum entanglement in these objects. Nanowires made of these structures make
use of their nitrogen vacancy centers for optical applications. These objects have been found in lamproite
deposits near Argyle lake and they are most commonly found in kimberlite pipes. They are used in anvil
presses to simulate high pressure environments. The atoms in this crystal have sp3 hybridization. This
crystal is imitated by cubic zirconia. For 10 points, identify this precious gemstone, an allotrope of carbon
with Mohs scale hardness of 10.
ANSWER: diamond
A common defect with spin polarization in this mineral is the nitrogen-vacancy center. High quality
examples of this are classified as first water, while low quality examples are crushing bort. This mineral can
be confused with moissanite, a silicon carbide that, like this material has a very high thermal conductivity.
This mineral is ranked above corundum on the Mohs scale, where it is rated a ten. Name this allotrope of
carbon that is a very valuable gem.
ANSWER: diamond
The P type of these minerals is formed in peridotite, while their E type originates in eclogite. They
are often covered with a gum-like skin called nyf, and bort is a variety of this mineral that occurs as
rough rounded masses without distinct cleavage. This mineral is lipophilic and hydrophobic due to its
strong intermolecular bonds, and its distinctively high thermal conductivity makes it desirable in
industrial machines such as (*) drills and cutters. They can often be found in kimberlite, and along with
graphite, this mineral is an allotrope of carbon. For ten points, name this mineral with a hardness of 10 on
the Mohs Hardness Scale, the hardest naturally occurring material.
ANSWER: diamond
Goto and Hayashi found that using a diarylprolinyl silyl ether can reverse the stereoselectivity of this
reaciton, which is also catalyzed by Seelig's ribozymes. Woodward epimerized the product of this reaction
in his total synthesis of cholesterol and cortisone. This reaction occurs rapidly using N-methylmaleimide
and certain dendralenes, while one form of it, using maleic anhydride, is known as the Wagner-Jauregg
reaction. The stereochemistry of this reaction can be predicted by the "endo" rule, and it requires one
component to be in the s-cis phase. This reaction combines two pi-electrons of one component with two pielectrons of the other to create two new sigma-bonds. For 10 points, name this reaction of a conjugated
diene and a dienophile, usually an alkene, to produce a cyclohexene, named for two Germans.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
The propensity of nitroso compounds to participate in a variant of this reaction has been used to synthesize
oxazine derivatives. Another variant of this reaction yields 2,3-dihydro-4-pyridones and uses a compound
named for Danishefsky. In addition to that 'aza' variation, this reaction is usually thermodynamically
favorable since it sees the formation two sigma bonds from pi bonds. Under kinetic control, it preferentially
yields an endo product, and one component must be in the s-cis conformation for the reaction to occur. For
10 points, name this cycloaddition reaction in which a diene reacts with a dienophile to produce a ring and
is named after two German chemists.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder Reaction [accept nitroso Diels-Alder, aza Diels-Alder, etc.]
When it occurs with 1,1-diarylethylene it is called the Wagner-Jauregg (yow-reg) reaction, although other
benzenoid compounds usually do not undergo this reaction, while the aza modification of it can be used
when either of two reactants contain imines. Lewis acids can be used to control the quantities of endo and
exo products produced in this reaction which requires an overlap of the HOMO and LUMO. For 10 points,
identify this 4+2 cycloaddition reaction wherein conjugated diene reacts with a dienophile to produce a
cyclohexene system, named for its two German discoverers.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
EJ Corey's total synthesis of Tamiflu begins with one of these reactions, and most norbornene
derivatives are synthesized using this reaction. Niobium-5-Chloride is used to activate molecules for
this reaction, and dendralene has the ability to undergo this reaction several times in tandem. Maleic
anhydride and cyclopentadiene undergo this reaction very quickly since the former has electronwithdrawing groups and the latter is locked in the s-cis confirmation. The LUMO of one reactant and the
HOMO of the other has to overlap correctly in this reaction, which occurs preferentially in the endo
confirmation. It is a 4+2 cycloaddition that occurs in a single, concerted step, and creates a cyclohexene
derivative. For 10 points, name this organic reaction in which a diene reacts with a dienophile.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder Reaction
The Gin synthesis of Nominine relies on an intermolecular version of this reaction, while Ishihara's triamine
catalysts allow acroleins to undergo this reaction. Rajaram and Sigman's catalysts facilitate the oxovariation of this reaction, which uses carbonyl compounds to create pyrans, and this reaction was one of the
first understood through the use of Fukui's theory. Seelig's ribozymes catalyze it in vivo, and a more
familiar variation uses 1,1-diarylethylene and is named for Wagner and Juaregg. The aza variation of this
reaction is used to synthesize pyridines, while this reaction prefers a transition state in which the groups on
one reactant are pointed inwards, called the "endo" state. FTP, name this [4+2] cycloaddition reaction that
creates a cyclohexene derivative from a diene and a dienophile.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
A paper by Hermitage et al. concluded that one form of this reaction for N-aryl imines occurs in a
stepwise mechanism with one reactant approaching the activated imine via a Burgi-Dunitz
trajectory. This reaction is often catalyzed by Lewis acids such as ytterbium (III) triflate. Its
products tend to have their longest bridges with substituents that are cis oriented. A particularly
reactive reagent used in this reaction is named for (*) Danishefsky. The highest occupied and lowest
unoccupied orbitals of the two reactants interact in the frontier orbital theory of this reaction. It has an aza
variety and it can be used to produce cyclohexane from ethene and butadiene. This reaction generally
follows the cis principle and endo addition rule. For 10 points, name this doubly-eponymous reaction that
requires little energy and involves the 4+2 cycloaddition of a conjugated diene to a dienophile.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
This reaction can be used to prepare the Vince Lactam from chlorosulfonyl isocyanate. Amino acid
derived imidazolidinones named for MacMillan are a common organocatalyst used for this reaction,
which is responsible for the synthesis of betanones. The photo-catalyzed version of this reaction is the
mechanism by which UV light forms thymidine dimers in DNA. Groups on one reactant tend to form
1,2 or 1,4-adducts in this reaction, whose transition state usually contains one reactant underneath
the other with its electron-withdrawing groups pointed inward in order to maximize interaction between
the HOMO and the LUMO. This reaction forms cyclohexenes and preferentially forms the endo product.
For 10 points, name this cycloaddition in which a diene and a dienophile react.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
The idea of decreasing surface area via "enforced hydrophobic interactions" was originally posited to
explain the acceleration of this reaction in water by Breslow. In cases where one of the reactants in this
reaction is also a cyclic ketone, it may be followed by the often-aromatizing cheletropic extrusion of carbon
monoxide. Pyridine and pyran derivatives are accessible through variants of this reaction which use imines
and ketones respectively. The HOMO-LUMO overlap of its two reactants usually explains why this reaction
has a strong preference for the electron-withdrawing groups of one reactant pointing down and inward in the
transition state; that is called the "endo" rule. For 10 points, name this [4+2] cycloaddition that forms
cyclohexene derivatives from dienes and dienophiles.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
The oxo variant of this reaction is used to construct dihydropyran from carbonyl groups. The stereoand regiochemistry of this reaction can be predicted using rules named for one of its namesakes and
Stein, which is also known as the cis principle. This is definitely the most famous name reaction for
which the selection rules of Woodward and Hoffmann apply. Interestingly, this reaction involves the
interaction of the HOMO of one reactant and the LUMO of the other, a situation that is reversed in its
"inverse demand" form. Danishefsky's reagent and maleic anhydride are commonly used reactants for this
reaction. Because the stereoisomer in this concerted/pericyclic reaction depends on whether the reactants
are aligned or staggered in the transition state, the endo state is kinetically favored. For 10 points, identify
this doubly-eponymous reaction in which a cyclohexene is produced from the cycloaddition of a conjugated
diene and an alkene, or dienophile.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction [prompt on [4+2] cycloaddition]
Chiral oxazaboroladine [ox-AY-zuh-bo-RO-lid-een] has been shown to improve both enantio and
regioselectivity for this reaction. Imidazolinium salts catalyze it when an imine is substituted for one
of the reactants, and when this reaction is under kinetic control, the (*) endo adduct is favored. As
observed in this reaction and its aforementioned aza modification, it requires one of the reactants to be in
the s-cis conformation and is driven by HOMO and LUMO overlap between the diene and dienophile
respectively. For 10 points, name this reaction which yields a cyclohexene product, a certain 4+2
cycloaddition named for its German discoverers.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
The MacMillan catalyst serves to accelerate an asymmetric version of this reaction, and Seelig showed that
this reaction could be catalyzed in vitro by certain ribozymes. The Woodward-Hoffmann rules were first
applied to this reaction, and in order for it to occur, one of its reactants must be in s-cis form. Driven by the
conversion of pi bonds into more stable sigma bonds, this reaction almost always favors the endo product,
and its simplest form is the reaction of ethene with butadiene to yield cyclohexene. For 10 points, name this
doubly-eponymous reaction, a 4+2 cycloaddition between a diene and dienophile.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
This reaction occurs twice, once intramolecularly, in the synthesis of gibberelic acid. Breslow showed an
acceleration of this reaction in aqueous solution that is attributed to hydrophobic effects. Like aldol
reactions, it can be enantioselectively catalyzed by both magnesium and copper(II) chelates of bisoxazolines. Other popular catalysts include scandium triflate and ytterbium triflate, the latter of which is
commonly used with a compound named after Danishefsky in this reaction's aza- variant. One of this
reaction's namesakes also names a rule that states that endo addition is preferred in this reaction. For 10
points, name this doubly-eponymous pericyclic addition reaction in which a conjugated diene is added to a
dienophile.
ANSWER: Diels-Alder reaction
LDA is used to transform propargyl diol into one of these compounds in the Whiting reaction. A
useful one of these compounds is synthesized using zinc chloride to combine trimethylsilyl chloride
with methoxybutenone. The namesake value of these compounds is expressed as the mass of iodine
equivalent to the amount of (*) maleic anhydride reacting with a unit mass of one of these. The cumulated
type of these compounds are less stable than other types. Electrophilic addition can result in both 1,2 and
1,4 additions in the conjugated type of these molecules. That type also undergoes a type of reaction that
follows the endo addition rule and forms cyclohexenes, the Diels-Alder reaction. For 10 points, name these
hydrocarbons that contain two carbon-carbon double bonds.
ANSWER: dienes [or diolefins]
One of these compounds sometimes called Kitahara is more commonly known as Danishefsky's one of
these and, due to its electron richness, is highly useful in perhaps their best-known use. Allene is an example
of the cumulated variety of these compounds, though the most stable type of these has conjugated double
bounds separated by a single bond and is therefore known as conjugated. The Diels-Alder reaction occurs
between a species named for its ability to attract these and one of these compounds. For 10 points, name
these chemicals, hydrocarbons with two double bonds, which are perhaps best known in their 1,3-buta form.
ANSWER: dienes [prompt on hydrocarbons before cumulated]
A model of this process in multicomponent systems that permits its namesake coefficients to be
negative was developed independently by Maxwell and Stefan. An ensemble of photons can be
modeled with equations for this process in materials with high optical depth and low mean free path.
Two laws of this process give the time derivative of the field as k times the second position derivative
of the field and give the flux J as negative k times the first position derivative; those are (*) Fick's
laws. For 10 points, identify this process referred to as "osmosis" when the substance in question is water,
in which molecules move down a gradient from regions of high concentrations to regions of lower
concentrations.
ANSWER: molecular diffusion [prompt on osmosis before mention]
One quantity characterizing this process is proportional to temperature to the 3/2 power divided by a
"collision integral" according to Chapman-Enskog theory. In a plasma, the presence of an electric
field between ions and electrons causes them to experience this process at equal rates in an ambipolar
form of this process. The previous quantity characterizing this process is proportional to the product
of the mean free path and the mean velocity and it is equal to the square of the (*) step size divided by
the time between steps when using a random walk to model this process. The flux of this process is equal to
minus the product of a namesake coefficient and the concentration gradient by Fick's 1st law. For 10 points,
name this process exemplified by osmosis where molecules move from regions of high to low
concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on "mass transfer" or "mass transport." Before the word "ions," accept "heat conduction" and prompt on "heat transfer" or "heat transport"]
Plasma and a magnetic field make for the Bohm kind of this process, while its anomalous type has
non-linear time dependence. Its collective variety makes its namesake coefficient concentrationdependent,
in contrast to its single-particle variety, Brownian motion. There is a rotational analog of
this process, and a special case of this process concerning water is called osmosis. For 10 points,
identify this behavior where particles tend to spread from areas of high concentration into areas of low
concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
The cage effect partially describes the relationship between the reaction rate and the rate at which this
process occurs; those reactions are limited not by activation but by this process. It is roughly inversely
proportional to the square root of molar mass. This process is modeled by Fick's Laws, which involve the
spatial derivatives of concentration. When water undergoes this process, it is called osmosis. For 10 points,
name this net mass movement of solute from higher concentrations to lower concentrations.
ANSWER: diffusion
Albert Einstein proposed that this process's namesake coefficient is inversely proportional to the
viscosity of a solvent. This process is governed by an equation setting the second spatial derivative
proportional to the first time derivative; that equation is Fick's Second Law. Einstein also proposed that this
process was equivalent to Brownian motion. For 10 points, name this net movement of solute from regions
of high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
In a bipolar junction transistor, the length scale of this process limits the width of the base, and it
occurs in both directions across the junction. A coefficient important to describing this process takes
into account tortuosity, porosity, and hindrance. A law describing this process states that its time
increases with the square of the distance travelled, and another law describing it states that its flux is
proportional to the negative gradient of the (*) chemical potential. Those two laws are named for Fick.
When this process occurs across a semipermeable membrane with water, it is called osmosis. For 10 points,
identify this process by which particles move from areas of high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [generously anti-prompt on "osmosis" until mention]
One form of this process is regulated by aquaporins. This process causes gas exchange in alveoli, and
it distributes nutrients in flatworms. Protein channels are required for a "facilitated" form of this to
occur. Oxygen (*) enters the cell via this process, and osmosis is a type of this process involving water. For
10 points, name this movement of particles from regions of higher concentration to regions of lower
concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion (accept passive transport; accept osmosis before "gas exchange")
The profile of this process is one way to separate Irvin's curves. One model of this process for
multicomponent systems was created by Maxwell and modified by Stefan. Excess interstitials generated by
ion implantation lead to a "transient enhanced" form of this process during annealing. A constant used in
calculations of this process is equal to Boltzmann's constant times temperature divided by the fundamental
charge all times the mobility according to a relation derived by Einstein. One type of this process occurs in
systems smaller than the mean free path and is named for Knudsen. That aforementioned constant can be
obtained from an Arrhenius-type law and has units of centimeters-squared per second; it is related to the
flux of this phenomenon by Fick's first law. For 10 points, identify this transport process that occurs in the
presence of sufficient thermal energy and a concentration gradient.
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on mass transport or random walk]
A set of laws which equates this process's flux to the product of namesake coefficient and the first
derivative of position was derived from the continuity equation. Another equation that governs this
process states that its rate is inversely proportional to the square root of mass. This process is
governed by Fick's Laws and Graham's Law. A specific type of this process involves movement from
[*] hypotonic to hypertonic solutions; that form is specific for water moving across a semipermeable
membrane and is called osmosis. For 10 points, name this process in which particles move from areas of
high concentration to areas of low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on "effusion" and "osmosis"]
One equation governing this process states that its flux is equal to a constant times del of phi. In
this process, the mean squared displacement is directly proportional to the time. One form of this,
which occurs using carriers, is known as the facilitated type, and this process is governed by Fick's
laws. Another subtype involves water across a (*) semipermeable membrane and is known as osmosis.
For 10 points, name this movement of particles from areas of high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
This name is given to the coefficient multiplied by the partial derivative of concentration with respect to
position in Fick's First Law. At constant temperature and pressure, the rate of this for gases is proportional
to one over the square root of molar mass according to Graham's Law. In biology, transport proteins can
facilitate this process across a cell membrane. FTP, name this process usually defined as the movement of
molecules from a region of higher concentration to one of lower concentration.
ANSWER: Diffusion
The Maxwell-Stefan model of this applies for multicomponent systems. It is used to separate isotopes of
uranium in gaseous compounds. This process is described by Fick's laws. This arises from the statistics of
random particle movement and in the context of water and a semipermiable membrane it is called osmosis.
For 10 points, name this movement from high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
This process's effect on band broadening in column chromatography is given by the van Deemter
equation. For a suspension liquid, the translational coefficient of this process is inversely
proportional to the particle diameter according to the Stokes-Einstein relationship. A collection of (*)
random walks spreads out through the normal type of this process, and Fick devised two laws governing this
process. For 10 points, name this process in which the random motion of particles results in a flow of matter
from regions of high concentration to low concentrations.
ANSWER: diffusion
At constant temperature, this process occurs in a direction that minimizes chemical potential by
maximizing entropy. An equation governing this process sets its rate inversely proportional to the square
root of molar mass. This process is governed by Fick's Laws and Graham's Law. When it occurs through a
semipermeable membrane, it is called osmosis. For 10 points, name this random movement of particles
from areas of high concentration to areas of low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on effusion; prompt on osmosis until it is read]
For an electron, the ratio of the coefficient of this process and mobility is equal to that of holes as a result
of Einstein's relation. The simplest model of this process is Brownian motion. The flux of this process is
related to the concentration gradient by Fick's first law. When this process occurs over a semipermeable
membrane it is called osmosis. For 10 points, identify this passive transport process that occurs via random
thermal motion, resulting in no bulk motion.
ANSWER: diffusion
One form of this process explains the phenomenon in which particles are deflected away from the particle
free layer when a heated rod is immersed into smokes; that effect is named after Ludwig and Soret. The rate
of this process is inversely proportional to the square root of the molar mass according to Graham's law.
One set of laws governing this process relates it to the difference in partial pressure and the area and
thickness of the membrane across which it is occurring. Some transport proteins across the cell membrane
facilitate this process. For 10 points, name this process by which particles move from areas of higher
concentrations to those of lower concentrations.
ANSWER: thermodiffusion [or thermophoresis]
The denominator of the Thiele modulus is the rate of this process, whose anisotropic type is used to reduce
image noise. Explained by the Ehrenfest model, this process is used to enrich uranium and dope
semiconductors. Its rate is inversely proportional to the square root of molar mass, and proportional to the
gradient of the concentration field. Governed by Fick's laws and Graham's law, it causes water to move
through semi-permeable membranes in osmosis. For 10 points, name this process by which particles move
from regions of high concentration to those of low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [do not accept "effusion"]
The surface type of this phenomenon can occur by gliding, reptation, and leapfrog mechanisms. Molecules
collide with walls more than each other in the Knudsen [NOOD-suhn] type of this phenomenon, whose
namesake coefficient appears in Fick's first law. The rate of this process is inversely proportional to the
square root of the molar mass of a gas according to Graham's law. Carrier proteins can transport sugars and
amino acids in a facilitated process named for this phenomenon. For fluids through a membrane, this
process is called osmosis. For 10 points, name this movement of substances from areas of high
concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion (coefficient) [prompt on "effusion" or "osmosis"]
The velocity of this process is related to the gradients of chemical potential and of the log of activity in the
Maxwell-Stefan model. The constant associated with this quantity equals the Boltzmann constant times
temperature times drift velocity divided by applied force. That constant is also proportional to mean thermal
speed and mean free path in a law that multiplies that constant by the derivative of concentration with
respect to position, which is Fick's Law. Name this process involving a larger opening than the quantity
usually addressed by Graham's Law in which the random motion of particles leads them to spread out.
ANSWER: diffusion [accept word forms; do not accept "effusion"]
This process's namesake coefficient is calculated using Fick's Second Law. Molecules undergo this
process by Brownian motion. Like a related process, the rate of this process is proportional to one over the
square root of molar mass by Graham's Law. A "facilitated" form of this process occurs across a cell
membrane, and when water undergoes this process it is known as osmosis. For 10 points, name this
movement of a substance down its concentration gradient.
ANSWER: diffusion
One statement describing this process utilizes a constant with dimensions of length squared over time, and
that law sets the time derivative of concentration proportional to the second derivative of concentration with
respect to position. A third law describing it states that the rate at which this process occurs is inversely
proportional to the square root of the molar mass, and an example of this process governed by Fick's and
Graham's laws is the movement of water across a semipermeable membrane. Osmosis is a type of, For 10
points, what process in which particles move from regions of high concentration to those of low
concentration?
ANSWER: Diffusion [accept Effusion; prompt on Osmosis before mention]
A formula developed for one type of this process scales the inverse of the magnetic field intensity, and was
observed when its namesake was using a magnetic arc to separate uranium isotopes. Another form of this
process is explained by the Ludwig-Soret effect, which results in a temperature gradient parallel to the
concentration gradient. A set of equations, which relate flux to the gradient of concentration also governs
this process, and its rate is inversely proportional to the square root of the molar mass according to
Graham's Law. For 10 points, identify this process, wherein particles move from regions of high
concentrations to areas of lower concentrations.
ANSWER: diffusion
Albert Einstein linked this process to Brownian motion in his Ph.D. paper. One law describing this process
calculates its flux using the gradient, while a second law relates that flux to the amount of time it takes to
occur. This process is described by Fick's and Graham's laws, and occurs during passive transport in
membranes. A special type of this process for water is called osmosis. For 10 points, name this effect in
which material moves from an area of high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
Plasma exhibits the Bohm type of this phenomenon. This process is also given by Einstein's Relation. A
specific type of it observed in gases is inversely proportional to the molar mass of the gas according to
Graham's Law, which is often paired with Fick's Laws. Another type of it involves water passing through
a semi-permeable membrane and is called osmosis. For 10 points, name this movement of particles from an
area of high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on "effusion" or "osmosis"]
The zero-length column method was designed to measure this process within zeolite crystals. Its rate is the
denominator of the Thiele modulus. The effective constant for it is a function of its bulk constant along
with tortuosity and hindrance factors. Large scale enriching uranium is accomplished using centrifugation or
this process. The mass flux is a function of the partial derivative of concentration with respect to length in
Fick's law describing this. Osmosis is this of water across a membrane. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon resulting from the random movement of particles that sees transfer between regions of high
concentration to regions of low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
One form of this process is characterized by a non-linear dependence of particle MSD on time and is
the subject of CTRW models. In plasmas, electrons move perpendicularly to magnetic field lines in a
form of this property named for Bohm. The rate of this process in a gas is proportional to the square
root of the density of the gas. The flux due to this process is related to the negative (*) chemical
potential. When protein channels allow for this process to occur, its "facilitated" form results, which is type
of passive transport. Fick's laws describe this process, and when water is subjected to this process, it is
called osmosis. For 10 points, name this process by which molecules flow from areas of higher
concentration to areas of lower concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [anti-prompt on "osmosis"]
A high or low Kubo number determines whether this process occurs in the quasilinear or percolative
regime. A semi-empirical model equates the coefficient of this process in plasmas to k T over 16 times
electron charge times magnetic field strength. Kinetic theory relates the coefficient describing this to
the Boltzmann constant times temperature times the mobility in the (*) Einstein-Smoluchowski
relation. If its coefficient is constant, the PDE named for this process reduces to the heat equation. Thermal
conduction occurs due to phonon vibration or electrons undergoing this process. The flux for this process is
proportional to the gradient of concentrations in Fick's first law. For 10 points, name this process in which
substances move from regions of high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
Gaseous uranium hexafluoride is manipulated in a variant of this process, yielding U-235 and
U-238. A derivation from the continuity equation explains this process, which is governed by Fick's
laws. A related phenomenon to this one is governed by Graham's law, and carrier proteins(*) are
used for the passive "facilitated" form across the plasma membrane. Hypotonic and hypertonic solutions can
be produced when this process happens to water, known as osmosis. For 10 points, name this general
motion of particles from regions of higher to lower concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on "effusion" in case people are confused]
This process is modeled well for large spherical particles by the Stokes-Einstein relation. One variety of this
process is used in Lars Onsager's method of thermal separation. Unlike that Soret variety, another type
results in an even distribution of molecules and is governed by a pair of equations relating molar
concentrations and named for Fick, while the rate of a similar process is inversely proportional to the root of
the molar mass of a gas by Graham's law. For 10 points, name this process wherein particles move down a
concentration gradient.
ANSWER: diffusion
The namesake coefficient of this process is given by the Einstein relation, and this phenomenon is
described by Fick's Laws. In cells this process can be facilitated, active, or passive. It can be viewed as a
consequence of the Brownian motion of many particles. When this concept is applied to water across a
membrane, it is called osmosis. For 10 points, name this process through which particles move from high to
low concentrations.
ANSWER: diffusion
In the Cottrell equation, the current generated in a chronoamperometry experiment is proportional to the
square root of a coefficient of this type and a Loschmidt tube can be used to study this phenomenon. The
ability of plasmas to escape confinement in a magnetic field faster than kinetic estimates would predict is
accounted for by the Bohm type of this process and in Levy flights its constant becomes infinite. Stochastic
variables can be applied to molecular states to produce the Ehrenfest model of this process and random
walks involving non-Brownian motion produces the anomalous version of this process. For 10 points, what
is this process that is governed by a relationship between flow rate and concentration difference known as
Fick's law and can describe gas molecules moving down a concentration gradient.
ANSWER: diffusion
Dynkin's formula describes the Ito type of this phenomenon at a stopping time. Ehrenfest's model of it
explains the statistical interpretation of the second law of thermodynamics. Its rate is inversely proportional
to the square root of particle mass, and its magnitude is proportional to the gradient, according to Fick's law
and Graham's law. One form which causes water to move through a semi-permeable membrane is called
osmosis. For 10 points, name this movement of particles down a concentration gradient, from areas of high
to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on effusion]
A formula developed for one type of this process scales the inverse of the magnetic field intensity, and was
observed when its namesake was using a magnetic arc to separate uranium isotopes. When polar molecules
and ionic compounds transverse across the lipid bilayer, the facilitated type of this process can be seen. Its
rate is inversely proportional to the square root of the molar mass according to Graham's Law, and osmosis
is this process in terms of water. FTP, identify this process, wherein particles move from regions of high
concentrations to areas of lower concentrations.
ANSWER: diffusion
The Knudsen type occurs at low pressures in porous media and is governed by the Einstein-Smoluchowski
relation, while the Bohm type occurs in plasmas acted upon by a magnetic field. Used in doping
semiconductors, it is governed by two laws named after Adolf Fick. Another law states that the rate at which
it occurs is inversely proportional to the square root of the particles' masses. That law is named after the
man who first studied it in liquids and gases, Thomas Graham. When it causes a solvent to move through a
semi-permeable membrane, it is called osmosis. Caused by the random collisions of particles, for 10 points,
name this transport phenomenon resulting in a net flow of molecules from areas of high concentration to
areas of low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion (prompt on "effusion" until "semiconductors" is read)
The rate at which momentum undergoes this physical process is related to a fluid's kinematic viscosity. In a
semiconductor at equilibrium, the current due to charge carrier drift is opposed by the current due to this
process. This process is described as a random walk in the Brownian motion model. The flux associated to
this stochastic process is proportional to the negative gradient of concentration, according to Fick's law.
Unlike convection, this process does not entail bulk motion of substance. When a solvent moves, rather than
a solute, this process is called osmosis. For 10 points, name this process in which particles migrate to
regions of lower concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [accept Brownian motion until it is read; prompt on "osmosis"; prompt on "random walk"]
A general model for this process in multicomponent systems that allows for negative constants of
proportionality was discovered independently by Maxwell and Stefan. One statement referring to this
phenomenon sets its flux proportional to the negative position derivative of a certain quantity; the other sets
the time derivative of concentration proportional to the second derivative of that quantity; those are Fick's
laws of this process. A "facilitated" form occurs in the cell when membranes proteins form channels to help
bulky molecules do this. For 10 points, name this process by which particles move randomly down a
concentration gradient.
ANSWER: diffusion
Einstein found that the coefficient describing this process is equal to Boltzmann's constant times
temperature divided by the drag coefficient. That coefficient is proportional to the mean square
displacement during Brownian motion, which drives this process. This process is characterized by Fick's
First Law, which states that solute flux is proportional to the concentration gradient. For 10 points, name
this process by which solute flows from areas of high to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
One form of this process can be used in image processing to remove noise; this is the Perona-Malik type. A
characterization of this process involving mobility and the Boltzmann constant was named after
Smoluchowski and Einstein. Separate coefficients of this process are given by the Maxwell-Stefan model
and by (*) Fick's Laws, where its rate is proportional to the square of velocity. This process is used to
separate isotopes of uranium, and proteins in the cell membrane give rise to its facilitated type. This process
is characterized by Brownian motion, and this process occurring to water is called osmosis. For ten points,
name this process where molecules move from an area of high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion
Dynkin's formula describes the Ito type of this process, while another type of this process occurs in plasmas
over a magnetic field and is named for Bohm. The namesake differential equation describing this process
reduces to the heat equation when its coefficient is zero, and another law governing it relates flux to the
gradient of the concentration field. In addition to being described by Fick's laws, a special case of this
process occurs with water across a semi-permeable membrane and is known as osmosis. For 10 points,
name this process, which involves the motion of a substance down a concentration gradient.
ANSWER: diffusion
One law governing this process sets the flux proportional to a certain spatial derivative and is named after
Adolph Fick. For a gas, the rate of this process is proportional to the square root of molar mass by Graham's
Law. When water undergoes this process by moving across a semipermeable membrane, it is called
osmosis. For 10 points, name this process in which a compound moves from an area of high concentration
to an area of low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [or effusion before "osmosis"]
One type of this process involves gas passing through small holes and has its rate given by Graham's Law.
Two laws named for Adolf Fick describe this process, and another type of this process occurs in hypotonic
and hypertonic cells; that process involves water crossing a semipermeable membrane. Osmosis is a type of,
for 10 points, what process in which particles move from regions of high concentration to low
concentration?
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on effusion; prompt on osmosis before it is mentioned]
The Knudsen type of this process occurs in long pores, and Dynkin's formula describes the Ito type.
Ehrenfest developed a model of this to help explain the statistical interpretation of the second law of
thermodynamics. Einstein and Smoluchowski linked Boltzmann's constant and the absolute temperature
together by a constant in determining this value, while its flux is related to the concentration field and its
resultant change on the field over time are described by Fick's Laws. Graham's Law also describes, FTP,
which chemical process through which substances, primarily gases, mix as a result of random movements of
their components.
ANSWER: Diffusion
The Knudsen type of this process occurs when the mean free path is relatively large, such that a
particle is more likely to collide with the walls of its container than another particle. A tortuosity
factor is often needed for those calculations to account for twists in the path, as in a gas in a porous
medium. The first law associated with this process describes a coefficient that can be calculated by the
Stokes-Einstein equation, while the second law describes the change in concentration. A specific type of
this process in which a solvent crosses a membrane is called osmosis. Governed by Fick's Laws, for ten
points, name this mass transport process in which particles move to region of lower concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [prompt on "(mass) flux, transfer, or flow", prompt on "effusion"]
This process' namesake PDE has the Gaussian Kernel as a solution. The fractional anisotropy is
calculated from the eigenvalues of a tensor named for this process. One quantity describing this
process is equal to terminal drift velocity times Boltzmann's constant times temperature. The second
derivative of phi with respect to x is proportional to the first derivative of phi with respect to time
according to one law governing it. Another law governing this process says that (*) flux is proportional
to the negative grad of the concentration; those laws are named for Fick. This process occurs through a
semipermeable membrane in osmosis. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which a substance moves
from an area of high concentration to low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion [accept osmosis till mention]
The Boltzmann-Matano method gives coefficients for this process, whose Knudsen type occurs at low
pressure. On surfaces, it can occur in reptation and leapfrog modes, while it names an approximation used
in reconstruction of optical tomograms. The Bohm type occurs in plasmas, and its constant is related to the
ratio of terminal drift velocity to an applied force in the Einstein relation. Multiplying that same constant by
4 and time gives the square of the length associated with this process, whose flux is inversely related to
separation in Fick's Laws. For 10 points, name this process also described by Graham's law, the movement
of a particle down a concentration gradient
ANSWER: diffusion
It's not inductance, but this quantity's "self" variety can be measured using pulsed-field gradient
spin echo sequence in NMR. Converting between its tracer and chemical forms can be found using an
expression including the derivative of the natural logs of the activity coefficient and the mole
fraction. This constant appears in the div term of an equation that relates its namesake process to
advection. It is reduced by the product of tortuosity, porosity and (*) hindrance in a porous material.
This quantity is the product of Boltzmann's constant, temperature, and mobility according to the Einstein
relation. For 10 points, name this constant that multiplies the negative grad of the concentration in Fick's
first law, a constant which describes a process in which particles move from areas of high concentration to
low concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion constant [or mass diffusivity; or diffusion coefficient]
One of these compounds forms an intermediate in the McMurry Reaction. A cyclic iodonium ion is the first
intermediate in both the Woodward and Prevost Reactions, which yield the syn and anti versions of these
compounds, respectively. These compounds form ketones in the Pinacol Rearrangement, and osmiumbased catalysts are used both the Upjohn and Sharpless Dihydroxylations that make these compounds. For
10 points, identify this class of molecules characterized by the presence of two -OH groups.
ANSWER: diols or dialcohols (or glycols)
The interaction of this moiety and boronic acid is what allows boronic acids to be used as biosensors and
binders such as boronolectins. These are converted to carbonyls in the Pinacol rearrangement. Copper
chromate reduces acyloins into these compounds. Periodic acid can cause the oxidative cleavage of one
type of these compounds. Osmium tetroxide oxidizes alkenes to give these compounds. The locations of
the characteristic functional groups in these compounds can lead to them being geminal or vicinal. For 10
points, name these compounds, which include ethylene glycol, which have two hydroxyl groups.
ANSWER: diols [accept Prevost reaction before "these compounds"; accept glycols before mentioned; prompt on "alcohols"; prompt on hydroxyls]
Though they are not hydrogen bonds, the presence of these cause alkyl halides to have higher
boiling points than regular alkanes, and a vector quantity associated with these is proportional to their
separation distance. Homonouclear diatomics cannot be used in infrared spectroscopy since they do
not have a permanent one of these, and ones induced instantaneously account for a weak form of
intermolecular forces named for London. For 10 points, identify these pairs of oppositely charged
particles, which exist permanently in polar molecules such as water.
ANSWER: dipole [accept dipole moment until "separation distance;" prompt thereafter]
Johan Gadolin performed one of these reactions using tin and studied using tartrates. The enantiomeric form
of this occurs in column chromatography with highly polar groups in nonpolar eluents, and the chain form
of this occurs when two radicals meet and terminate by proton exchange, generating a terminal alkene,
which is a process also called dismutation. Another organic example of this process can use formaldehyde
in a crossed variety and uses a base to produce carboxylic acids and alcohols, the Cannizarro reaction. The
best examples of the typical use of the term are usually a subset of redox reactions, in particular, those in
which one element is both reduced and oxidized. For 10 points, name this general class of chemical reaction
in which one species reacts to generates two different chemical species.
ANSWER: disproportionation
One example of this occurs in the de Meijere modification of the Kulinkovich reaction. Another example of
it is the formation of an ester from two aldehydes occurs in the Tishchenko reaction. The KornblumDeLaMare rearrangement is one since peroxide is converted to a ketone and an alcohol, and another
example is the Cannizzaro reaction. Johan Gadolin studied one such reaction of tin and tartrates, while
another is the catalase-assisted breakdown of hydrogen peroxide into water and diatomic oxygen. A simple
example is the formation of bleach from lye and diatomic chlorine. The opposite of comproportionation is,
FTP, what type of reaction that forms two species, usually one reduced and the other oxidized, from a single
original.
ANSWER: Disproportionation or Dismutation
A molecule that does not do this action in a solution has a van 't Hoff factor of 1. An ICE table is often
used to determine the amount of a compound that undergoes this action. For an acid, the log of the constant
for this process is related to pH by the Henderson-Hasselbach equation. When this process occurs with
salts, it can create an electrolytic solution. For 10 points, name this process by which molecules are split
into their smaller component ions.
ANSWER: dissociation [or ionization; or acid dissociation]
One method of performing this action for air-sensitive substances uses the Perkin Triangle, and is used in
the vacuum type. Many variants of this technique do not work for deviants from Raoult's Law, or
azeotropes. One type of this technique is used in oil refineries to separate more volatile compounds from
crude oil - that is the "fractional type." For 10 points, name this technique in which a substance is boiled to
separate its components which have different boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation [accept word forms such as distilling, accept vacuum distillation before mentioned]
This method's breakdown is the subject of the DeRosier problem. The zone of equilibrium in this technique
is known as a "theoretical plate," and one type of this process uses a spinning band of Teflon. One setup for
using this technique is called the Perkin triangle, which can be used when air-sensitive compounds are
subjected to the "vacuum" type of this. One technique for performing this can use a Vigreaux column, or the
cheaper Liebeg condenser. Many types of this process do not work with deviants from Raoult's Law, or
azeotropes. For 10 points, name this method of separating mixtures based on differences in volatilities,
which has a "fractional" type.
ANSWER: distillation
In some cases, setups for performing this process will include a Dean-Stark trap to remove water. The
amount of theoretical plates needed for this process can be determined via the McCabe-Thiele ["teal"]
method. It is difficult to obtain alcohol that is more than 96% pure because this technique cannot be
executed completely on azeotropes [AY-zee-oh-"tropes"]. Setups for this process use a reflux condenser
to collect the products. One form of this process commonly used in petroleum refining and the
separation of air is called the "fractional" type. Name this process that separates liquids by their
boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation [accept word forms]
Biorefineries use a "reactive" form of this technique to convert organic acids to acid esters with high
yields. Another modification of this technique uses a namesake type of column that is packed with plates or
beads that increase surface area. Azeotropes cannot be separated by a "simple" type of this process and
must be separated by the aforementioned "fractional" type instead. For 10 points, name this technique of
separating liquids based on their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
This process is used in the production of carbon tetrachloride to remove the sulfur monochloride byproduct,
and neon, krypton, and xenon were discovered by it. The destructive variety of this process produces new,
smaller molecules, a phenomenon called cracking, while a mixture that cannot be separated by this process
is known as an azeotrope. One type of this process which is used in the purification of gasoline leads to
lighter compounds being removed first and is known as the fractional kind. For 10 points, name this process
in which compounds are heated and boiled, causing them to be separated by their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
An equation that labels some components of this process as "light key" or "heavy key" can be used to find
the number of theoretical plates or equilibrium trays used in this process. A setup for this process can
include a Claisen adapter if an additional outlet or access hole is necessary. A substance travels a relatively
short path between rotating bulbs in a kugelrohr, which is used for the "vacuum" type of this process. When
the components' boiling points are less than 25 degrees Celsius apart, one should use the "fractional" type
of this process. For 10 points, name this process which is used to separate mixtures based on the differential
volatilities of their components.
ANSWER: distillation [accept "fractional distillation" or "vacuum distillation"]
The short path form of this process uses a Kugelrohr apparatus. A "piq" adaptor can be used to
achieve better results in this process. At total reflux, the Fenske equation can be used to calculate the
minimum number of theoretical plates required in one form of this process. For air-sensitive
materials, a series of Teflon taps known as a Perkin triangle can be used in its (*) "vacuum" type.
Some types of this process do not work for compounds deviating from Raoult's law; those are azeotropes.
This process comes in "fractional form." For 10 points, identify this process of separating mixtures based
on differing boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
One quantity helpful in this laboratory procedure may be computed in the Fenske (FEN-skee) equation; a
complementary graphical approximation method is named for McCabe and Thiel. One of the common
pieces of glassware employed in this process is the Liebig condenser. Complete separation cannot be
accomplished by this technique as that would require one component to have a zero partial pressure. A
repeated form of this technique relies on repeated cycles called "theoretical plates," the "fractional" form.
For 10 points, name this method of separating mixtures that relies on differences in boiling point.
ANSWER: distillation [accept fractional distillation before "Liebig condenser"]
An apparatus that allows this technique to be applied to air-sensitive substances uses three Teflon
taps and is called the Perkin Triangle. One variant of this technique uses a Vigreaux column, which
separates the mixture into several trays with different temperatures. A cold finger or a jacket
condenser can be used in one arm of this technique's apparatus, and this technique commonly
employs reflux to increase yield. (*) Entrainers allow the breaking of azeotropes in this procedure. This
technique separates a mixture of compounds that differ in boiling point and takes that evaporate and
condenses it in a separate container. For 10 points, name this chemical separation technique, which is often
applied to fermented solutions to create alcoholic beverages.
ANSWER: distillation
The Fenske equation calculates the number of theoretical plates in this process. It is broadly divided
into batch and continuous forms. Azeotropes cannot be separated using this technique. Refining crude oil
utilizes the fractional form of this technique. That aforementioned type of this technique is the vacuum
variant, which works by lowering the pressure surrounding the compound. For 10 points, name this
technique of separating mixtures based on their boiling point, notably used to create liquors.
ANSWER: distillation
One variety of this technique utilizes a short-path apparatus called a Kugelrohr (KOO-gehl-roar).
Teflon flaps are used in another apparatus, a Perkin triangle, to perform this technique on airsensitive materials. The pressure-swing type of this process is used on azeotropic mixtures, while the
vacuum type of this process reduces the ambient pressure until it drops below the (*) vapor pressure.
When component parts boil at less than 25 degrees Celsius from each other, such as for crude oil, the
fractional type of this technique is employed. Often applied to air, alcoholic beverages, and seawater, this is,
for ten points, what technique whereby components of a mixture are separated based on their boiling
points?
ANSWER: distillation (accept vacuum distillation before "Teflon")
Carl von Linde patented the application of this unit operation to air. Industrially, this process can be
modeled using the McCabe-Thiele method and involves the use of towers filled with perforated trays or
packed beds. Common applications of this process include refining crude oil, separating air into its
components, and isolating ethanol from fermented food products. It is ineffective when the components are
azeotropes. For 10 points, name this process that separates two liquids based on their boiling points, and
which has a "fractional" variant.
ANSWER: distillation [or fractional distillation]
Though this is not drying solvents, it can use a Perkin triangle when some of the chemicals are air-sensitive
in the vacuum type of this process. Another type uses repeated pressure swings in the same direction. The
most common method can use randomly packed Raschig [RAASCH-ig] rings to provide a large surface
area inside a column. That method, contrasted with the simple type which can be used when there is a wide
spread in boiling points, is the fractional type. Name this method of separating mixtures.
ANSWER: distillation
This process can be performed by a continuous-feed or pot-type system. One type of this technique
requires a water aspirator, mechanical pump, and diffusion pump; that technique is performed at
low pressures and known as the "vacuum" type. (*) Azeotropes are mixtures of liquids that cannot be
further separated using the fractional form of this technique, because the liquid that goes through the
condenser has the same composition as the liquid that is evaporated. For 10 points, name this method of
separating liquids in a mixture by their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
An apparatus named for Kugelrohr performs one type of it over short paths. One type of this process
exploits Raoult's law to increase or decrease the vapor pressure of the substance, and may be more useful
than another type which produces better results when the number of theoretical plates are increased, but
cannot separate azeotropes. Those are the "steam" and "fractional" varieties of this process. For 10 points,
identify this lab procedure where pure vapors of a liquid are captured and condensed, which is used to
obtain a pure liquid from a mixture.
ANSWER: distillation [do not accept specific types, like "fractional distillation"]
Laboratory apparatuses designed for use in this procedure include the Perkin triangle and Raschig rings.
It is difficult to perform this procedure on volatile mixtures called azeotropes. Followed by cracking, the
"fractional" variety of this procedure is used on a mass scale by oil refineries. For 10 points, name this
procedure in which components of a mixture are separated by their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
A quantity called theoretical plate number is associated with setups for this process, such as in a Dean-Stark
apparatus. Such setups for this process employ a condenser and sometimes a column packed with metal
ribbon or glass beads to increase surface area. For heat-sensitive compounds, water is first added to the
reaction mixture in the "steam" type of this process, and substances whose boiling points differ by less than
25 degrees Celsius can be separated via the more common "fractional" type. For 10 points, name this
process of separating a mixture into its components based on boiling points which is common in the oilrefining industry.
ANSWER: distillation [accept fractional distillation until "steam"]
One type of this process used with temparature-sensitive organic substances uses steam to lower
the temperature to which the substances much be heated. Another type of this process uses a
Kugelrohr apparatus and is a short-path version of the "vacuum" type of this process. This process
does not work for substances that deviate from (*) Raoult's law, azeotropes, and the "fractional" type of
this process distinguishes compounds with similar boiling points. For 10 points, name this experimental
technique that separates the components of mixtures based on boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
This laboratory technique may use Raschig rings to increase the surface area without sacrificing too much
space. For certain products, this technique can be improved by using a spinning band of an inert material
like Teflon. A solution of 96% ethanol and 4% water cannot be normally separated by this technique,
because it deviates from Raoult's law as an azeotrope. One variant of this is used to refine petroleum. For
10 points, name this lab technique that separates two components of a solution based on boiling point,
which comes in a "fractional" version.
ANSWER: distillation [accept fractional distillation or extractive distillation; prompt on boiling]
McCabe-Thiele diagrams relate the concentration of components in two different phases undergoing this
process, and apparatuses named after Vigreux and Liebig are used in one variation of it. A Perkin triangle
setup can be used for air sensitive materials in the "vacuum" variety of this process, and Raoult's law is key
to this process as it describes this process's vapor phase. Mixtures upon which this process does not work
are called azeotropes. For ten points, name this process whose "fractional" and simple" varieties can be used
to separate two liquids because of differing boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation (accept more specific forms such as "binary" and those included in the tossup before mention of "variation")
A device for accomplishing one form of this process uses a pressure-equalized addition funnel instead of a
revolving stand of test tubes. The ideal number of plates for one form of this is given by the Fenske
equation and may be found graphically with the McCabe-Thiele method. That aforementioned device,
called Perkin's triangle, permitted the vacuum form of this process. Its extractive form features the addition
of a separation solvent to break azeotropes, and its fractional form is used for separations of less than
twenty-five Kelvin. For 10 points, name this process for separating mixtures of liquids with different boiling
points.
ANSWER: distillation [accept word forms]
The continuous form of this process uses the Fenske equation, while an indented column is used in the
fractional form of this process, which cannot be used on an azeotrope. In this process, (*) vapors from
a separation flask are passed through a water-cooled condenser jacket. Conducted on crude oil and alcohol,
for 10 points, name this process that separates mixtures of liquids with different boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
The number of theoretical plates required for this process is calculated by the Fenske equation. The
simple form of this process is ineffective for azeotropes (AY-zee-oh-tropes), and the fractional form of this
process must be employed when the compounds in question have close boiling points. In this process, a
mixture is separated into its various chemical components based on differences in volatility. For 10 points,
name this chemical process often employed in petroleum refineries.
ANSWER: distillation [or fractional distillation]
Industrial-scale columns use the Fenske equation to determine the number of "theoretical plates" needed for
this process. When applied to heat-sensitive materials, steam is often added, while the type often applied to
petroleum to prevent cracking is the (*) "vacuum" type. It is often made more accurate by refluxing, or
returning condensed vapors to the system. Unless entrainers are used, the composition of azeotropes
remains unchanged by this procedure, which uses a large-area surface to increase the vapor-liquid ratio in
its "fractional" form. For 10 points, name this process which separates out a mixture of compounds based
on the differences in their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation [accept "fractional distillation" before (*)]
One variety of this process uses a short-path apparatus known as a Kugelrohr. The Fenske equation is used
in another form of this process to determine the necessary number of theoretical plates. Raoult's law is used
in one variety of this process to manipulate the vapor pressure of the substance involved in this technique.
Azeotropes are mixtures of liquids that can not be separated using the fractional form of this technique, in
which the more volatile compound has a higher concentration in the produced vapor. For 10 points, name
this laboratory technique of separating liquid mixtures based on their boiling points.
ANSWER: Distillation
The McCabe-Thiele method is used to develop apparatus for this process, which assumes constant
molar overflow and defines several "operating lines." One form of this process is also known as
rectification, and in its extractive form a miscible and non-volatile solvent is added to a mixture whose
components have similar low volatilities. For 10 points, identify this laboratory procedure whose
fractional form separates liquid components of a mixture through evaporation.
ANSWER: distillation
In the Kjeldahl method, this procedure is followed by titration of ammonia product. In the Dean-Stark
apparatus, this method's setup is associated with a plate number. One type of this procedure may use a
Kugelrohr and is known as the "vacuum" type. Two other common types include the "fractional" and
"simple" type of this procedure, and this procedure is governed by Raoult's Law. For 10 points, name this
procedure in which components of a mixture are separated based on their different boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
The efficiency of this process can be quantified with either overall, point, or Murphree efficiency.
One method of performing calculations for this process first requires determination of the slope of
the q-line for the feed. The next steps in that method are to split the operating line into enriching and
stripping sections, to draw alternating horizontal and vertical lines between the operating and
equilibrium lines, and finally to count off the number of horizontal lines drawn. That method
determines the number of (*) theoretical trays required for this process and is named for McCabe and
Thiele. Mixtures that do not change composition when this process is performed are termed azeotropes. For
10 points, name this process which separates components of a solution based on their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation [accept "stage distillation," "continuous distillation," "fractional distillation," "batch distillation," and other types of distillation]
When using this technique, the substance with the highest volatility will be extracted first. One kind of it is
used to separate hydrocarbons of different lengths, but it cannot separate azeotropes, which are mixtures of
liquids with the same boiling point. That is the "fractional" type of this process. For 10 points, name this
laboratory technique used to purify substances like bottled water, in which a mixture is separated by boiling
off and condensing one component.
ANSWER: distillation
One type of this procedure may use a device called a Kugelrohr (KOO-gehl-roar) and is the "vacuum"
type. This process utilizes another apparatus that may be named after either Vigreux (vih-GROO) or Liebig
(LEE-big). One key principle in this procedure is Raoult's (raw-OOLT's) Law, since it describes the vapor
pressure of a solution. A compound on which this procedure cannot be performed is called an azeotrope
(AY-zee-oh-trope). For 10 points, name this method of physically separating liquids by boiling.
ANSWER: distillation
A water aspirator or mechanical pump is used to reduce the time needed for the first step of this process
in the "vacuum" type of this process. A Vigreux column is placed below the Y-adaptor in one type of the
"fractional" type of this process. The "simple" type of this process heats a mixture of liquids, then
condenses the resulting vapors. For 10 points, name this process of separating a mixture of liquids by
boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
Raschig rings in packed beds are sometimes used in this procedure, as are Vigreux columns. The Perkin
triangle is used in air-sensitive applications, and the pressure-swing type uses extreme positive and negative
pressures. Another type can be performed in a bubble-capped column. Governed by Raoult's law, special
techniques must be employed for mixtures of water and ethanol or other positive azeotropes because they
are move volatile than each of their components individually. One type used to separate hydrocarbons in
crude oil is called "fractional". For 10 points, name this method of separate mixtures by boiling them.
ANSWER: distillation (accept "fractional distillation" until "Perkin triangle" is read)
A McCabe-Thiele diagram describes the application of this process to a binary feed. The Fenske equation
gives the number of theoretical plates required for one form of this process, which may utilize a rotavap or a
Dean-Stark apparatus. A Perkin triangle allows it to be performed under vacuum, and mixtures that do not
obey Raoult's law require the azeotropic form of this technique. If the components' boiling points differ by
less than 25 degrees, such as in crude oil mixtures, the fractional form of this technique is used. For 10
points, identify this technique used to separate liquid mixtures through boiling.
ANSWER: distillation
The efficiency of this procedure can be improved by using a bubble cap tray. One form of this
procedure uses a device filled with steel wool or small beads in order to maximize the number of
theoretical plates. When the product of this procedure is returned to the original system, it's called
refluxing. This process is ineffective at separating (*) azeotropes. The "fractional" type of it is used in
petroleum refining. For 10 points, name this method by which mixtures are separated by boiling point in a
namesake column.
ANSWER: distillation [or fractional distillation; accept specific types of distillation, e.g. extractive distillation]
This procedure is done on air-sensitive material using a Perkin triangle. The number of stages involved in
one kind of this procedure can be derived from a VLE plot using the McCabe-Thiele method, which is used
in designing binary columns. Most versions of this procedure do not work on azeotropes. The Fenske
equation can be used to calculate the number of theoretical plates in its fractional variety. For 10 points,
name this procedure that separates components of a liquid mixture using differences in their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
The pressure of the air above the substance in question is reduced in the "vacuum" form of this process, and
azeotropes, which are solutions that deviate from Raoult's law, are impervious to the "simple" form of this
process. The number of theoretical plates achieved determines the effectiveness of this process, and oil
refineries use this process to isolate gasoline from crude oil. For 10 points, name this process that comes in
a "fractional" type, which is often used in laboratories to separate components of a solution based on their
boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation [accept word forms like distilling; accept types of distillations like vacuum distillation or fractional distillation or simple distillation]
One type of this process employs a band of Teflon that spins, and compounds that can defy this process
are called azeotropes. A type of this process used on components that vary from each other in a certain
property by 25 degrees is called the "fractional" type, and a principle law that governs this process is
Raoult's law. For 10 points, name this physical process used in chemistry whereby components of a mixture
are separated based on their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
Carl von Linde patented the application of this unit operation to air. Industrially, this process can be
modeled using the McCabe-Thiele method and involves the use of towers filled with perforated trays or
packed beds. Common applications of this process include refining crude oil, separating air into its
components, and isolating ethanol from fermented food products. It is ineffective when the components are
azeotropes. For 10 points, name this process that separates two liquids based on their boiling points, and
which has a "fractional" variant.
ANSWER: distillation [or fractional distillation]
One type of this process makes use of the Perkin triangle. The minimum number of plates needed in this
process can be calculated using the Fenske equation, and it can be interpreted using a McCabe-Thiele
diagram. Some types of this process cannot be performed on azeotropes. One type of this process uses a
column named for Vigreux, and another type uses a vacuum to lower the pressure over the surface of the
liquid. For 10 points, name this laboratory technique that separates liquids based on their boiling point.
ANSWER: distillation
The Perkin triangle, which is now typically not triangular, is used to perform this procedure in an
inert atmosphere. It is not chromatography, but efficiency is improved in this procedure with an
increasing number of theoretical plates. An (*) entrainer may be added to the mixture in this technique in
order to isolate components of azeotropes. The alcoholic content of beverages is typically capped at around
96% ethanol due to the inability of this procedure to remove water. For 10 points, identify this procedure
that relies on a difference in boiling points to separate parts of a mixture.
ANSWER: distillation
Some types of this technique use devices named for Claisen or Vigreux, the former of which reduces
the effects of "bumping." The McCabe-Thiele method optimizes parameters such as the location of feed
trays and the number of necessary stages. Azeotropes cannot be separated using this technique, whose
"vacuum" form occurs at low pressure and whose "fractional" form involves multiple condensers. For 10
points, name this method of purifying mixtures of liquids by separating them by boiling point.
ANSWER: distillation
In the bulb-to-bulb form of this process, an apparatus known as a kugelrohr is used. Before performing one
type of this process, a McCabe-Thiele diagram may be drawn. The minimum number of equilibrium stages
needed for another type of this process can be determined with the Fenske equation. Pieces of glass tubing
known as Raschig rings are used in a Hempel column in a type of this process, which also may utilize a
Vigreux column. Entrainers are added in order to separate azeotropes in this process, and gasoline is
separated from petroleum using its "fractional" type. For 10 points, name this process that consists of
boiling a liquid and condensing its vapor.
ANSWER: distillation
In the Kjeldahl method for analyzing organic nitrogen content, this procedure is followed by titration
of its ammonia product. VLE diagrams are used in the McCabe-Thiele method to determine the
number of stages over which this process must occur. One type of these involves lowering the
pressure on the system below the vapor pressure of the desired product, and is called the "vacuum" type.
The Fenske equation gives the number of theoretical plates required for the "fractional" type of it. For 10
points, identify this process used to separate volatile liquids based on the differences in their boiling points.
ANSWER: distillation
The presence of these objects prevents interconversion between cis and trans isomers (ICE-oh-merz).
Their presence is the defining feature of most unsaturated fatty acids. Phosphoric acid has one of them
between the hydrogen-less oxygen atom and the phosphorus atom. To form them, a pi interaction must be
formed from two overlapping p orbitals. This kind of bond is found in carbon dioxide, as well as molecular
sulfur and oxygen. For 10 points, name these covalent bonds in which four electrons are shared.
ANSWER: double bonds [prompt on covalent bonds or pi bonds before they are mentioned]
Some fatty acids can be named by finding the position of one of these constructs in reference to the
omega carbon, and the presence of only one signifies that the fatty acid is monounsaturated. This type of
bond is necessarily found in imine (IH-meen), sulfoxide (sool-FAHKS-ide), and carbonyl
(car-bohn-NEEL) groups. It typically consists of one sigma and one pi bond and is typically indicated by
two parallel lines between two atoms. For 10 points, name this type of bond that is typically shorter and
stronger than a single bond.
ANSWER: double bond
Compounds containing these structures resonate in the band from 1500 to 1800 wavenumbers in IR
spectroscopy. In carbon, sp2 hybridization permits formation of these structures. These structures prevent
rotation of adjoining groups with respect to one another, giving rise to configurations that can be described
using E-Z notation, or less precisely, using cis-trans notation. They are eliminated when unsaturated fats are
hydrogenated to yield saturated ones. Alkenes are defined by having at least one of these linkages between
two carbons. For 10 points, name these linkages that appear in diatomic oxygen, bonds in which four
electrons are shared between two atoms.
ANSWER: double bonds [accept carbon-carbon double bond; accept carbon-oxygen double bond; prompt on "bonds"; prompt on "alkenes" or "olefins" before "alkenes" is read; prompt on "carbonyls"; prompt on "pi bonds"; prompt on "carbon-oxygen bond" do not accept "single bonds"]
The letters E and Z are used to distinguish how atoms are located relative to one of these structures.
Because of resonance, each of the nitrogen-oxygen bonds in nitrate partially has this structure. Possessing
this structure distinguishes an alkene from an alkane as well as an unsaturated fat from a saturated fat. In
ethylene, they are formed from both the overlap of sp2 orbitals and the overlap of p orbitals and thus
consist of a sigma and pi bond. For 10 points, name this type of chemical bond that has bond order of two.
ANSWER: double bond
The incompatibility of these structures with the bridgeheads of rings is governed by Bredt's rule. In
organic chemistry, their "E" and "Z" substituents are useful in determining cis- and trans - isomers.
They alternate with a weaker structure in conjugated systems, and have [*] "sigma" and "pi"
components. One of these with carbons is the defining trait of an alkene [al-KEEN]. For 10 points, name
these structures that occur naturally in atmospheric oxygen, a connection between two atoms in which
exactly four electrons are shared, represented in Lewis diagrams by two straight lines.
ANSWER: double bond
An alternate name for this type of reaction is "metathesis" (muh-TATH-uh-sis). If one of the products of
this kind of reaction breaks down to release a gas, it is an effervescent reaction. This type of reaction is also
undergone when acids and bases are neutralized to form salts. This type of reaction differs from a redox
reaction in that no reactant changes oxidation states. In the most common form of this kind of reaction, two
ionic solutions are added to each other to form a precipitate. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in
which portions of two reactants swap positions with each other.
ANSWER: double displacement reactions [or double replacement reactions]
In bimolecular enzyme-catalyzed reactions of this type, the product of an enzyme with one substrate
leaves before reaction with the second substrate. Neutralization reactions are most often of this type.
Multiple spectator ions are present when a precipitation reaction is this kind of reaction. This reaction is
most common with ionic compounds. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in which two compounds
exchange ions or elements to form new compounds.
ANSWER: double displacement reactions [or double replacement reactions; or metathesis reactions]
An alternate name for this type of reaction is "metathesis" (muh-TATH-uh-sis). If one of the products of
this kind of reaction breaks down to release a gas, it is an effervescent reaction. This type of reaction is also
undergone when acids and bases are neutralized to form salts. This type of reaction differs from a redox
reaction in that no reactant changes oxidation states. In the most common form of this kind of reaction, two
ionic solutions are added to each other to form a precipitate. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in
which portions of two reactants swap positions with each other.
ANSWER: double displacement reactions [or double replacement reactions]
The formation of one of these, which is essentially the opposite of a Roche moutonnee, was first observed
in 2007 in the Rutford Stream. Frequently occurring in clusters of hundreds called fields or swarms and
commonly associated with landscapes called sheepbacks, they have tapered ends pointing in the direction of
motion of their creators. Though there are both rock and depositional varieties, they are generally formed
from till. For 10 points, give the common term for the hills associated with Rogen moraines, which begin to
accumulate sediment in the grooves on the bottom of ice sheets and glaciers.
ANSWER: drumlin
Neutron irradiation decreases this property in crystals, where it is more pronounced in face-centered cubic
structures than in body-centered ones. In alloys, this property is inversely related to carbon content, while
the process of nitriding hardens steel without diminishing this property. In general, heating enhances this
property, which is measured in terms of strain or reduction in area. This property is low in lead despite that
metal being very malleable, and tests for this property in metals often cause necking, which refers to the
shape produced when stretching the material to its breaking or tensile point. Sometimes described as the
opposite of brittleness, name this physical property which allows a substance like aluminum or copper to be
drawn out into a thin wire.
ANSWER: ductility [accept word forms, e.g. ductile]
For one type of these features, small ones appear to pass through the slower-moving large ones,
leading to comparisons of that type with solitons. Similar larger-scale features are called draas. The
main processes leading to the creation of these features are surface creep and (*) saltation, which are
both aeolian. These features are frequently found in ergs. The slip face of these features forms an angle of
about 34 degrees with the surface, the angle of repose for its constituent material. Vegetation fixes the arms
of parabolic ones, which point upwind. Other types of these features include longitudinal ones and
barchans, or the crescent type. For 10 points, name these large accumulations of sand.
ANSWER: sand dunes
Ralph Bagnold's work on the formation of these entities, though written in 1941, is still mostly accurate.
Barchans (BAR-chanz) are formed where there is little of their namesake substance, which is made up of
particles of diameter between 0.1 and 1.6 millimeters. The most common type of these objects is the
crescentic type, which are wider than they are long. Star ones are found in the Namib and Sahara Deserts.
For 10 points, name these massive hills built by wind-blown sand.
ANSWER: sand dunes
Under permafrost conditions, pahas developed in the last ice age that were characterized as these formations
until recently, when it was discovered that they were linear loess hills. Star, parabolic, and longitudinal
systems of these are known; however, the most common form of these have a 34 degree angle of repose
between the slip face and the back face. These are generally characterized as cresentic or barchan, and they
move through the process of creep or saltation. Generally formed by aeolian processes, they also can come
into being through the action of water, and are common in the Sahara and Atacama deserts. For ten points,
name these large ridges or hills of sand.
ANSWER: sand dunes
After these objects exceed a certain critical angle, they form avalanche strata. These features are
shaped by processes called surface creep and suspension. Abnormally large versions of these features,
occasionally hundreds of miles across, are known as draa. When these features form in large groups,
the aggregation is called an erg. A slipface with horns on either side is a technical description of the
(*) crescent type of these entities, which are also known as barchans. The parabolic type of these features is
formed in areas of unidirectional wind, while the Seif variety is very common in the Rub al Khali and
Sahara deserts. A namesake "grass" is planted on these features to protect them when they occur at beaches.
For 10 points, name these wind-built mounds of sand.
ANSWER: sand dunes
A 2011 Science paper produced by the HiRISE project explained how, on Mars, these objects can
become destabilized by the sublimation of dry ice. Like yardangs and loess, they are produced via
Aeolian processes, which include saltation, surface creep, and suspension. Types of these geologic
objects include barkhans and draa, and both (*) "fossilized" ones and those that "move" are found in
ergs. "Reversing" ones are formed where seasonal winds blow in different directions. For 10 points, name
these large accumulations of sand.
ANSWER: sand dunes
An early one was formed by the reaction between uric acid and nitric acid, followed by the formation of an
imine, which gave the product murexide. In 1869, the synthesis of one, alizarin, from anthracene was
established simultaneously by Heinrich Caro and William Henry Perkin. Perkin is better known for his 1856
accidental synthesis of one of these, aniline purple. Natural ones include carminic acid derived from
cochineal scale insects, norbixin found in annotto, and indigotin found in indigo plants. Either liquids or
soluble in the matrix that delivers them, usually water, for 10 points, identify this class of chemical products
that contain chromophores and are used to impart a material with color.
ANSWER: dye [do not accept "pigments"]
Hans Kuhn pioneered using the free electron model to describe the notable feature of conjugated
types of these objects, such as polymethines ("poly"-METH-eens). Examples of those types of systems
include cyanine and azo compounds. Many of them are derived from aniline (ANN-uh-leen) and
accridine (ACK-rid-een). Direct ones do not require fixing. The (*) Phoenicians produced one from sea
snails called Tyrian, while indigo is a blue one. They are used for the biological staining procedures. For 10
points, name these substances used to color fabrics.
ANSWER: dyes [prompt on stain]
The Karlsruhe experiment tested this using sodium. Glatzmaier and Roberts developed the first
self-consistent model for studying this theory. A similar theory in astronomy was shown to be possible by
Eugene N. Parker by overcoming issues raised by Cowling's anti-theory of this. It gives rise to alpha and
omega effects One issue in modeling this is heat flow across the CMB. Proposed mechanisms for the
required energy include the freezing of deposited materials and decay of radioactive isotopes. The velocity
needed for this to work is dependent on the magnetic Reynold's number. For 10 points, name this theory
that Earth's magnetic field is caused by moving, electrical conductive fluid in the outer core.
ANSWER: geodynamo theory
The deuterium isotope effect for this reaction mechanism is greater than one, and in a cyclohexane
ring this reaction can only occur when the substituents are trans diaxial. Originally elucidated by
Christopher Ingold, one reaction that obeys a similar mechanism occurs after an exhaustive
methylation step. It only occurs when the substituents are coplanar and is much faster when they are
antiperiplanar, and is a concerted mechanism with an sp3 hybridized carbon transforming to sp2 in one step.
For 10 points, name this reaction mechanism that occurs with bulky bases, whose name stands for
bimolecular elimination.
ANSWER: E2 or Bimolecular elimination before mention
The IUPAC notation for this reaction is AxhHDN. In dealing with alcohols, phosphorus oxychloride
in a pyridine solvent can be used to carry out this reaction. The presence of poor leaving groups
increases the favorability of (*) Hoffman products in this reaction. It is aided by an anti-periplanar
configuration, and in the case of alkyl halides it is promoted by strong base. This second order mechanism
is favored by secondary and tertiary alkyl halides, and its product is governed by Zaitsev's rule. Unlike its
primary counterpart, this reaction does not have a carbocation intermediate, but it does result in an alkene.
For 10 points, name this one step bimolecular elimination reaction.
ANSWER: E2 [or bimolecular elimination before mentioned]
Modern devices for measuring this phenomenon rely on proton precession, and noted anomalies in
it have been detected in Mongolia and the South Atlantic. Both the ring current and ionospheric
dynamo contribute to this phenomenon that was first measured by Gauss in 1835. The zebra-striped
pattern of the ocean floor records past reversals of this entity that interacts with the solar wind to
create auroras. The rotation of the liquid outer core contributes to what phenomenon that causes a
compass needle to align with the poles?
ANSWER: Earth's magnetic field [or geomagnetic field or geomagnetism; accept magnetosphere; prompt on (ferro)magnetism]
One process associated with this phenomenon is associated with an event named for Brunhes and
Matuyama. The Vine-Matthews hypothesis holds that an one property belonging to this phenomenon is
evidence for seafloor spreading. The a slight error contributed by this object is the declination, and this
object had periodically reversed its direction throughout history. Birds use this object in navigation, and
having a strength of around 30 microteslas, for ten points, name this object which shields the earth from
harmful solar radiation and causes compasses to point north.
ANSWER: the magnetic field of the Earth (Accept equivalents. Accept the B-field of the Earth. Accept magnetic poles or pole reversals early.)
The Tysganenko mode describes this phenomenon, and the strength of this phenomenon at a
particular distance from its origin is described by the McIlwain L-parameter. Courtillot was the first
to measure "jerks" in this phenomenon, while the K-index is used to measure other disturbances in
this phenomenon. Anomalies in this phenomenon include the South Atlantic Anomaly and the Kursk
Anomaly, and every few million years it undergoes reversals, which can be seen in the geological record. Its
shape is dictated partially by its interaction with the solar wind. For 10 points, name this phenomenon which
arises due to currents in the outer core, whose strength is on the order of microteslas.
ANSWER: Earth's Magnetic Field (equivalents ok)
One idea posited to limit potential explanations of this feature notes that, because of its strong axisymmetric
component, it cannot have been created by a steady MHD flow. The strength of the most powerful
interactions undergone by this entity are quantified in the so-called K index; those same interactions cause
the South Atlantic Anomaly, which is of great concern to the space program. The aforementioned Cowling's
theorem is one wrinkle in the standard theory of this object. Closed banana orbits within this approximate
dipole give rise to the Van Allen belts. For 10 points, name this geological phenomenon that, according to
the dynamo theory, is caused by flow in the Earth's core.
ANSWER: the Earth's magnetic field [accept clear-knowledge equivalents; accept planetary magnetic fields or lunar magnetic fields before "K index"; prompt on B or M]
Fluctuations in one component of this entity are given by the K-index. Simple models of this entity
are accurate for low values of the McIlwain L-parameter, but at higher L-shells a model like the one
named for Tysganenko are needed. Secular variation in this entity includes 0.2 degree westward
drift. Isogonic lines are areas where the declination of this entity is invariant. This entity is created by
currents of (*) molten iron in the outer core, in accordance with the geodynamo theory, and the interaction
of this entity with particles in the solar wind causes the aurora borealis. For 10 points, name this entity
which measures around 30 microteslas at the surface of our planet.
ANSWER: Earth's magnetic field [or magnetosphere]
The current mathematical model of this entity is the IGRF. Short duration changes that occur in
this entity are called secular variations. Evidence for seafloor spreading includes the presences of
stripes which maintain a record of the reversal of this entity. This entity is generated by the (*)
dynamo mechanism, which is the rotation of the Earth's outer core. For 10 points, name this entity that
interacts with the solar wind to produce the magnetosphere and which compasses use for navigation.
ANSWER: the Earth's magnetic field [or geomagnetic field]
The Glatzmaier-Roberts model can be used to explain events that affect it, and VADM and VDM
values are often used to study its behavior. Certain data sets from Columbia river basalt flows from
the Steens Mountains notably show evidence for its erratic behavior. The South Atlantic Anomaly is
the location where it has its lowest intensity and the Matuyama-Brunhes boundary about marks the
last inversion of it, which occurred 800,000 years ago. It helps deflect solar wind, and causes Van Allen
belts to stay together. Thought to arise due to the motion of molten iron in the earth's core, for 10 points,
identify this thing which makes your compass point northward.
ANSWER: magnetic field of the earth [or geomagnetic field; accept obvious equivalents]
One law gives the frequency of these events as ten to the power of a constant a minus a constant b times
their strength. These events can cause liquefaction, and Inge Lehmann used these events to predict the
existence of the inner core. They frequently occur at strike-slip faults such as the San Andreas Fault. The
moment magnitude scale replaced the Richter scale for measuring the strength of these events, and the point
on the earth's surface directly above the focus of these events is the epicenter. For 10 points, name these
geological events which occur near faults and result in the shaking of the earth.
ANSWER: Earthquakes
Liquefaction can cause damage during these events which are theorized to be caused by elastic rebound.
The shadow zone is a result of P waves generated by this phenomenon refracting in the D-double prime
layer. The focal depth measures the distance between the surface and the epicenter of these events. The
intensity of this phenomenon is measured by the Mercalli and Richter scales. Aftershocks follow the
mainshock of these events. For 10 points, name this violent shaking of the ground that occurs near faults.
ANSWER: earthquake
Wadati Benioff zones give rise to ones of the deep focus variety, which have been attributed to the phase
transition of olivine to a spinel crystal structure. The Burridge Knopoff models occurrences of these on a
line, and displays the self organized criticality which also occurs in a model named for Gutenberg, which
gives the distribution of these as a function of their magnitude. Examples of these include the ones which
changed the course of the Mississippi River at New Madrid, and the ones which destroyed Lisbon and San
Francisco. FTP, name this phenomenon measured by the Richter scale.
ANSWER: earthquakes [prompt on close equivalents]
These events occur frequently in Benioff zones. Henry Reid proposed elastic rebound theory to
explain these events. These events can cause sand boils as a result of liquefaction. An area of the
earth between 104 and 140 degrees from these events is known as a shadow zone because the liquid
outer core refracts and stops (*) P and S waves, respectively. Although now measured on the moment
magnitude scale, they used to be measured on the Richter scale. The point on the earth directly above the
focus of these events is the epicenter. For 10 points, name these geologic events which occur near faults and
result in the shaking of the earth.
ANSWER: earthquakes
The locations of these events are classified using the Flinn-Engdahl regions. John Milne developed an
early tool for studying these events. A law providing for the probability distribution of these events is
partially named for Beno Gutenberg. These events frequently occur in areas named after Wadati and
Benioff. The intensity of these events is measured using the Mercalli scale, while frequently these events
cause the most damage at their epicenters. For 10 points, name these events once measured with the Richter
scale, which produce devastating seismic waves.
ANSWER: Earthquakes [accept quakes, tremors, or temblors]
A paper by Ibarra, Medina, and Krawinkler incorporated deterioration properties into hysteretic
models to assess the performance of systems that are faced with one of these occurrences. M.J.N.
Priestly argued that a displacement-based method rather than a strength-based method should be
used when evaluating how to counteract these entities. Bill Robinson developed lead rubber bearings
to stave off the effects of these entities, and his work has been used in the design of New (*) Zealand's
parliament building. The idea of base isolation is important in mitigating their effects, and Frank Lloyd
Wright intended to float the foundation of his Imperial Hotel to make it resistant to them. For 10 points,
name these seismic events whose intensity is measured on the Richter Scale.
ANSWER: earthquakes
Soil liquefaction results when one of these events occurs around loose, saturated soils, and the elasticrebound theory explains how energy is spread during these processes. Trilateration can be used to
pinpoint the focus and (*) epicenter of these events, a majority of which occur around the Pacific Ring of
Fire. A seismometer is used to measure the scope of one of these by applying a moment magnitude scale,
the most famous example of which is the Richter scale. For ten points, identify this natural phenomenon in
which seismic waves cause the ground to shake.
ANSWER: Earthquake
In certain areas, these events originate in the Benioff (BEHN-ee-off) Zone. These events are modeled by
elastic-rebound theory. These events can cause liquefaction, and phenomena associated with these events
cause a "shadow zone." Those phenomena are S and P waves. They are measured on the moment
magnitude scale. They can cause tsunamis when they occur underwater, and they are followed by
aftershocks. For 10 points, name these events that occur at fault boundaries and were measured using the
Richter scale.
ANSWER: earthquakes
These can occur in Wadati-Benioff zones. Although these rarely occur in the middle of continental plates, a
notable series of them occurred in New Madrid, now part of Missouri. The depth to which these can occur
is limited by the increasing temperature and loss of rigidity in deeper rock. Most of their activity can be
found in the Ring of Fire due to the collision of crustal plates. These can create tsunamis when their
epicenters are below bodies of water. FTP, name these events that result in the release of energy trough the
earth's crust and create seismic waves, usually along fault lines.
ANSWER: earthquakes
Hiroo Kanamori developed a formula to measure the moment of these events. Microzonation classifies
areas based on the occurrence of these events that can trigger seiches. Turbidites and scarps are features that
form as a result of these events. These events begin at asperities and generally originate in the WadatiBenioff zone or the brittle part of the brittle-ductile boundary. These events are caused by elastic rebound
and are located by triangulation. The epicenter is directly above the focus of these events. For 10 points, the
Mercalli and Richter scales measure what events that occur along fault lines and are studied by
seismologists?
ANSWER: earthquakes
Henry Reid proposed the elastic rebound theory to explain these phenomena. They are responsible
for Love, or Q, waves. The absence of measurable effects of these phenomena led to the conclusion
that the outer core is liquid. That absence of measurable effects is called the shadow zone, and is due
in part to (*) P waves being refracted by the outer core. Their intensity is measured on the Mercalli and
Richter scales. For 10 points, name these geologic phenomena that occur when plates suddenly shift,
causing the ground to shake.
ANSWER: earthquakes [or seismic tremors]
The process of dividing a region into areas of different risk and potential for these phenomena is called
microzonation ("MICRO"-"zone"-"nation"). These events are measured by the Mercalli intensity scale, and
generate Rayleigh and Love waves in addition to p and s waves. The location of origin for one of them is
called the hypocenter and the spot above it on the surface is called the epicenter. Their intensity can be
measured by the Richter scale. For 10 points, name these events in which the ground shakes.
ANSWER: earthquake
A controversial method for predicting these events by detecting electric signals is called the VAN
method. These events can produce Rayleigh and Love waves. They occur at unusually high depths in
subduction zones due to the presence of submerged lithosphere. The moment magnitude scale is used to
measure large examples of these events, superseding the older Richter scale. For 10 points, name these
violent releases of energy that cause movement in the Earth's crust.
ANSWER: earthquakes
These can create sand volcanoes, which look like volcanoes but are very small. Those are often a secondary
effect from the loss of shear strength in the ground, which is soil liquefaction. These sometimes occur one
after the other in close proximity, which is a swarm, and an attempt to predict them is the Coulomb stress
transfer theory. Examples include the Great Kanto in 1923 and the Great Tangshan in 1976. These result in
Love and Rayleigh waves on the surface and S- and P-waves through the ground. Name these events often
explained by plate margins, or fault lines, which are studied by seismologists and measured on the Richter
Scale.
ANSWER: earthquakes [or seismic tremors]
Flinn-Engdahl regions are used to categorize where in the world these events occur. Most of the damage
caused when these events affect urban areas is due to soil liquefaction. Deep-focus examples of these events
often occur at Wadati-Benioff zones of convergent plate boundaries. One can find the location of their
occurrence by finding the time lapse between first arrivals of P and S waves, multiplying by their speed
difference, and then triangulating to pinpoint the epicenter. Their strength can be measured on the Modified
Mercalli or Richter scales, and they are common along fault lines. For 10 points, identify these geological
events in which the ground shakes a lot.
ANSWER: earthquakes
The strength of these events is measured on the Mercalli scale. These events can cause liquefaction.
Shadow zones are associated with these events. The Zipingu Dam may have been the cause of one of
the 2008 one of these events in the Sichuan Province of China. Many of these events occur along (*)
transform faults and are due to strike-slip behavior, such as the ones that occur along the San Andreas
Fault. For 10 points, name these seismic events one of which caused a tsunami in Japan in 2011.
ANSWER: earthquakes [or tremors; or temblors]
The occurrences of these phenomena determine how the Earth is divided into Flinn-Engdahl regions.
These phenomena can generate effects named for Rayleigh or Love on the surface, and they are
especially prevalent in Wadati-Benioff zones. The twelve-point (*) Mercalli scale was developed to
measure the intensity of these phenomena by examining their results. They occur from a focus, which is the
point directly below the epicenter, and generally happen near fault lines. For 10 points, name these events
caused by seismic waves whose intensity is measured by the Richter Scale.
ANSWER: earthquakes [prompt on "tremors" or "quakes"; prompt on "seismic activity" before mentioned]
One derivative of this compound is used to protect the heart from anthracycline chemotherapeutics like
doxorubicin; that compound is desrazoxane. To collect the buffy coat, either heparin or this compound is
used as an anticoagulant. A mixture of Tris-HCl and this compound is a common buffer used to store
nucleic acids, because of this compound's ability to inactivate some nucleases. This compound is used to
treat lead poisoning when the lead level is above 45, and this complex uses four oxygen atom and two
nitrogen atoms to form an octahedral structure against its target metal atom. For 10 points, name this
chelating agent whose four acetic acid units attached to a diamine backbone can sequester magnesium and
calcium.
ANSWER: EDTA [ or Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid or Ethylenediaminetetraacetate]
In the 1960s, Clementi and Raimondi calculated these quantities used self consistent field wave
functions instead of the usual Slater-type orbitals, allowing them to better account for penetration at
the core. This quantity is often used as a tunable parameter when doing calculations using variational
methods; for instance, the ground state of the helium atom is minimized when this quantity is 27/16.
This quantity can be calculated using (*) Slater's rules, an example of which is that 1s electrons decrease
the value of this quantity by 0.30, and this quantity is taken over the covalent radius squared in the AllredRochow scale of electronegativity. This quantity is different from the number of protons times the proton's
charge due to electron shielding. For 10 points, name this measure of how much positive charge an electron
feels from the nucleus.
ANSWER: effective nuclear charge (accept Z-effective; accept shielding constants until "electronegativity"; prompt on "Z" or "core charge")
Elements in the period of this number are the first to have g electrons. Many compounds containing this
number of carbons may be obtained by dimerizing butadiene. This is xenon's highest oxidation state, and
also the highest oxidation state observed for any element. The element of this atomic number forms the
lightest homonuclear triatomic molecule and is also the most abundant element in the crust by mass. All the
noble gases past helium have this many valence electrons, as one expects based on a rule named for this
number. For 10 points, what is the atomic number of oxygen and the number of carbons in octane?
ANSWER: eight [or period eight; or plus eight; or octet rule]
According to Bell's rule, the lowercase p capital K lowercase a of an oxoacid is approximately equal to this
number minus 5n. The point group capital D 4 lowercase h has ten irreducible representations, this number
of which confer IR inactivity. Orthorhombic sulfur consists of molecules made of this number of atoms. In
the body-centered cubic arrangement, each atom is the center of a cube formed by this number of
surrounding atoms. Sulfur hexafluoride has a molecular geometry named for this number, and boron
trifluoride violates a rule named for it. For 10 points, identify this value that corresponds to the number of
neutrons in radiocarbon, and the atomic number of oxygen.
ANSWER: eight
This event is closely linked to the Antarctic Dipole, and it is associated with eastward-moving Kelvin
waves, which may be influenced by the Madden-Julian Oscillation. The Modoki variant of this event occurs
only near the international date line, and variations in air pressure between Tahiti and Darwin characterize
its expression in the atmosphere, the Southern Oscillation. This event in 1998 caused a world high
temperature record, but its other effects include warm winters in Alaska and dry ones in Australia. While it
decreases the number of Atlantic tropical cyclones, its counterpart tends to do the opposite. Contrasted with
La Nina, for ten points, name this event where warm water occurs near the Peruvian coast.
ANSWER: El Nino or ENSO or El Nino Southern Oscillation (accept La Nina in power, accept Southern Oscillation before mention)
An index of this phenomenon is obtained by measuring the sea level pressure difference between Darwin
and Tahiti. This phenomenon results from a weakened Walker Circulation. One of the strongest examples
of this quasiperiodic phenomenon occurred in 1982 and 1983 and led to widespread coral bleaching. This
phenomenon strongly suppresses upwelling off the coast of Peru, harming anchovy harvests. For 10 points,
identify this climate pattern characterized by warm ocean temperatures in the equatorial Pacific, which is
contrasted with the cold ocean temperatures of La Nina.
ANSWER: El Nino/La Nina-Southern Oscillation [or ENSO; prompt on Southern Oscillation; do not accept "La Nina"]
This event is associated with a shift in the Walker Circulation, which allows warm water to disperse and
disrupt the Humboldt Current. It causes increased precipitation across the southern US during winter
months, and impacts fishing near Peru and Chile. For 10 points, name this phenomenon characterized by
warmer than average water in the Eastern Pacific, whose name comes from the Spanish for "the little boy."
ANSWER: El Nino-Southern Oscillation
Madden-Julian Oscillation usually occurs a year before these events though rarely during these events, and
Walker Circulation tends to be weaker during these events. These events have also coincided with decreases
in hurricane formation in the Atlantic and these events cause a decrease in upwelling off the Pacific coast of
South America. This event is the warm phase of Southern Oscillation on the tropical Pacific Ocean. For 10
points, name this phase of a periodic atmospheric and oceanic cycle that is paired with the La Nina.
ANSWER: El Nino [ENSO or El Nino Southern Oscillation]
This event is recognized by a rise in surface pressure over the Indian ocean, Indonesia and Australia.
It causes warm, Nutrient poor tropical water to replace the cold, nutrient rich surface water of the
Humboldt current. The most intense of these events marked the start of mass coral bleaching
worldwide, and it is caused by the slowing of the Walker Circulation. That same event temporarily
(*) warmed air temperatures by 1.5 degrees Celsius, approximately six times the normal increase. For 10
points,, name this phenomenon characterized by warmer than average water in the Eastern Pacific, whose
name comes from the Spanish for "the little boy."
ANSWER: El Nino Southern Oscillation [accept ENSO; prompt on "Southern Oscillation" before "spanish for little boy"]
One effect of this phenomenon has been the rerouting of the Kuroshio extension further north. It has
been postulated that a recently emergent "Modoki" form of this event doesn't feature its
characteristic depression in Atlantic hurricane rates. This phenomenon results from weakened or
reversed Walker circulation. Work by Bjerknes linked this phenomenon to one that occurs when the
surface air pressure at Tahiti is less than that at Darwin, Australia; that is this phenomenon's atmospheric
component, called the Southern Oscillation. For 10 points, name this periodic occurrence in which the
central and eastern Pacific warm up, paired with La Nina.
ANSWER: El Nino-Southern Oscillation [or ENSO]
This event, which is indirectly caused by the Madden-Julian Oscillation, typically occurs every three to
seven years and has far-reaching effects, even occasionally in Asia and North America. Episodes of this
cyclic event are indicated by increases of more than half a degree centigrade in sea surface temperature and
series of Kelvin waves. It typically begins with unusually warm ocean conditions along the west coast of
South America and faltering of the trade winds. This event has devastating impacts on fishing, agriculture,
and local weather in tropical areas and can result in climatic anomalies elsewhere. FTP, name this event
which alternates with its cold phase, La Nina.
ANSWER: El Nino-Southern Oscillation
One system to predict this phenomenon is the IRI/CPC plume, which is based on data from the
3.4 region. This phenomenon occurs after the Madden-Julian oscillation and either the weakening or
reversal of the Walker circulation. One part of predicting this event compares the Darwin pressure
anomaly to the Tahiti pressure anomaly, and this event is often followed by a smaller event whose
changes are in the opposite direction. This phenomenon includes a strong jet stream across the
southern United States and warm temperatures in the Pacific, and it occurs approximately every five
years. Name this part of the Southern Oscillation that is often followed by La Nina.
ANSWER: El Nino Southern Oscillation [or ENSO; prompt on Southern Oscillation; do not accept "L Nina"]
An instance of this effect is credited by some historians as setting off the famines that energized the French
Revolution, while another is tied to the demise of the Moche civilization. Both the Atlantic and Pacific
oceans see a lower incidence of tropical cyclones during an instance of this, and 1998 contained an
especially intense instance of this phenomenon, helping lead to that year being the warmest on record. Its
atmospheric component is defined by the pressure difference between Tahiti and Darwin, Australia, and is
measured by the Southern Oscillation Index. For 10 points, name this periodic climatic effect centered
around the warming of the eastern Pacific ocean.
ANSWER: El Nino-Southern Oscillation [or ENSO; prompt on "Southern Oscillation"]
The strength of one component of this phenomenon is measured as the difference in surface pressure
between Tahiti and Darwin. Although not global warming, this phenomenon increases vertical wind shear,
which adversely impacts the strength of hurricanes. That component is the Walker circulation. One of the
strongest occurrences of this phenomenon, in 1983, marked the start of mass coral bleaching. This
phenomenon causes a warm current to appear off the coast of Peru, preventing upwelling due to the cold
Humboldt current. For 10 points, name this irregular cycle of warming and cooling in the eastern Pacific.
ANSWER: El Nino-La Nina/Southern Oscillation [or ENSO]
This field of study makes use of Frost Diagrams to plot oxidation states and utilizes the equation
QM/Fz. In addition to two laws by Faraday, this field utilizes a specialized case of the Goldman
Equation by making use of reduction potentials and reversal potentials. For ten points, name this branch
of chemistry that makes heavy use of the Nernst equation that analyzes reactions in the context of a
conductor or an insulator, as well as using zinc in galvanization.
ANSWER: Electrochemistry or Electrical Chemistry
Frumkin's correction only considers the potential from the compact layer and not the diffuse layer
around these devices. The Chang-Jaffe boundary conditions are applied to the Stern plane of these
devices to get the Gouy-Chapman limit, where the double layer around these devices will act like an
ideal diode. Although not related to plasmas, the double layer acts like a Debye screen for these
devices whose potential, along with the equilibrium potential, is related to current in the (*) ButlerVolmer equation. These devices are electrical conductors that come in contact with non-metallic portions of
a circuit such as an ionic solution or electrolyte. For 10 points, name these devices in an electrochemical
cell, including anodes and cathodes.
ANSWER: electrodes [anti-prompt on anode or cathode]
Selectivity coefficients for these devices give their relative responsivity to different analyte ions.
Ion-selective ones can have crystalline or noncrystalline membranes, and glass pH meters possess a
silver and silver chloride reference device of this type. (*) Reduction potentials are typically given with
respect to the standard hydrogen type of this device, and other standards include the calomel type of
this device. For 10 points, name these devices at which oxidation and reduction occur, termed anodes
when they gain electrons and cathodes when they lose electrons.
ANSWER: electrode
This process sometimes leads to bubble overpotentials, such as one that leaves hydroxide ions in sodium
chloride solution. In a debunked cold fusion experiment, Fleischmann and Pons performed it using a
palladium catalyst. Used in the Hall-Heroult process to obtain aluminum, this process is governed by two
laws named for Faraday, which quantify mass produced from it as a function of the transferred charge. For
10 points, name this process which drives a non-spontaneous chemical reaction using an electric current,
often used to separate water into gaseous hydrogen and oxygen.
ANSWER: electrolysis
In one industrial process that uses this technique, calcium chloride is added to rock salt to decrease its
melting point. Aqueous chlorine gas cannot be produced by this process because oxygen is preferentially
oxidized. This process is governed by a law stating that the amount of product is proportional to the amount
of electrons supplied. This technique is used in the Downs process to make sodium, and in plating
chromium metal surfaces. For 10 points, name this process governed by Faraday's law, in which a redox
reaction separates pure compounds from an ionic substance and drives a reaction that would normally not
be spontaneous.
ANSWER: electrolysis [prompt on electrochemical reaction or similar answers]
Lead and bismuth are separated in a process of this type named for Betts. The first law of this technique,
which was formulated by Faraday, states that the separated mass is proportional to the amount of charge
passed through. One example of this technique breaks down water into hydrogen and oxygen gas. For 10
points, name this reaction, in molecular bonds are broken via the application of electric current.
ANSWER: electrolysis
This process aids the production of symmetrical dimers from radicals in a namesake Kolbe reaction.
It aids in the reduction of p-benziquinone, and another reaction involving it results in ferrocyanide ions.
One test often coupled with it involves a wooden splinter which bursts into a bright white flame, and
iron is frequently avoided for constructing the apparatus in which it occurs, as reactive metals can
corrode the namesake cell. For 10 points, name this method of separating compounds into ones forming
at the anode and cathode by the passage of electricity.
ANSWER: electrolysis
The Castner-Kellner process uses this method to produce alkali hydroxide, and it was applied to heavy
water in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment that discredited cold fusion. First discovered by Nicholson and
Carlisle in 1800, it was later used by Moissan on potassium hydrogen difluoride in hydrogen fluoride to
produce fluorine. The amount of chemical change produced in a given substance by a given amount of
charge is proportional to its equivalent weight according to one of two laws formulated by Faraday
concerning this process. Anodization and the Hall-Heroult process both make use of this process. For 10
points, name this process that typically involves a liquid medium and two electrodes and uses a current to
decompose chemicals.
ANSWER: electrolysis
This technique used to be employed using two sites of graphite and mercury in the Castner-Kellner process
for making sodium hydroxide, and it is used on a solution of alumina in molten cryolite in the Hall-Heroult
process. The much-disputed discovery of cold fusion by Fleischmann and Pons used palladium to achieve
this kind of process, and a common laboratory technique with a variant using a massive surfactant called
SDS, uses this process through a polyacrylamide gel. For 10 points, name this technique by which water is
separated into oxygen and hydrogen gas by the application of an electric current.
ANSWER: electrolysis
The high-temperature version of this process commonly uses lanthanum strontium manganate and
yttria-stabilized zirconia. The Hall-Heroult process is a version of this process used to produce
aluminum, while a Downs cell uses carbon and iron in this process to produce sodium. The second
law of this process uses equivalent weights to predict the amount of output; that and its first law
were developed by Michael Faraday. Name this process that uses an anode and cathode as the sites of
a chemical reaction caused by a direct current, especially the decomposition of water into hydrogen
and oxygen.
ANSWER: electrolysis [accept word forms]
Faraday's laws can be used to find the mass of a substance altered in this process. The Hall-Heroult process
involves dissolving alumina in cryolite and then performing this process. This method was used by Davy to
discover potassium, sodium, barium, and calcium, and performing this process on water yields hydrogen
and oxygen gas. Sometimes seeing precipitates at the cathode, for 10 points, name this process in which
reactions are driven by an electric current.
ANSWER: electrolysis
One process described with this word is characterized by a decarboxylation and proceeds by creating
radicals, which subsequently dimerize. In addition to the Kolbe process, it is used by the Castner process to
yield sodium from lye. Faraday's laws explain that the mass obtained from this process is proportional to
the charge applied, and when applied to water, it ultimately yields hydrogen and oxygen gas. For 10 points,
name this process of separating chemical compounds into smaller substances at the anode and cathode via
the passage of electricity.
ANSWER: electrolysis [accept equivalent word forms, such as the electrolytic process]
The characteristic c to the one-half dependent concerning these entities appears in the Kohlrausch equation.
The constant of protolysis appears in Ostwald's law of dilution concerning these entities. The GuldbergWaage equation for chemical equilibrium in these entities was modified in a paper centered on obtaining the
activity coefficient from the Debye-Huckel equation. Results of the dissociation of positively and negatively
charged particles called ions, for 10 points, name these substances which conduct electric currents in
addition to being depicted as sodium combined with water in Gatorade advertisements.
ANSWER: electrolytes [prompt on ions; prompt on ionic solutions; prompt on non-ideal gases]
Dry ones are known as DSPEs, while weak ones have their constant of protolysis related to overall
concentration in Ostwald's law of dilution. The classical Guldberg-Waage formula for their equilibrium
constant was modified in a paper about the "strong" kind of them by Debye and Huckel that theorized
the "activity coefficient." Exemplified by Na-plus in water, for 10 points, name these substances
containing free ions that can conduct electricity.
ANSWER: electrolytes
When these particles get too close to one another, they cause a type of repulsion called shielding.
Transitions metals are said to have a sea of these particles. They were discovered in 1897 as the result
of experiment with cathode ray tubes conducted by J. J. Thomson who called them corpuscles. They
make up less than one percent of the mass of atoms, and can be found in s, p, d, and f (*) orbitals. For
10 points, name these subatomic particles responsible for negative charge.
ANSWER: electrons
The addition of sodium metal to ammonia yields this thing in solution, producing a deep blue color. In one
form of mass spec, this substance may be thermionically emitted, and then multiplied in a vacuum tube via
secondary emission. This substance is exchanged in dismutation reactions. When only one of them is
present, the energies of transitions undergone by this non-element may be predicted by the Rydberg
formula. Its energies are determined by the Aufbau principle, which governs its sorting into shells and
orbitals. For 10 points, name this particle, formerly known as a cathode ray, which is released in beta decay
and which is shared among covalently-bonded atoms.
ANSWER: electrons [accept electride]
The spins of these objects induce magnetic dipoles that increase shielding in NMR. Atomic orbitals are
usually visualized as regions within which there is a 90% probability of finding one of them. No two of
them can have the same quantum numbers by the Pauli Exclusion Principle. These particles are unpaired in
single oxygen atoms and other free radicals. Covalent bonds are formed when they are shared between
atoms. For 10 points, name these small, negatively charged components of atoms.
ANSWER: electrons
One mole of these particles is represented by Faraday's constant. These particles are arranged using the
Aufbau's principle in a manner which maximizes their total spin, an observation noted by Hund's rule.
The charge of this particle was determined in the oil drop experiment and compounds gain this particle in a
reduction reaction. For 10 points, name this negatively charged particle found outside of the nucleus.
ANSWER: electron
A theory pertaining to the transfer of these items uses a quantity equal to the energy required to bring the
system to its final reaction coordinates under certain conditions, and won Rudolf Marcus the 1997 Nobel in
Chemistry. In the post-Hartree-Fock methods, the configuration interaction functions try to correct for
neglecting the correlation energy between these particles. Nitro and halide groups "withdraw" these
particles from an aromatic ring. The outer most sets of these which don't participate in bonding are called
"lone pairs" and are represented in Lewis structures. For 10 points, identify these particles which carry a
negative charge.
ANSWER: electron
Solvated" forms of these entities cause solutions of alkali metals dissolved in liquid ammonia to appear
blue. The Lyman series is generated by the relaxation of these particles. Radicals are molecules that either
have an open shell of them or unpaired ones. Suspending droplets of oil in a field allowed Millikan to
calculate their charge. Four quantum numbers describe their orbits about the nucleus. They are depicted as
dots and lines in Lewis structures. For 10 points, name these subatomic particles with a negative charge.
ANSWER: electrons [prompt on beta]
The movement of these things is the subject of the Marcus Theory, and HIPIP proteins are
components of systems which result in the movement of these things. The affinity of compounds for
these things is described by their reduction potentials. These things are pushed from the tail of a
curved (*) arrow to its tip, and when only one of these particles move, a single barbed arrow is used. After
homolytic bond cleavage, each half has an unpaired one of these particles; in those compounds, these
particles are called free radicals. The placement of these particles in orbitals is the subject of Hund's Rules
and the Aufbau principle. For 10 points, name these nearly-massless subatomic particles that have a
negative charge.
ANSWER: electrons
The dual nature of these entities was confirmed by firing them at a nickel target in the Davisson-Germer
experiment. The Balmer series describes the transitions of these entities. The Aufbau principle gives rules
to the placement of these particles. According to Hund's rule, they should be arranged so as to maximize
their spin. A compound gains these particles in a reduction reaction, and they can be found in ~s~ and ~p~
orbitals. For 10 points, name this negatively charged particle that orbits the nucleus.
ANSWER: electron
The transfer of these particles is central to Marcus theory, and they are emitted in the Auger (oh-ZHEY)
effect. Nitro and cyano groups "withdraw" these particles from conjugated systems. The solvated type of
these particles are responsible for the blue color when sodium is dissolved in liquid ammonia. Robert
Millikan measured the charge of these particles in the oil drop experiment. Reducing agents can cause other
substances to gain these particles, which are depicted in Lewis dot structures. For 10 points, name these
negatively charged particles that orbit the nucleus.
ANSWER: electrons
When performing the Born-Haber cycle for sodium chloride, the steps solely involving chlorine are the
breaking of the chlorine-chlorine bond and a process whose energy gain is equal to this quantity. For
nitrogen, this quantity is close to zero; that is a result of Hund's rule since nitrogen has a single electron in
each of the three P orbital subshells. The largest values for this quantity are found in the halogens, since
they are one electron short of forming a complete octet. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the
amount of energy given off when a neutral atom gains an electron.
ANSWER: electron affinity
One form of this technique is referenced against the MNN transition in Silver and must be conducted
in vacuum. Another form of this technique, which isn't NMR, is complicated by the presence of
satellite peaks arising from resonances with aluminum and magnesium K-alpha lines. In this
technique, the secondary edge introduced by an input-amplifying channeltron must be excluded by
applying a potential whose magnitude depends on the (*) work function of the analyzer. This technique
often employs a hemispherical analyzer, which excludes particles based on their kinetic energies. In general,
this technique is used in ultra-high vacuum to analyze the structure and oxidation state of surfaces. For 10
points, name this type of spectroscopy in which one measures the energy of things emitted due to the Auger
effect or the photoelectric effect
ANSWER: electron spectroscopy [accept (X-ray or ultraviolet) photoelectron spectroscopy; accept photoemission spectroscopy; accept Auger electron spectroscopy; accept just electron after "spectroscopy" is read; prompt on "X-ray spectroscopy"; prompt on "spectroscopy", I guess]
Configuration state parameters can be used to estimate it, and a decrease in this interaction upon
ligand binding causes the nephelauxetic effect. A set of three parameters A, B, C which reflect this
interaction are named for Racah, one of which normalizes both axes of a Tanabe-Sugano diagram.
This interaction is responsible for the difference between the actual energy of a system and the
Hartree-Fock energy, which is why post-Hartree-Fock methods attempt to calculate it. The presence
of a term for this interaction in the Schrodinger equation of a helium atom makes it non-separable, and
this interaction breaks the degeneracy of orbitals with the same principal quantum number but different
angular momentum quantum numbers. This interaction is the basis for Hund's rule, which states the
particles involved fill up orbitals one at a time. For 10 points, name this repulsion between negative
particles.
ANSWER: Electron-electron repulsion or electron correlation or Columb[ic] repulsion (accept anything that implies that electrons repel or interact with each other)
A quantity represented Z-star is divided by the square of the covalent radius in one definition of this
quantity, and higher atomic values of this quantity make for better leaving groups in SN2 reactions. A ratio
of electron densities is used in one definition of this quantity, which can be calculated as the mean of
electron affinity and first ionization energy. Defined by Sanderson and Mulliken, this quantity increases as
one moves toward the top right of the periodic table, and it is measured from 0.7 to 3.98 on a relative scale
developed by Linus Pauling. Fluorine has the highest value of, for 10 points, what property that reflects an
atom's ability to attract electrons?
ANSWER: electronegativity [do not accept "electron affinity"]
This quantity's namesake equalization method is used in computational models of charge
distribution. With organophosphorous materials, the Kabachnik parameters are equivalent to this
quantity. One measure of this quantity is given by a linear equation whose slope is 0.359 and whose
y-intercept is 0.744, while another one is a weighted average of epsilon sub s and epsilon sub p. The
inductive effect is caused by differences in this quantity, and another version of this quantity is based on the
inverse of atomic volume. Besides the Sandersen and Allred-Rochow scales, another scale uses the mean of
the electron affinity and ionization energy. The greater the difference in this quantity between two atoms in
a bond, the greater the bond's ionic character. For 10 points, name this quantity measured by the Mulliken
and Pauling scales, the tendency of an atom to attract electrons in a bond.
ANSWER: Electronegativity
This chemical property has been linearly related to chemical shifts in NMR spectra, and Sanderson's
calculations of this property uses the reciprocal of atomic volume. Another model of this quantity uses
Slater's rules and divides the effective nuclear charge of the atom divided by covalent radius squared; that
model is named after Allred and Rochow. Another scale used to measure this calculates the average of (*)
ionization energy and electron affinity, but a more popular scale uses puts fluorine's value of this at 4. For
ten points, name this quantity measured on Mulliken or Pauling scales that measures the electron-pulling
power of an atom.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Allred and Rochow (ROE-shou) developed one formula to calculate this property, which can also be
calculated by taking the arithmetic mean of electronic affinity and ionization energy in the Mulliken scale.
The most commonly used scale for this property, developed by Linus Pauling, gives fluorine a value of just
under 4.0. For 10 points, name this chemical property that describes the ability of an atom to attract
electrons towards itself in a covalent bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This quantity is modeled for different groups substituted on a benzene ring via the Hammett equation. One
measure for this quantity takes the average energy of a free atom's valence electrons and is named for Allen.
A simple measure for this quantity is equal to the mean of first ionization energy and electron affinity,
named for Mulliken, though it is more often measured on the Pauling scale, which gives fluorine a value of
3.98. For 10 points, give this quantity that represents the degree to which an atom or group attracts electron
density.
ANSWER: electronegativity
The principle of equalization of this quantity states that for a chemical compound, this quantity is
the geometric mean of that of the compound's constituent elements. That principle was developed by
Sanderson, who defined this quantity as an atom's (*) electron density divided by its expected electron
density. Mulliken defined this quantity as the arithmetic mean of the first ionization energy and electron
affinity. The square root of the ionic resonance energy is the definition of this quantity provided by Linus
Pauling. For 10 points, name this ability of an atom to attract electrons to itself in a bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
William Jensen ended up with a triangle when he graphed the average of this quantity on the x-axis and its
spread on the y-axis, and Leland Allen devised a new way to measure this quantity which
he called configuration energy. This quantity was subtracted, squared, multiplied by twenty-three, and then
added to the original amount of enthalpy to find the enthalpy of a new compound according to the person
who discovered this concept, Linus Pauling. Name this quantity that measures the ability of an element to
attract electrons, which is extremely low for francium and extremely high for
fluorine.
ANSWER: electronegativity
One way for calculating this involves taking the arithmetic mean of the first ionization energy and the
electron affinity, named after Robert Mulliken. The bond between two atoms is polar covalent if the
difference for this value between them is greater than 2.6. Fluorine has the highest value for this on the
Pauling scale. For 10 points, name this quantity that describes the tendency for atoms to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This quantity is used to determine oxidation states--but not formal charges-- in compounds. sp carbons have
a greater value for this quantity than do sp3 carbons, causing the relative acidity of alkynes. When this
property is large for certain atoms, it causes a relative increase in acidity for adjacent protons according to
the inductive effect. C-H are nonpolar because both carbon and hydrogen have a value of 2.2 on a scale for
measuring this quantity. On the Pauling scale, fluorine has the greatest value for this property. For 10
points, name this property measuring an atom's ability to attract electrons to itself.
ANSWER: electronegativity
The Moessbauer spectra of tin salts has shown a strong correlation to this property, and this
property can explain the inductive effect observed in sigma bonds. Neon exhibits this property the
most on the Allen scale, while this quantity's equalization was developed in a model by Sanderson.
Slater's rule is applied to find the effective nuclear charge used in the (*) Allred-Rochow definition,
while it can also be found by taking the average of the first ionization energy and electron affinity using the
Mulliken definition. Caesium exhibits this property the least, and is assigned a value of 0.7 on a scale
developed by its formulator, Linus Pauling. For ten points, name this chemical property that describes an
atom's tendency to attract electrons towards itself.
ANSWER: electronegativity
One formula for this value initially was given as 0.744 plus a term proportional to a quantity derived
from Slater's Rules. That quantity is the effective nuclear charge, and that formula was developed by Allred
and Rochow. Another measure of this quantity was developed by Sanderson. Other scales for it involve the
square root of the ionic resonance energy and the average of ionization energy and electron affinity. For 10
points, the Pauling and Mulliken scales measure what ability of atoms to attract electrons to themselves in a
covalent bond?
ANSWER: electronegativity
A high value of this property is responsible for the electron-withdrawing nature of nitro compounds. One
definition of it flips a sign but is otherwise the same as the definition of chemical hardness, computing it as
the average of the ionization energy and an analogue of this property, the electron affinity. The most
common definition of it compares the energies of homo- and hetero-nuclear bonds, and defines hydrogen as
standard at 2.1. That scale, defined by Pauling, sets the value of this property to 3.98 for fluorine. It
increases up and to the right on the periodic table. For 10 points, name this empirical property that reflects
the ability of atoms to attract electrons in a bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This quantity equals negative one times the partial derivative of chemical energy with respect to number of
electrons, and its derivative is negative hardness. It is proportional to the square root of the covalent radius
times actual nuclear charge minus a screening constant determined by Slater's rules. Due to d-block
contraction, gallium and germanium have higher values of it than aluminum. The mean of electron affinity
and first ionization energy is Mulliken's formulation of this quantity that increases across a period and up a
group. Its greatest value on the Pauling scale, 4.0, is assigned to fluorine. For 10 points, name this tendency
of an atom to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity [accept Mulliken electronegativity or Allred-Rochow electronegativity]
When this value is calculated for different elements, hydrogen is given a value above two so that all
elements have positive values. This was calculated by taking the square root of the difference of a
dissociation energy and the average of two other dissociation energies. This value depends largely on the
number of spaces in the outer energy level and its distance from the nucleus. Name this value invented by
Linus Pauling measuring the ability of an atom to attract electrons, a value high in fluorine.
ANSWER: electronegativity
R. T. Sanderson calculated this quantity as a ratio of densities. In the calculation of a bond dipole moment,
the charge separation acts as a scaling factor for differences in this quantity. It was defined in terms of
effective nuclear charge by Allred and Rochow, and as the average of first ionization energy and electron
affinity by Robert Mulliken. Increasing across a period and decreasing down a group, its differences result
in partial charges and polar covalent bonds. First quantified by Linus Pauling, its value is highest for
fluorine. For 10 points, name this measure of an atom's ability to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Sanderson's version of this property allows estimation of bond energies due to known bond lengths, while
the Allred-Rochow scale define it in terms of covalent radius. A small difference in this quantity leads to a
polar covalent bond, while a large difference results in an ionic bond. The Mulliken scale defines it as the
mean of electron affinity and ionization energy, while the more common Pauling scale sets the greatest
value at 4.0. For 10 points, name this property defined as the tendency of an atom to attract electrons in a
bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
A way to find this value is to take the sum of the first ionization energy and electron affinity and divide
by two. The Allen scale for finding this value has its lowest end at cesium, which differs from a more
common scale for this value that gives its lowest value, 0.7, to francium. That common scale for this value
assigns its highest value, 3.98, to fluorine and is named for Linus Pauling. A large difference in this value
between molecules usually results in an ionic bond. For 10 points, name this ability of atoms to attract
shared electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
An equation stating that the square of one measure of this quantity is equal to square of the band gap minus
the square of the homopolar band gap was developed by Phillips and van Vechten. The principle of
equalization of this quantity states that in a bond, each atom's value for this quantity will be the geometric
mean of the atoms' original values; that principle was developed by Sanderson, who computed this quantity
as the ratio of atomic number to atomic volume, divided by what would be expected from a linear
interpolation of those values for inert gases. The first ionization energy and electron affinity are averaged to
obtain the Mulliken scale for it, and the Pauling scale assigns fluorine a value of four. For 10 points, name
this measure of an atom's ability to attract electrons to itself.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This property can be measured using the reciprocal of atomic volume, which can be used to determine
molecular geometry under Sanderson's Equalization Principle. The square of covalent radii is used to
define this property under the Allred-Roschow Scale, and another way to measure this property uses the
average energy of valence electrons, a method named after Allen. Electron affinity and ionization energy
are averaged together in order to measure this property on a scale named for Mulliken, and the first scale to
define this property is named after Pauling. For 10 points, name this ability of an atom to attract electrons,
of which fluorine has the highest value.
ANSWER: Electronegativity
Predictions of whether or not transmetalation will occur can be made based on these values for the metal
elements. IUPAC ["eye you pack"] has recommended ordering groups or elements in chemical formulas
based on this quantity, and a hydrogen bond must involve an element that has a high value of this. An
attempt to measure this using spectroscopy is named after Allen, a formulation using arithmetic means was
developed by Mulliken, and the most common scale was developed by Pauling. Differences in this quantity
are used to determine the ionic character of a molecule. Name this tendency of an atom or molecule to
attract electrons that is very high in fluorine.
ANSWER: electronegativity [accept word forms]
One measurement for this property utilizes the reciprocal of atomic volume and can be used to calculate
molecular geometries, which is named after Sanderson. Another measurement of this property named after
Allen uses the average energy of the valence electrons, and on that scale Neon has the highest value. The
most common scale used to measure this property increases as one goes up and to the right of the periodic
table and is named after Linus Pauling. For 10 points, name this property of atoms that describes the ability
for an element to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This quantity can be calculated by taking the nuclear charge and dividing it by the square of the
covalent radius. Another way to calculate this property involves calculating the square root of three
types of bond dissociation energies. This property is often calculated as the average (*) of electron
affinity and the first ionization energy. It is calculated by the Mullikan Scale, and francium has the lowest
value for this property. It was first proposed by Linus Pauling, who gave fluorine a value of 4.0. For 10
points, name this tendency of an atom to attract electrons toward itself in a covalent bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
In a charge-transfer complex, the energy of a transition is proportional to the difference between the
optical value of this quantity for the metal and the ligand. Electrons distribute themselves to equalize this
quantity according to Sandersen, while a y-intercept of .744 appears in the equation for the Allred-Rochow
scale of it. Common methods of measuring this quantity include the mean of the first ionization energy and
the electron affinity. For 10 points, name this quantity which is high for fluorine and has scales named for
Mulliken and Pauling, the tendency of an atom to pull electrons toward it in a covalent bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
For carbon, this quantity increases as the s character of a bond increases. Z. R. P. Iczkowaski and J. L.
Margrave defined it as the derivative of energy with respect to the derivative of charge. The average of the
valence ionization potential and the electron affinity is how this quantity is measured on the Mulliken scale.
On the Pauling scale, the highest value for it is assigned to fluorine. This property increases as one moves
up and to the right on the periodic table. For 10 points, name this property of an atom to pull electrons
towards itself in a bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Jenson's triangle plots chemical species using two values derived from a version of this quantity
developed by Martynov and Batsanov. Sanderson's work on this quanity suggested it should be
proportional to the compactness of the atom, explaining why it decreases down a period. One
measure for this quantity comes from bond energy, while another is simply the average of the
electron (*) affinity and ionization energy; those are named for Pauling and Mulliken. Flourine has the
highest value of, for 10 points, what quantity that predicts polar bonds by measures the tendency of a
nucleus to attract electrons?
ANSWER: Electronegativity
This is on the x-axis of a quantitative version of the van Arkel and Ketelaar triangles, named after William
Jensen. Martynov and Batsanov introduced one method to obtain this quantity. An equation involving this
quantity predicts, in kilocalories per mole, the bond enthalpy between two atoms. The arithmetic mean of
the first ionization energy and the electron affinity of an atom is Robert Mulliken's definition of this. When
two bonded atoms differ slightly in this, a polar bond arises from partial charges. The first derived scale
measuring this quantity was that of Linus Pauling. Fluorine has the highest value of, for 10 points, what
value of an atom's tendency to attract electrons?
ANSWER: electronegativity (prompt on electropositivity until "ionization" is read)
For a heteronuclear particle, it is equal to the square root of the difference between the bond
dissociation enthalpy and the enthalpy change of atomization. It can also be determined by dividing
effective nuclear charge by the square of the covalent (*) radius. The average of the first ionization
energy and the first electron affinity is equal to this value according to Mulliken, and it can be used to
determine the polarity of a bond. For 10 points, name this value that is highest for fluorine and
represents the tendency of an atom to attract a shared electron pair.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This can be measured on the Allen scale. One method of calculating this quantity defines it as the
average of ionization energy and electron affinity. On the periodic table, it increases as one goes up
and to the (*) right, so that cesium has the lowest value for this quantity and fluorine the highest. For 10
points, name this quantity which can also be described by the Mulliken and Pauling scales and describes an
atom's ability to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
A technique named for Allen that uses spectroscopic data to measure this quantity runs into
difficulties with d and f block electrons, while this quantity is used to plot species on Jensen's
triangle. This quantity is proportional to the effective nuclear charge divided by a surface area term,
in a result by (*) Allred and Rochow. One way to calculated this quantity is simply to average the
ionization energy and electron affinity, but the most common definition of this quantity is based on
dissociation energies; those scales are named for Mulliken and Pauling. For 10 points, name this quantity
that summarizes the ability of an atom to attract electrons and is approximately four for Fluorine.
ANSWER: Electronegativity
In one model, relative values for this property can be found by calculating the difference between the
expected and actual bond energy of two elements. This property decreases as more electron shells are
added, but increases with more protons: thus, on the periodic table the trend is to increase moving across
the periods and decrease descending the groups. Elements with similar values for this property will form
covalent bonds. For 10 points, name this ability of an atom to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
The acidity of oxyacids is determined using the number of oxygen atoms present with this value for the
central atom. One method of calculating this value involves using Slater's rule to find the effective nuclear
charge and is named after Allred and Rochow. The polarity of a bond between two atoms increases as the
difference in this quantity increases, and it can be defined by averaging the first ionization energy and
electron affinity according to Mulliken. For 10 points, name this quantity for which fluorine has the highest
value, and which measures how strongly a gaseous atom holds on to its electrons.
ANSWER: Electronegativity
One method of calculating this quantity uses the square root of the differences of dissociation energies of
certain bonds between two elements. The partial ionic character of a bond is determined by the difference
of this value for the two elements involved in the bond. This quantity is measured on the Pauling scale, and
fluorine has the highest value of it. For 10 points, name this quantity, the ability of a bonded atom to attract
shared electrons in a bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Atoms with large values for this quantity will deshield protons in NMR spectroscopy. According to one
scale, the difference in this quantity is calculated using the square root of the difference in the bond
dissociation energies. On that scale named for Linus Pauling, a value of 4.0 for this property is the highest
and belongs to fluorine. A large difference in this quantity over a covalent bond creates a dipole. For 10
points, name this property of an atom in a compound to attract electrons to itself.
ANSWER: electronegativity
One version of calculating this property involves dividing the electron densities of atoms and is named
for Sanderson. Taking the average of the ionization energy and the electron affinity of an atom gives the
Mulliken scale for measuring this value. Atoms with identical values for this property will have non-polar
bonds and those with large differences form ionic bonds. For 10 points, name this property usually
measured on Pauling's scale that describes the ability of an atom to attract a bonding pair of electrons, for
which fluorine has the highest value at 4.0.
ANSWER: electronegativity
The unique properties possessed by Teflon are due to an extreme value in the difference of this
quantity. One definition states it is proportional to the average between the electron affinity and the
first ionization energy. One formula for finding the difference of this value between atoms A and B
uses the square root of the dissociation energy between A and B minus the average dissociation
energies between A and A and B and B. Atoms with small differences of this quantity form covalent
bonds. One formula for this quantity was developed by Linus Pauling. Fluorine has the highest value of, for
10 points, what ability of an atom to attract electrons towards itself in a chemical bond?
ANSWER: electronegativity
For a heteronuclear particle, it is equal to the square root of the difference between the bond
dissociation enthalpy and the enthalpy change of atomization. It can also be determined by dividing
effective nuclear charge by the square of the covalent (*) radius. The average of the first ionization
energy and the first electron affinity is equal to this value according to Mulliken, and it can be used to
determine the polarity of a bond. For 10 points, name this value that is highest for fluorine and
represents the tendency of an atom to attract a shared electron pair.
ANSWER: electronegativity
In the Luo-Benson expression, this quantity is related to the number of valence shell electrons divided by
the atomic radius. Another method to calculate this quantity uses effective nuclear charge values, and is
named for Allred and Rochow. Electron affinity and ionization energy are added together in a measure of
this property named for Mulliken, and fluorine has the largest value on the scale of it named for Pauling.
For 10 points, name this property that measures the ability of an atom to draw the electrons in a bond to
itself.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Molecular orbital theory can explain the relationship between it and absolute hardness in Lewis acid-base
complexes. One equation for measuring it relies on Slater's rules and is named for Allred and Rochow.
Germanium has an anomalously high value for this property compared to silicon due to effective nuclear
charge. Increasing from left to right and from the bottom to the top of the periodic table, this property is
highest in fluorine, which has a value of 4.0 on the Pauling scale. For 10 points, name this property that
measures an atom's ability to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
The difference between this value for constituent atoms increases going up the right side of Ketelaar's
triangle. The spectroscopic type of it was developed by Leland Allen, and it is inversely proportional to the
square of the covalent radius and proportional to the effective nuclear charge in the Allred-Rochow type.
Ionization energy and electron affinity are added together to determine the Mulliken type, and fluorine,
measuring four, has the highest value according to the Pauling scale for it. For 10 points, name this measure
of the tendency of an atom in a molecule to attract electrons within bonds.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Sanderson defined this quantity as the ratio of atomic number to atomic volume, and the Mulliken
method of calculating this quantity involves finding the arithmetic mean of ionization energy and electron
affinity. According to the Pauling scale, francium has a value of 0.67 for this quantity, and cesium has a
value of 0.659, while at 4.0, fluorine has the highest value. For 10 points, identify this property which is
defined as an atom's tendency to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
The Felkin-Anh model places the group with the highest value for this quantity orthogonal to the
carbonyl. Groups with a high value of this quantity always serve as deactivators of EAS reactions.
One form of this quantity is equal to the effective nuclear charge divided by the square of the
covalent radius, while another form expresses it as the arithmetic mean of the (*) ionization energy
and the electron affinity. Those are the Allred-Rochow and Mulliken scales. The difference in this quantity
between two atoms determines whether their bond is ionic or covalent. Fluorine has the highest value for
this quantity with a 4.0 on the Pauling scale. For 10 points, name this quantity which describes how well an
atom attracts electrons in a bond to itself.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Sanderson developed the principle of the equalization of this quantity. Allred and Rochow developed a
scale for it, as did Robert Mulliken. Like the two measures that average to form this quantity via the
Mulliken scale, it increases from left to right on the periodic table and decreases from top to bottom. The
most commonly used scale, developed by Linus Pauling, assigns fluorine a value of four. For 10 points,
name this measure of an atom's ability to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Sanderson defined it as the ratio of atomic number to atomic volume, divided by the expected ratio
as extrapolated from noble gas data. Another measure of it is based on the square root of differences in
ionic resonance energy between two elements, while Mulliken defines it as the average of first
ionization energy and electron affinity. For 10 points, name this tendency of an atom to attract electrons
of other atoms to itself, for which fluorine has a value of 4.0 according to the Pauling scale.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This dimensionless quantity is of tremendous utility in all forms of chemistry because it assists analysis of
dipoles and bond polarity and can be calculated on one of several scales, including ones by Sanderson,
Allen, Allred-Rochow, Mulliken, and Pauling. This quantity is not, strictly speaking, a property of free
atoms, but rather of atoms in molecules, where it is affected in particular by oxidation state. Its free element
analogue is electron affinity. This quantity increases going up and to the right in the periodic table, peaking
with fluorine, whose value of this quantity is 4.0. FTP, name this quantity that reflects the ability of atoms to
attract electron density.
ANSWER: electronegativity
One method of making this property quantitative uses the difference in dissociation energy, and this
property increases or decreases through the induction effect. This property, which can be measured with the
Mulliken scale, can also be measured by a scale that gives fluorine a value of 4.0. The effects of this
property is decreased in electron shielding. This property can be measured by the Pauling scale, and
increases when moving up and to the right of the periodic table. For 10 points, name this property, the
ability of an atom to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
One formulation of this value uses Slater's rules to find a effective nuclear charge, which is then divided
by the covalent radius. The Allred-Rochow (ROSH-ow) formulation of it does not account for the d-block
elements. Allen suggested that this value is related to the average energy of a certain particle, and Mulliken
defined it as the mean of first ionization energy and electron affinity. Fluorine possesses the highest value
for, for 10 points, what quantity proposed by Pauling as a measure of an atom's ability to attract electrons to
itself?
ANSWER: electronegativity
Kabachnik parameters are used in phosphorus chemistry as a generalization of this quantity for groups, and
Sanderson proposed a definition for this measure as the reciprocal of atomic radius. It is proportional to the
reciprocal of the squared covalent radius in the Allred-Rochow scale, though it is more commonly defined
as the mean of first ionization energy and electron affinity. For 10 points, identify this quantity, frequently
measured on the Mulliken or Pauling scales, the tendency of an atom to attract electrons in a bond.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This property has been found to relate linearly to isomer shifts in the Mossbauer spectra of some
compounds. A formulation of it that uses Slater's rules to estimate effective nuclear charge and does
not hold for d-block elements is named for Allred and Rochow. One way of calculating it involves
taking the square root of the difference between the (*) dissociation energy of a bond between two
different atoms and the average dissociation energy of diatomic compounds of each of those atoms.
Calculated by averaging ionization energy and electron affinity, it is measured by scales named for Pauling
and Mulliken. For 10 points, name this ability of an atom in a compound to attract electrons, whose highest
value is seen in fluorine.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Allen and Sanderson independently developed two different methods for calculating this property,
the former utilizing the average energy of the valence electrons while the latter calculating the ratio
of the actual charge denisty to the expected charge denisty extrapoloated from noble gas data. It is
often calculated by taking the arithmetic mean of (*) electron affinity and ionization energy according to
the Mulliken scale, and this property increases moving right and up along the periodic table. For 10 points,
name this atomic property proposed by Linus Pauling which measures the ability to attract electron density,
exhibited highly in oxygen and fluorine.
ANSWER: electronegativity
This quantity for a compound is the geometric mean of this quantity for each atom in that compound
according to its principle of equalization. Slater's rules and the covalent radius of an atom are used
to calculate this quantity according to the Allred-Rochow scale. This quantity can be calculated by
taking the arithmatic mean of the first (*) ionization energy and electron affinity. Scales for this quantity,
which increases with movement up and to the right on the periodic table, are named for Pauling and
Mulliken. For 10 points, name this quantity that measures the affinity of an atom for electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity
Sanderson proposed a method of calculating this value based on the reciprocal of atomic volume, and Allen
proposed one of the simplest definitions of this value by relating it to the average energy of the valence
electrons in a free atom. Mulliken averages the first ionization energy and the electron affinity to calculate
this quantity, first proposed in valence bond theory by Linus Pauling, who chose hydrogen as a reference at
2.2 and gave fluorine a value of nearly 4. For 10 points, identify this chemical property, the tendency of an
atom to attract electrons
ANSWER: electronegativity [accept nothing else]
One type of this reaction is a two-step process involving the formation and disassembly of a carbanion. One
reaction of this kind uses iodomethane and carbon disulfide to produce a xanthate intermediate. After an
oxidation by mCPBA treatment, another reaction of this kind involves the disruption of a cyclic amine
oxide transition state by simple heating. Those reactions are the syn variety, in which the abstracted
hydrogen and leaving group are on the same side. These reactions often compete with substitution reactions,
which, like these reactions, have uni- or bi- molecular reaction mechanisms, with the more stable product
forming in accordance with Zaitsev's rule. For 10 points, name these reactions, including the Chugaev and
Cope varieties, that result in the formation of double bonds.
ANSWER: elimination [accept E1cb reactions for the first sentence, tell them to be less specific afterwards]
The Danishefsky Taxol synthesis replaces a hydroxyl group with a selenide for further reaction in the
Grieco version of this, while in another variety of this reaction, a tosylhydrazone is formed from a
carbonyl and then cleaved by an alkoxide in the Bamford-Stevens version. Alkyllithium can also be
used in the Shapiro reaction of this type, while a hydroxylamine can be generated as a side product in
the (*) Cope version. More famously, methyl iodide and silver oxide can be used to remove an amine in the
Hofmann version, which has selectivity opposite to Zaitsev's rule. For 10 points, name this type of reaction
coming in E1 and E2 varieties, which culminates in double bond formation.
ANSWER: elimination
In the catalytic cycle of Wilkinson's catalyst, the product is evolved after a reductive form of this
type of reaction. When performed in a cyclohexane ring, one type of this reaction can be performed
on a pair of substituents in the axial position. One type of this reaction is performed using potassium
tert-butoxide and has a deuterium isotope effect greater than one. One type of this reaction uses an
initial step of exhaustive methylation and generates (*) the less-substituted product, though most types
of this reaction generate the most substituted product according to Zaitsev's rule. Another type of this
reaction competes with SN1 and results from the deprotonation of a carbocation, creating an alkene, while
another requires an antiperiplanar configuration. For 10 points, name this type of reaction whose
mechanisms include E1 and E2, in which a group is kicked off a molecule.
ANSWER: elimination [accept E1 before mentioned; accept E2 before mentioned]
This type of reaction can undergo an unusual two-step mechanism with a carbanion intermediate, called the
"conjugate base." A quarternary nitrogen in a five-membered ring undergoes an pericyclic mechanism in the
Cope type of this reaction. Stereochemistry of the products of these reactions is determined by Zaitsev's
rule. The classic example of this reaction takes an alkyl halide and reacts it with a strong base, kicking off
the halide and an adjacent hydrogen. For 10 points, name this type of a reaction that forms a double bond
and comes in E1 and E2 varieties.
ANSWER: eliminations
One reaction of this type produces the side products carbonyl sulfide and methanethiol after the
formation of a xanthate intermediate. In another reaction of this type, an amine is oxidized by mCPBA in a
5-membered cyclic transition state. A more common reaction of this type differs from its counterpart
because it does not have a carbocation intermediate and proceeds faster with an antiperiplanar
configuration. Primary and secondary alkyl halides participate in that reaction of this type, and tertiary
alkyl halides participate in its counterpart. According to Zaitsev's rule, these alkene-producing reactions
will form more of the more stable alkene. Chugaev, Cope, E1, and E2 are types of, for 10 points, what
reactions in which two substituents are removed from a molecule?
ANSWER: eliminations
One reaction of this type is the basis of the Herzig-Meyer determination test, while another reaction
of this type creates sulfur dioxide from alpha-halo sulfones. Another reaction of this type uses onitrophenylselenocynate and tributylphosphine. Yet another reaction of this type uses carbon
disulfide to convert the reactant into a xanthate. Besides the Ramberg-Backlund, Greico, and Chugaev
varieties, another one has a 5-member cyclic transition state and generates an amine oxide and is named for
Cope. Adding excess methyl iodide to an amine is the Hoffman method of this. General mechanisms for this
include a one-step mechanism that is accelerated when the substrate is in the antiperiplanar configuration;
that mechanism is dubbed E2. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in which substituents are removed
from a molecule.
ANSWER: Elimination
In the Boord olefin synthesis, one reaction of this type is the proposed mechanism for forming the
intermediate Grignard reagent. One reaction of this type involves moving the hydride from the beta position
of a ligand to the metal center. This type of reaction will usually be second order in the presence of a strong
base, and will then require that the leaving group and the departing hydrogen be coplanar in order to allow
rehybridization of p orbitals to form the new pi bond. When multiple products are possible, the favored
product will be the one with the most substituted double bond according to Zaitsev's rule. It's not
rearrangement, but well known ones include those named for Cope and Hoffman. For 10 points, name this
type of reaction usually involving alkyl halides in which two substituents are removed from a molecule.
ANSWER: elimination reactions
In the Horeau effect, the difference in concentration of two of these is non-linearly related to the
rotation. Auxiliaries are used to selectively create one of these over another, and spontaneous
resolution and resolution by entrainment are methods of separating them. These entities' namesake
excess is the concentration of one of these relative to the other one. Labeling them involves finding
the priorities of each constituent of a non-superimposable atom by the CIP-rules. They rotate
polarized light, diasteriomers are a less specific designation, and flipping between them involves flipping
the designation of each chiral center in a molecule. Racemic mixtures contain two of, for 10 points, these
molecules which are mirror images of each other.
ANSWER: Enantiomers (accept chiral compounds or chiral centers or diasteriomers until "mirror" or mention)
If a palladium catalyst is not used, allyl esters rearrange to gamma-delta unsaturated compounds through
this intermediate in the Carroll rearrangement, while beta-gamma unsaturated compounds equilibrate when
possible with alpha-beta unsaturated compounds with this species as the intermediate. Alkylation of ions of
these molecules by an alkyl halide or a tosylate forms carbon-carbon single bonds, and stereochemical
information is lost over time in ethylacetoacetate because of the formation of one. While forming one with
acid can lead to single halogenation, using base leads to the haloform reaction and the generation of a
carboxylate. Enamines may be used as equivalents to this functional group, and they are essential to the
Robinson annulation and the Claisen condensation. Malonic acid derivatives form particularly stable ones
due to conjugation. For 10 points, identify this functional group, the tautomer of many carbonyl compounds.
ANSWER: enols
Aza versions of this moiety are produced from aldimines via deprotonation, and thos aza versions are
the conjugate bases of hydrazones. A ruthenium imidazole alkylidene reagent catalyzes a ring-closing
reaction involving olefins and this type of ether, as reported by Rainier. They can be synthesized by
the addition of a Gilman reagent to an alpha,beta-unsaturated ketone. The attack of a Grignard
reagent upon the beta carbon of an unsaturated ketone producs this moiety as a (*) 1,4-adduct. One of
these reacts with a carbonyl to form a beta-hydroxyketone in the aldol reaction. Under standard conditions,
this group is present in much lower concentrations than its tautomer, a carbonyl group. For 10 points, name
this functional group that consists of a carbon-carbon double bond with a hydroxyl group on one of the
carbons.
ANSWER: enol [accept enolate or alkenol]
A lactone of this functionality is the starting point of the Fujimoto-Belleau reaction, and acetyl CoA
in this form adds to a protein-bound carboxylate chain in fatty acid synthesis. Silyl ethers of this type
are used in a pair of reactions developed by Teruaki Mukaiyama. These compounds are the initial result
of the oxy-Cope rearrangement. Reagents used to form the conjugate base of this functionality include
KHMDS and LDA. A rare example of one of these compounds being more stable than its keto tautomer is
phenol. For 10 points, name this functional group consisting of an alkene with a hydroxyl group on an sp2
carbon.
ANSWER: alkenols
In a Rankine cycle, the work done by the turbine can be found by multiplying the mass flow rate by the
difference in this quantity across the turbine. The derivative of this quantity with respect to temperature
gives the constant-pressure heat capacity. This quantity is held constant during a throttling process. The
change in this state function, defined as the internal energy plus the product of pressure and volume, can be
summed over component reactions to obtain this quantity for the total reaction. The change in this quantity
is positive for an endothermic reaction. For 10 points, name this quantity whose change can be calculated
using Hess's Law, symbolized H.
ANSWER: enthalpy [accept specific enthalpy until "heat capacity"]
Differences in this quantity is related to the specific surface energy by Stefan's formula. A theory
formulated by Benson and Buss uses individually calculated versions of it to calculate an unknown. The
Born-Haber cycle is used to calculate it for lattices, and Joule-Thomson processes also hold this quantity
constant. This is used as a constant in an equation relating differences in pressure and temperature
formulated by Clausius and Clapeyron. For 10 points, what is this state function of a system that is equal to
the sum of the internal energy and the product of the pressure and volume, governed by Hess's Law during
reactions?
ANSWER: enthalpy
With kinetic energy, this quantity is unchanged in a Joule-Thompson process. One form of this quantity,
that describes the binding in an ionic solid, is calculated using a Born-Haber cycle and is the lattice variant.
It is equal to internal energy plus pressure times volume. The Gibbs free energy of a system is defined as
this quantity minus temperature times entropy. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized H, that
represents the total energy of a system under constant pressure.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on H before mentioned; prompt on heat]
The negative ratio of this quantity to the gas constant is equated to the derivative of the natural log
of equilibrium constant over the derivative of the natural log of inverse temperature. During
throttling processes, this quantity remains constant, and for isochoric processes, this quantity is
simply equal to the change in internal (*) energy. The standard heat of formation is this quantity for the
formation of 1 mol of a compound. This quantity for the conversion of a gas to an ionic solid is reported as
the lattice energy, and this quantity has units of joules per kilogram. For 10 points, name this quantity which
is equal to the product of pressure and volume of a system plus its internal energy, which is usually denoted
H.
ANSWER: enthalpy
One form of this quantity can be calculated using the Kapustinskii equation or the Born-Lande equation.
According to Maxwell's relations, the second partial derivative of this quantity is equal to the partial
derivative of temperature with respect to pressure. The sum of the electrostatic potentials in a lattice, also
called the Madelung constant, is proportional to this quantity. Specific heat at constant pressure is equal to
partial derivative of this quantity. Hess's law determines the change in this quantity for a chemical reaction.
For 10 points, name this quantity that measures energy and is symbolized with an H.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on H before mentioned]
This quantity remains constant in a Joule-Thomson process. The van't Hoff equation relates the
derivative of the natural log of the equilibrium constant to the change in this quantity, and Gibbs free
energy equals this quantity minus the product of temperature and entropy. The change in this
quantity can be found by subtracting the (*) heats of formation of the reactants from those of the
products, since the change is independent of the reaction path according to Hess's Law. For ten points,
identify this thermodynamic quantity, equal to internal energy plus pressure times volume, and symbolized
H.
ANSWER: enthalpy (accept H before mentioned; prompt on "delta H")
This quantity remains constant for a system in a throttling process, as well as when gases in a pipe are
forced through a valve in the Joule-Thomson effect. Kirchhoff's law can be used to calculate the change in
this quantity when a substance changes temperature, and the differential amount of this quantity is equal to
T dS plus V dp. This quantity is equal to the sum of internal energy plus the product of pressure and
volume, and Gibbs free energy is equal to this quantity minus the product of temperature and entropy. For
10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity used to calculate heat transfer, symbolized H.
ANSWER: Enthalpy
The temperature dependence of the change in this quantity is given by Kirchoff's law in terms of
the change in specific heat. The change in this quantity when dissolving a substance at infinite
dilution is zero for an ideal solution. Its differential equals TdS + Vdp, and its partial derivative with
respect to temperature is the heat capacity at constant pressure. The change in this quantity equals
the (*) heat transferred in a reaction at constant pressure. The Born-Haber cycle calculates this quantity for
ionic lattices using the fact that this quantity is a state function and hence path-independent, as stated by
Hess's law. It is equal to internal energy plus pressure times volume. For 10 points, name this
thermodynamic quantity symbolized H.
ANSWER: enthalpy
This quantity is plotted on the y-axis of the Mollier diagram. The negative of the change in this quantity is
divided by the square of the temperature in the Gibbs-Helmholtz equation. This quantity minus the product
of temperature and entropy equals Gibbs free energy. Its change for an overall reaction equals the sum of
the changes of each step according to Hess's law. The change in this quantity is negative in an exothermic
reaction. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized H that is equal to the internal energy of a system plus
the product of pressure and volume.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on "H"]
This quantity is plotted on the y axis against entropy in a Mollier diagram. The heat capacity at constant
pressure is given by the derivative of this quantity with respect to temperature, and this quantity appears in
the numerator divided by RT across from the derivative of the log of pressure with respect to temperature in
the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. Joule-Thomson cooling occurs at a constant value of this quantity, which
can be written as the derivative of the log of the partition function with respect to the inverse temperature.
For ten points, identify this quantity which is used to calculate heat transfer, often across phases, and is
defined as the internal energy plus the product of pressure and volume.
ANSWER: enthalpy
One process in which this quantity is constant is called a throttling process. The natural variables of this
potential are pressure and entropy. Two terms must be added to the Helmholtz free energy to derive this
potential. The statement that this quantity is a state function and hence can be computed using a Born-Haber
cycle is known as Hess's law. Since most chemical reactions aren't conducted at constant volume, this
potential is more useful than the internal energy for determining whether a reaction is exothermic. For 10
points, name this quantity typically denoted "H" that measures the heat content of a system.
ANSWER: enthalpy [accept lattice enthalpy; prompt on "lattice energy"; prompt on "energy"; prompt on "heat"; prompt on "H"]
This quantity is invariant for a gas travelling across a shock wave. For an isobaric process, the
change in this quantity is directly proportional to the specific heat, and it can also be defined as internal
energy plus pressure times volume. The quantity of this type associated with lattices is the amount of
energy required to convert solid atoms into gaseous ions. For a given reaction it must be constant,
regardless of the pathway, according to Hess's law. Gibbs free energy is a function of temperature,
entropy, and this quantity. For 10 points, identify this state function.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on H; prompt on heat content]
Lithium fluoride has the largest hydration value of this quantity of any halide (HAL-"ide") salt, and the
energy calculated by the Born-Haber cycle is also called the lattice type of this. When the temperature and
equilibrium constants are known, the change in this quantity can be found using the van't Hoff equation. For
a closed system, this quantity is equal to internal energy plus pressure times volume, and the change in this
quantity for each step of a reaction can be summed to find the total change by Hess' law. Indicating an
exothermic reaction when its change is negative, name this thermodynamic quantity symbolized H and used
to determine the heat content of a system.
ANSWER: enthalpy [do not accept or prompt on "heat"; do not accept or prompt on "heat content"]
Processes that leave this quantity constant include throttling. The process of breaking a chemical bond
always has a positive value of this quantity. Hess' law can be used to calculate the change in this quantity
for a multi-step process. This quantity is defined as a system's internal energy plus the product of its
pressure and its change in volume. The change in this value is always negative for exothermic processes
and positive for endothermic ones. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic variable, the change is which is
symbolized as delta H.
ANSWER: enthalpy
This quantity is plotted on the Y axis against entropy in a diagram used to find the "dryness fraction",
the Mollier diagram. The Joule-Thompson process keeps this quantity constant. The change in this quantity
can be calculated through the Born-Haber cycle using Hess' law. This quantity minus temperature times
entropy gives the Gibbs free energy. For 10 points, name this quantity whose change is used to characterize
whether a reaction is endo- or exothermic, usually symbolized H.
ANSWER: enthalpy [accept H until read]
The Joule-Thompson coefficient can be calculated by keeping this quantity constant and taking the
partial derivative of temperature with respect to pressure. The net change in this quantity for a reaction can
be calculated using Hess's Law. The change in Gibbs free energy can be calculated by subtracting the
temperature times the change in entropy from the change in this quantity. At constant pressure, a reaction is
exothermic when the change in this quantity is negative. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity
that is represented by H.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on H before mentioned]
This quantity remains constant in the Joule-Thomson effect. It equals internal energy plus the
product of pressure and volume. The Gibbs Free Energy is given by this quantity minus the product
of temperature and entropy. For a multi-step reaction, it can be calculated independently of the
pathway and is equal to the sum of its changes in each step according to (*) Hess's Law. It is positive
for an endothermic reaction. For 10 points, name this "heat content" of a thermodynamic system,
symbolized capital H.
ANSWER: enthalpy [accept H until it is read; do not accept or prompt on "lowercase 'h'"]
The Joule-Thompson coefficient results in a process during which this quantity is conserved through
throttling. This quantity is calculated by multiplying the pressure of a system times the volume of
that system and adding that to the system's overall energy. When the product of temperature and (*)
entropy is subtracted from this state variable, the result is Gibb's free energy. The total change in this
quantity in a reaction is found by adding up its changes during each step of that reaction according to Hess'
Law. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic property symbolized H, the total heat content of a reaction.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on H until mentioned]
The change in this quantity equals the temperature times the change in entropy plus the volume times the
change in pressure. The derivation of that formula takes advantage of the fact that change in energy equals
the amount of work done to a system minus the work done by a system. Gibbs free energy is found by
subtracting temperature times entropy from this quantity, which is a sum of internal energy plus the product
of volume times pressure. In a constant pressure system, the change in this quantity also equals the energy
added through heat. Name this quantity represented with a capital H.
ANSWER: enthalpy (prompt on "H")
Though not superconductivity, Heike Kamerlingh-Onnes coined its name. It remains constant when
gases are forced through a pipe in the Joule-Thomson effect. For quasistatic processes at constant
pressure, one can use standard state values of this quantity, independent of [*] reaction pathway, to
calculate change in this quantity using Hess's law. Positive values of it denote endothermic reactions while
negative ones indicate exothermic reactions. Though not heat, it has a standard 'change of formation', and
can be given as internal energy plus pressure times volume. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic
property used to calculate heat transfer, symbolized H.
ANSWER: enthalpy [accept H until "H" is read]
Unlike temperature, this quantity is held constant in the Joule-Thomson effect. Given this quantity for
individual steps of a reaction, one can find this quantity for the overall reaction by using Hess's law. The
difference between this quantity and the product of temperature and entropy is Gibbs free energy. For 10
points, identify this thermodynamic state function which is symbolized H, often referred to as the heat
content of a system.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on H until it is read; do not accept or prompt on "entropy"]
This quantity remains unchanged in the throttling process, as well as in an adiabatic process that
is irreversible and does no work. This state variable's total for a given reaction is independent of the
number of steps involved according to (*) Hess's law. This quantity is equal to internal energy plus
pressure times volume. Its change is negative for exothermic reactions. For 10 points, name this quantity
whose change, in a system at constant pressure, is equal to the heat absorbed or released.
ANSWER: enthalpy
This quantity can be estimated for a given liquid using Watson's equation using its critical temperature.
Kirchoff's equation can be used to estimate how this value for a reaction changes with temperature, and the
Clausius-Clapeyron equation directly relates this quantity for vaporization to the natural log of vapor
pressure. The change in this quantity divided by temperature is always less than the (*) entropy change for
a spontaneous process, and calorimeters are used to measure this value for a reaction. For ten points, name
this thermodynamic quantity, which like Gibb's free energy can be calculated using Hess's law.
ANSWER: enthalpy (accept enthalpy of vaporization before "reaction")
One form of this quantity that describes an ionic solid can be calculated through a process that
includes the ionization energy of a metal atom and the dissociation energy and electron affinity for a
non-metal. That process, the Born-Haber cycle, calculates the *lattice form of this quantity. One law
states that the change in this quantity for a reaction equals the sum of the change of this quantity for
the products minus the sum of the change of this quantity for the reactants. This quantity, calculated
using Hess's law, can be defined as the internal energy plus the product of pressure and volume. For 10
points, name this thermodynamic property symbolized with an H.
ANSWER: enthalpy (prompt on "H" before mentioned, accept lattice enthalpy or lattice energy before "lattice" is mentioned, prompt on delta H, accept change in enthalpy)
This value may be more conveniently regarded as a function of temperature and pressure instead of as a
function of temperature and volume. In endothermic reactions, the change in this parameter is greater than
zero; temperature falls under consequent adiabatic conditions, and heat enters a system with a transfer that
at constant pressure is positive under isothermal conditions. In exothermic reactions, the change in this
parameter is less than zero, resulting in a temperature rises under adiabatic conditions and heat exits with a
transfer at constant pressure that is negative under isothtermal conditions. Through the chain rule, the exact
differential of this parameter may be found by adding the differential of the internal energy of a system, the
product of the pressure and the differential of the volume, as well as the product of the volume and the
differential of the temperature. For 10 points, name this state function determined by adding the internal
energy of a system to the product of pressure and volume, abbreviated H.
ANSWER: enthalpy
The slope of a coexistence curve is proportional to a form of this quantity divided by temperature.
This quantity is the integral of the constant-pressure heat capacity with respect to temperature. It
equals internal energy plus PV. The most common statement of (*) Hess's Law is that this quantity is a
state function. For 10 points, name this quantity, the heat transferred at constant pressure, which often
measures the energy change associated with a chemical reaction.
ANSWER: enthalpy [or latent heat before "heat capacity"; prompt on "heat" or "heat of reaction"]
Vertical lines on Mollier diagrams display transformations in which this quantity is unchanged. This
quantity remains constant for a system in a throttling process. The van't Hoff equation states that the
derivative of the natural log of the equilibrium constant with respect to inverse temperature is equal
to negative change in this quantity divided by the ideal gas constant. For transformations occurring at
constant pressure, it is equal to the change in the internal energy of the system, and the product of
temperature and change in entropy subtracted from change in it is the change in the Gibbs energy of a
reaction. For 10 points, identify this thermodynamic quantity symbolized H.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on H]
The Joule-Thompson process keeps this quantity constant, and in the Van't Hoff equation, the
negative change in this quantity is divided by the ideal gas law. For an isobaric process, the change in
this quantity is equal to the heat added. It is equal to the internal energy plus (*) pressure times
volume, and the change in this quantity plus the temperature times the change in entropy is equal to the
change in the Gibbs Free energy. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity symbolized H.
ANSWER: enthalpy
One form of the law of conservation of energy states that, like internal energy, the change in this
quantity equals the amount of heat flow minus the amount of work done, because it is equal to the
sum of internal energy and the product of pressure and volume. The change in this state variable can
also be given by the sum of the change in Gibbs free energy and the product of temperature and the
change in entropy. With units of joules per kilogram, for 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity
denoted H.
ANSWER: enthalpy [prompt on H before read]
In the Peng-Robinson equation, the departure function for this quantity is equal to R times critical
temperature times a function of the compressibility factor. The change in this quantity is divided by
negative 2kt in the exponential of the expression giving the density of Schottky defects in a crystal.
Both this quantity and the mass flow rate are held constant along a Fanno line. When a gas is forced
through an insulated, porus plug, this quantity is held constant. For an ideal solution, the (*) change
in this quantity upon solvation is zero. This quantity, which is held constant during a Joule-Thomson
process, is equal to the internal energy plus pressure times volume. The fact that this quantity is a state
function leads to Hess' Law. The change in this quantity determines whether a reaction is endo or
exothermic. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized H.
ANSWER: enthalpy
This quantity, for systems with geometrical frustration, is nonzero at absolute zero. The fluctuation
theorem gives the probability that over time this quantity decreases. An experimentally useless form
of the Clausius-Clapeyron equation has the slope of the coexistence curve equal the change in this
quantity over the change in volume. Allowing different gases to (*) mix increases this quantity. This
extensive quantity is the conjugate variable of temperature and, for an ideal gas, its change is the focus of
the H theorem. This quantity is equal to the Boltzmann constant times the logarithm of the number of
microstates. For an irreversible process, this quantity increases over time according to the Second Law of
Thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this quantity, a measure of a system's disorder.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on S]
Even though this quantity is not part of the Clausius theorem, when this quantity is constant the Clausius
theorem is an equation rather than an inequality. Clausius defined change in this quantity as the change in
heat divided by the temperature, and the product of this quantity with temperature is subtracted from
enthalpy to calculate Gibbs free energy. This quantity is lowered by Maxwell's demon, a being which
cannot exist. This quantity used to be thought of as waste energy, since an increase in this quantity meant a
decrease in the amount of useful work a system was capable of. Name this quantity which, according to the
2nd Law of Thermodynamics, always increases.
ANSWER: entropy
Dinaburg and Bowen improved on Adler, Konheim, and McAndrew's introduction of a topological
variety of this quantity, and a measure theoretic quantity for dynamical systems by this name is
named for Kolmogorov and Sinai. The relative type of this quantity is equivalent to the KullbackLeibler divergence, and Landauer's principle posits that lost (*) information corresponds to an increase
in this quantity. In information theory, a version of it is named for Claude Shannon, and the change in this
quantity is equal to the change in the heat over the change in the temperature. It is multiplied by the
temperature and subtracted from the enthalpy in the definition of Gibbs free energy. FTP, name this
quantity, symbolized S, which is a measure of a system's disorder.
ANSWER: Entropy
Changes in this quantity due to mixing are the concern of the Gibbs paradox. Given by Boltzmann's
constant times the log of the number of microstates, its changes may equal heat divided by
temperature. This state function is zero in a perfect (*) crystal at 0 Kelvin and it cannot decrease in
isolated systems, by the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Denoted S, for 10 points, name this quantity
measuring a system's disorder.
ANSWER: entropy (prompt on "S" before mentioned; do not accept "enthalpy")
One version of this quantity is equal to the trace of the density matrix, and this quantity is the macroscopic
quantity that characterizes the microcanonical ensemble. One equation states that this quantity is the product
of Boltzmann's constant and the natural logarithm of the number of microstates of a system. The third law
of thermodynamics states that this quantity is zero for a perfect crystal at absolute zero. For 10 points, name
this thermodynamic quantity, higher for gases than for liquids or solids, the measure of disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy
One equation for this quantity states that it is proportional to the natural log of the possible number of
microstates of a system. Subtracting the product of this quantity and temperature from enthalpy yields
Gibbs free energy. Clausius (CLAW-see-us) defined the change in this quantity as heat over temperature,
and heat only flows if this quantity is positive. For 10 points, name this subject of the Second Law of
Thermodynamics that is symbolized S, the measure of the ever-increasing disorder of a closed system.
ANSWER: entropy
At constant temperature, the change in this quantity equal n times R times the natural logarithm of the
ratio of volumes. It can be written as the sum of the probabilities of the microstates multiplied by
Boltzmann's constant. It is linked to Q over T in several theorems. This quantity approaches zero as the
temperature approaches absolute zero according to the Third Law of Thermodynamics. Enthalpy minus this
quantity times the change in temperature equals the change in Gibbs free energy. For 10 points, name this
quantity symbolized S, a measure of disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on S before mention]
At constant temperature, the partial derivative of this quantity with respect to volume is equal to the
partial derivative of pressure with respect to temperature at constant volume according to one of the
Maxwell relations. This conjugate variable to temperature is proportional to the log of the number of
microstates. Clausius defined the change in it as the heat over the temperature. It should theoretically be
zero at absolute zero. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic measure of disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on S]
One equation for this quantity demonstrates that it is proportional to the logarithm of the internal energy
density and provides a valid approximation of this quantity for monatomic ideal gases. In addition to being
calculated by the Sackur-Tetrode equation, this quantity is equal to the negative partial derivative of Gibbs
free energy with respect to temperature. This quantity is also given by Boltzmann's constant multiplied by
the logarithm of the number of microstates, and the third law of thermodynamics gives its value at absolute
zero to be 0 for a perfect crystal. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic measure of disorder.
ANSWER: entropy
This quantity equals the natural logarithm of the number of possible states multiplied by the
Boltzmann constant. Heat content divided by temperature equals a change in this quantity as defined
by Rudolph Clausius. Dividing the quantity of enthalpy minus Gibbs free energy by temperature
results in this measurement that increases over (*) time according to the second law of
thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this quantity that measures a system's randomness.
ANSWER: entropy
The change in this quantity equals 10.5 times the gas constant for the boiling of various liquids
according to Trouton's Rule. At equilibrium, the change in this quantity is equal to the change in
enthalpy over the temperature. For a chemical reaction, the sign of it can be predicted by measuring
the moles of (*) gas on both sides of the equation. A crystal at zero Kelvin has a value of 0 for this
property, which, according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, increases in the universe for every
spontaneous process. For ten points, name this measurement of a system's disorder symbolized S.
ANSWER: entropy (or S before mention)
In contrast to the Helmholtz free energy, the Massieu [mas-syoe] potential is also known as the Helmholtz
free amount of this quantity. The amount of this added to a system is calculated in the Clausius inequality,
and this value is maximized at equilibrium. This equals the reciprocal of temperature integrated with respect
to energy, and this is proportional to the log of the number of states a gas can occupy. Name this quantity
which, according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, never decreases in an isolated system.
ANSWER: entropy
A change in this quantity can be calculated by integrating supplied heat divided by the temperature
at which it is supplied. This quantity is zero for a perfect crystal, and reactions with a positive change
in this quantity become more product-favored as (*) temperature increases. One formula for this
quantity sets it equal to Boltzmann's constant times the natural log of the number of microstates. This
quantity's SI units are joules per mole kelvin. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity that must
increase by the second law of thermodynamics, a measure of the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy
For an ideal gas, this quantity is equal to the number of moles times Boltzmann's constant, times the sum of
five halves and the natural log of the quantity one over moles times volume divided by the cube of the
thermal wavelength. For molecules in a solid, this quantity can be expressed as one over temperature times
the difference between internal energy and zero point energy, plus the natural log of the rotational partition
function times the product of moles and Boltzmann's constant. This quantity is also equal to the enthalpy
minus Gibbs free energy, all over temperature. It is always increasing by the Second Law of
Thermodynamics. For 10 points, give this thermodynamic quantity symbolized S, which measures the
amount of disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy
This quantity is equal to n times R times the natural log of the final volume over the initial volume for an
isothermal process. The derivative of the Gibbs energy with respect to temperature is negative one times
this quantity. The change in this quantity is negative for the gas-phase reaction of ammonia and
hydrochloric acid to produce solid ammonium chloride. For a reaction with a positive change in enthalpy,
this quantity must be positive for a spontaneous reaction to occur. For 10 points, name this quantity that
represents the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy
This quantity for an ideal gas can be calculated by the Sackur-Tetrode equation, while another equation uses
this quantity, temperature, and enthalpy to calculate Gibbs free energy. The Third Law of thermodynamics
states that its value at absolute zero is zero. Symbolized as S, this quantity has a unit of joules per kelvin,
and according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, this quantity will always increase over time. For 10
points, name this quantity, which measures the amount of disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy
The probability the time-averaged value for this property takes a given value over the probability it
takes the opposite value follows an exponential function, as shown in the fluctuation theorem. The
H-theorem shows the change of this property in an ideal gas is irreversible. The H-theorem was developed
by the same man who defined this property as the logarithm of available microstate times Boltzmann's
constant. Clausius define it as the line integral of change in heat over temperature. The second law of
thermodynamics states this value must universally be increasing. For 10 points, name this measure of a
system's disorder.
ANSWER: entropy
In a reversible process, the change in this quantity for an ideal gas equals Cp times the log of the
temperature ratio minus R times the log of the pressure ratio. Maxwell's relations relate the first partial
derivatives of pressure, volume, temperature, and this quantity. For a reservoir absorbing heat, the change in
this quantity equals the heat divided by the temperature of the reservoir. It is multiplied by temperature in a
formula for Helmholtz free energy, and lost work can be attributed to increases in this quantity, which
occurs for every spontaneous process according to the second law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, name
this measurement of disorder symbolized S.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on "S" before mention]
If all microstates of a system have equal probability of occurring, this quantity equals Boltzmann's
constant times the logarithm of the number of microstates. The change in this quantity is often defined as
change in heat over unit temperature. It is multiplied by temperature and subtracted from enthalpy to get
Gibbs free energy. The second law of thermodynamics states any spontaneous reaction will result in the
quantity increasing. For 10 points, name this measure of disorder in a system, usually symbolized S.
ANSWER: entropy
The change in this quantity is approximately the same for all liquids at their boiling temperature according
to Trouton's rule. Taking the negative partial derivative of the Helmholtz free energy with respect to
temperature gives this quantity, which can be calculated for ideal gases by the Sackur-Tetrode equation.
Equal to the Boltzmann constant times the natural log of the number of microstates, this quantity can be
decreased by the hypothetical Maxwell's demon. The second law of thermodynamics states all spontaneous
processes lead to an increase in this property for the universe. For 10 points, name this property that
measures the disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy
For one type of object, this quantity is proportional to the cube of the speed of light and one-fourth the
area of the object. For an ideal gas, this property approaches negative infinity as temperature approaches
absolute zero, as a consequence of the natural logarithm term in the Sackur-Tetrode equation. In
information theory, it is proportional to the sum over all possible values of a random variable of the
quantity p sub i times natural log of p sub i. That relation is derived from a similar equation, stating it is
proportional to the natural log of the number of microstates of a system, elucidated by Ludwig Boltzmann.
For 10 points, name this ever-increasing quantity that measures the amount of disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on S]
On a certain type of thermodynamic diagram, lines along which this quantity is constant are given by an
expression in which one quantity is raised to the ratio of specific heats; those lines are called adiabats. The
difference between the Gibbs free energy and the enthalpy is equal to this quantity times temperature, to
which it is conjugate. This quantity can be measured in units of Boltzmann's constant, which is the
proportionality factor relating it to the logarithm of the number of available microstates. This quantity is
non-decreasing, according to the second law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this quantity that is a
measure of disorder.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on "S"]
Lieb and Yngvason's axiomatic definition of this quantity builds on Caratheodory's. The Sackur-Tetrode
equation gives its value for an ideal gas, and for an isothermal reversible process the change in this value is
the energy transferred divided by the temperature. This qunatity is related to the number of (*) possible
microstates. The third law of thermodynamics defines this value to be zero in a perfect crystal at absolute
zero, and the second law of thermodynamics states the value of this quantity for the universe increases in a
spontaneous process. For 10 points, identify this measure of the degree of disorder in a system, symbolized
S.
ANSWER: entropy
The discontinuous behavior of this quantity when two substances are mixed is the subject of the Gibbs
paradox. Boltzmann rigorously defined this quantity for a system as being proportional to the natural
logarithm of the number of microstates corresponding to an observed macrostate. The Sackur-Tetrode
equation, derived from that definition, allows for this quantity to be calculated for an ideal monatomic gas.
In differential form it appears in the definition of Gibbs free energy; its product with absolute temperature is
subtracted from enthalpy to correct for energy in the system unavailable to do work. Therefore it is often
thought of as the amount of disorder in a system. FTP, name this quantity symbolized "S" that, according to
the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics, is always increasing in a closed system.
ANSWER: Entropy
A transition occurs where this changes sign, and Lieb and Yngvason treated it as a monotonic, additive,
extensive function. Stirling's formula is often used in deriving its value for a monoatomic ideal gas; that
value is given by the Sakur-Tetrode equation. For a microscopic system, it is calculated by
multiplying Boltzmann's constant by the natural log of possible microstates, and multiplying the change in
this by temperature and adding the change in enthalpy yields the free energy of a system. For 10 points,
what is this thermodynamic quantity which represents the amount of disorder in a system and is symbolized
S?
ANSWER: Entropy
For an isothermal process, the change in this quantity is equal to nR (en are) times the natural log of the
ratio of volumes. Heat capacity is equal to temperature times the partial derivative of this quantity with
respect to temperature. This quantity can be calculated by finding the natural logs of available microstates,
and its change is equal to the change in heat divided by temperature. It can be defined as the amount of
thermal energy in a system that cannot do useful work, and the second law of thermodynamics means that
for the universe this is always increasing. For 10 points, name this measurement of disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy
For reversible isobaric processes, the molar version of this quantity is equal to the molar heat capacity
times the natural log of the ratio of final to initial temperatures. By Trouton's Rule, its molar version for
vaporization processes is approximately eighty-eight Joules per mole Kelvin. It is equal to Boltzmann's
constant times the natural log of the number of microstates according to a formula written on Boltzmann's
tombstone. For 10 points, name this measure of disorder of a system, symbolized S.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on early S]
In drug design, to minimized unfavorable changes in this quantity upon binding, scientists prefer rigid
skeletons. The source of the Gibbs paradox is an incomplete measurement of this property, inadequately
describing the increase in this quantity when two unlike substances mix. This quantity may be defined in
information theory as proportional to the negative logarithm of the number of microstates of a system, while
classically it is the integral of one over temperature with respect to heat. This quantity tends to increase or
remain the same over time. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity, a measure of the disorder of a
system.
ANSWER: entropy
Information theory makes use of a form of this phenomenon named after Claude Shannon, and
another form is equal to Boltzmann's constant times the natural log of the number of microstates. It
is multiplied with the temperature when calculating both Helmholtz's and Gibb's free energy, and it
is the subject of the (*) third law of thermodynamics, which states that this quantity equals zero at absolute
zero. Introduced by Rudolf Clausius, this phenomenon always increases according to the second law of
thermodynamics. For 10 points, identify this quantity that is symbolized with a capital S and defined as the
measure of a system's disorder.
ANSWER: entropy
The residual type of this quantity remains when a system is cooled towards absolute zero. According to
one definition, this quantity is proportional to the natural logarithm of the number of microstates. Change in
this quantity can be measured as heat input over temperature, and, in an isolated system, this quantity
increases over time according to the second law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this quantity,
symbolized S, which is associated with the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy [prompt on S before it is read]
The Ornstein theorem states that Bernoulli schemes which have equivalent values for this are
isomorphic, while another type of this is given by the logarithm of the covering number, and is
named for Kolmogorov. One form of this quantity useful in information theory is named for Claude
Shannon, and for an ideal monoatomic gas it is given by the Sackur-Tetrode equation. For an irreversible
process, this quantity is always greater for the system and its surroundings according to the second law of
thermodynamics. For 10 points, identify this quantity which describes the degree of disorder of a system,
usually represented by the letter S.
ANSWER: entropy
This quantity is equal to n times R times the natural log of the final volume over the initial volume for an
isothermal process. The derivative of the Gibbs energy with respect to temperature is negative one times
this quantity. The change in this quantity is negative for the gas-phase reaction of ammonia and
hydrochloric acid to produce solid ammonium chloride. For a reaction with a positive change in enthalpy,
this quantity must be positive for a spontaneous reaction to occur. For 10 points, name this quantity that
represents the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy
This quantity is responsible for the stability of point defects but not line or plane defects. A factor of
root N factorial was introduced to this quantity to account for identical particles and keep this quantity
extensive as this quantity increased by a factor of log 2 when two gases were mixed. The Rankine, Otto and
Carnot cycles include two steps where this quantity is held constant. Two of the four common
thermodynamic potentials include a negative term where it is multiplied by temperature. In the Clausius
inequality, the change in it is given as the line integral of the change in total heat over time. It equals
Boltzmann's constant times the log of the number of microstates. For 10 points, name this quantity
symbolized S that represents the disorder of a system.
ANSWER: entropy [or S until it is read]
This quantity can be expressed as the derivative of Helmholtz free energy with respect to temperature,
and can also be expressed as Boltzmann's constant times the natural log of the microstates. This quantity
can be described as a system's tendency towards positions with higher probabilities, and the second law of
thermodynamics indicates that it is always increasing. For 10 points, identify this property which is
sometimes described as the disorder of a system, symbolized S.
ANSWER: entropy
This property is the only one responsible for the direction of time's arrow. The change in this quantity
multiplied by temperature and subtracted from the change in enthalpy gives Gibb's free energy. This
property is measured in joules per Kelvin. The value of this quantity will either remain the same or increase
according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this measure that can never
decrease in a closed system, and which is a measure of the amount of disorder in a system.
ANSWER: entropy
The von Neumann form of this concept is given in terms of the trace of a density matrix times its log. The
Sackur-Tetrode equation gives this quantity extensively, avoiding the Gibbs paradox. Defined as the
Boltzmann constant times natural log of the number of microstates, it is multiplied by temperature in the
expression for Gibbs free energy. Maxwell's hypothetical demon purports to lowers this quantity.
Symbolized by the letter S, its tendency to increase is dictated by the second law of thermodynamics. For 10
points, name this quantity, a measure of a system's disorder.
ANSWER: entropy
The Clausius-Clapeyron equation states that the change in this quantity over the change in volume is
equal to the derivative of vapor pressure with respect to temperature, and for an isothermal process,
the change in this quantity is equal to nR times the natural log of the ratio of the volumes. The
Helmholtz energy is equal to the (*) internal energy minus temperature times this quantity, while for a
perfect crystal, this quantity is equal to 0. It always increases or stays constant by the second law of
thermodynamics, and reactions are spontaneous when they have positive changes in, for ten points, what
quantity, symbolized S, the measure of disorder in a system?
ANSWER: Entropy
A hydroxyl version of this functional group is isomerized in the Payne rearrangement, and aflatoxin
damages DNA after one of these moieties is added to it by the P450 system. One method of
synthesizing them uses a catalyst with a manganese-III salen-like ligand dissolved with sodium
hypochlorite, while another uses DET and titanium isopropoxide. A third method reacts a carbonyl
with a sulfonium ylide. They can be opened with a Grignard reagent in an SN2-like reaction or protonated
with sulfuric acid and then opened in an SN1-like reaction. Besides the Jacobsen, Sharpless, and CoreyChaykovsky reactions, this functional group can be created from halohydrins in an intermolecular
Williamson synthesis. They have lots of ring strain due to the sixty-degree angle of their bonds. For 10
points, name this functional group, a three-member ring with two carbons and one oxygen.
ANSWER: Epoxides or oxiranes (prompt on ethers)
Nakanishi hypothesized that a cascade reaction of these functional groups might generated certain
ladder compounds found in red tides. The Payne rearrangement leads to the isomerization of this
functional group. The reaction of trimethylsulfonium iodide, base, and a ketone yields this functional
group in one reaction, though that reaction can also create the similar aziridine group when a
nitrogen containing compound is used. A more canonical synthesis makes use a concerted
intermediate step resembling a (*) butterfly and uses an olefin and peracid as reactants--that synthesis is
sometimes named for Prilezhaev. This functional group can be "opened" by nucleophiles to relieve ring
strain and yields an alcohol. FTP, name this functional group similar to a cyclic ether which consists of a
three-membered ring containing an oxygen atom.
ANSWER: epoxide [accept oxirane]
Meso versions of these compounds yield beta-amino alcohols in the presence of Antimony (III) Chloride
catalysts when reacted with aromatic amines, while Jung and Murphy studied the use of Tungsten
hexachloride to form trans-vicinal dichlorides from them. A dimethyloxosulfonium methylide is used to
synthesize these compounds from carbonyl compounds via the Johnson-Corey-Chaykovsky reaction, and
they can be produced enantioselectively from allylic alcohols through the Sharpless reaction. Alkenes react
with mCPBA to form these compounds via a "butterfly mechanism," but they can be more commonly
synthesized by an intramolecular SN2 reaction in a halohydrin. The high bond-angle strain in these
compounds makes them susceptible to ring opening under strong acidic or basic conditions. For 10 points,
identify this class of ethers which feature 3-member rings.
ANSWER: epoxides or oxiranes
These compounds can be formed by a modification of the Wittig reaction that uses sulfur ylides with
ketones and aldehydes. An enantioselective reaction that uses allylic alcohols in the presence of diethyl
tartarate and t-butyl hydroperoxide can be used to create these compounds. Those are the
Corey-Chaykovsky and Sharpless reactions for these compounds. The aza variant of these compounds are
called aziridines, in which the oxygen atom found in these compounds is replaced with nitrogen. These
compounds can be created by reacting MCPBA with an alkene in a reaction that contains the "butterfly
mechanism." That is the Prilezhaev reaction. For 10 points, name these cyclic ethers that are commonly
used in adhesives.
ANSWER: epoxides [or oxirane; or oxacyclopropane]
Sodium hypochlorite and methyl dichloride react with trans-alkenes to from them in the Jacobsen-Katsuki
reaction. Another reaction uses sulfur ylides and ketones in DMSO to yield them, and that reaction is named
after Johnson, Corey, and Chaykovsky. Yet another synthesis of these compounds, the Prilezhaev reaction,
proceeds through the so-called "Butterfly Mechanism," while enantioselective versions of them are created
from allylic alcohols via a reaction named after Sharpless. They are most commonly formed by an oxygen
in the spiro position attacking a double bond, with the use of a peracid like mCPBA to donate the oxygen.
For 10 points, name these molecules that all have a three-membered ring containing oxygen.
ANSWER: epoxides
Two examples of this type of expression named for Berthelot and Dieterici include an empirical b
term with units of volume. A simple example that can be derived from kinetic theory sets the heat
capacity ratio to either five thirds or seven fifths. One example of these is a power series developed
by Clausius and sets the average kinetic energy equal to half the average potential energy. One of
these equations contains (*) a and b terms to describe intermolecular forces and is named for a Dutch
scientist, while one of the simplest of these can be derived by combining laws named for Boyle and GayLussac and holds at low pressure and high temperature. For 10 points, name this type of equation which
describes the relation between pressure, volume and temperature, such as the ideal gas equation.
ANSWER: Equation of State for a gas [accept Gas Laws, prompt on "EOS"]
Depending on whether a system is isobaric or isothermal, there may exist invariant, univariant or
divariant forms of this condition, a fact reflected in the Gibbs phase rule. In chemistry, ICE charts may be
used to calculate property values for a reaction in this state. Statics is the study of a form of this condition
in which the net moments and forces on a are both zero. The thermal form of this condition is transitive
according to the zeroth law of thermodynamics. Chemical ones of these are stable as Le Chatelier's
principle states that a system perturbed from this state will shift back toward it. For 10 points, name this
condition in which, roughly speaking, a system will not change over time unless acted upon by outside
forces.
ANSWER: equilibrium
Peter Waage and Cato Guldberg developed a mathematical model to describe one form of this condition.
The van't Hoff equation relates the change in temperature with the change in one quantity related to this
condition, and in this condition, the Henderson-Hasselbach equation assumes that the acid does not
dissociate and that the conjugate base does not hydrolyze. The law of mass action describes this state, which
is reached when Gibbs Free Energy equals zero. Le Chatelier's principle is used to describe changes in this
state. For 10 points, name this state in which both forward and reverse reaction rates are the same.
ANSWER: Chemical Equilibrium
Changes in this property's namesake coefficient due to temperature are measured by using the van't Hoff
equation. The bottom row of an ICE table contains the concentrations of the relevant species in this
condition. When a reaction reaches this state, its namesake coefficient is equal to the reaction quotient. Le
Chatelier's principle states that when a system in this state is disturbed, it will shift to restore the system to
this state. For 10 points, name this chemical state at which a reaction proceeds at the same rate as its reverse
reaction.
ANSWER: equilibrium
The Schlenk variety of this property is found in solutions of Grignard reagents, and the temperature
dependence of this condition is modeled by the van't Hoff equation. The standard Gibbs free energy of
reaction is the product of negative one, the gas constant, temperature, and the natural log of this state's
namesake constant. Guldberg and Waage discovered the mathematical expression describing it, the Law of
Mass Action. Coming in solubility, vapor, and dynamic forms, for ten points, name this chemical state in
which the forward and reverse reactions occur at the same rate.
ANSWER: chemical equilibrium
The law of mass action describes the dynamic type of this state. Changes in concentration at this state
are calculated via ICE tables, and Le Chatelier's principle states that systems tend toward this
condition. The concentration quotient is (*) 1 at this state, and the self-ionization of water is due to this
property between H3O+ ["H-three-O plus"] and OH- ["O-H minus"] ions. Double half arrows represent, for
10 points, what state in which the forward and reverse reactions are the same?
ANSWER: chemical equilibrium
This state was mathematically modeled by Peter Waage and Cato Maximilian Guldberg in the law of mass
action. The constant representing it is related to temperature change and enthalpy change by the van' t Hoff
equation. This state is achieved when a system minimizes its Gibbs free energy. This state shifts when
temperature, pressure, volume, or concentration changes according to Le Chatelier's principle. For 10
points, name this chemical state in which the forward and reverse reaction rates are the same, which results
in a stable chemical process.
ANSWER: chemical equilibrium
A molecular interpretation of Michaelis-Menten kinetics assumes that a fast one occurs between enzyme
and substrate, and the van't Hoff equation predicts how the properties of this state change with respect to
temperature. The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation assumes that the acid does not dissociate and the
conjugate base does not hydrolyze in this condition, and in special cases the law of mass action gives the
masses of reactants and products present. For 10 points, identify this condition, during which the forward
and reverse reaction rates are the same.
ANSWER: chemical equilibrium
The variety named for Schlenk involves magnesium filled Grignard reagents, while the constant
named for it appears in the van't Hoff equation and is the subject of the law of mass action. That
constant is the ratio of products of a reaction to its reactants, whose factors are powered by their
coefficients. Maximum entropy is usually a characteristic of, for ten points, what state, modified by Le
Chatelier's Law in which chemical's form products and reactants simultaneously.
ANSWER: equilibrium
In this state, the derivative of the Gibbs Free Energy with respect to the extent of reaction is zero.
The law of mass action applies to systems in this state. The ratio of the molarity of products to that of
reactants is used to calculate a (*) constant for this state. A shift in this state will occur to oppose the
change in a variable that describes a system in this state according to Le Chatelier's principle. For 10 points,
name this state of a system that can occur when the forward and reverse reactions of a system proceed at
the same rate.
ANSWER: chemical equilibrium
In the secular conformation form of this condition, the decay rate of a radioactive element is equal to the
production rate of the daughter nucleus. When a system emits and absorbs equal amounts of energy, the
radiative form of this condition is achieved. The Law of Mass Action describes this condition, and the
thermal type of this occurs when two objects reach the same temperature. The mechanical type occurs when
the net force and torque are zero. For 10 points, name this condition where all parts of a system are in a
state of complete balance.
ANSWER: equilibrium [prompt on "balance"]
Only when a chemical system containing multiple phases is at this state is the Clausius-Clayperon equation
able to describe the vapor pressure of the gaseous phase. For some reactions, catalysts can be used to
accelerate a reaction to this state, although they cannot change its composition. This is always assumed of
an analyte-titrant system, which allows calculation of analyte concentration at the equivalence point via
reaction stoichiometry. The Law of Mass Action describes the concentrations of reactants and products at
this state. For ten points, name this state, which exists when a reversible reaction ceases to change net
concentrations of reactants and products.
ANSWER: dynamic equilibrium
The effectiveness of dialysis relies on the Donnan form of this concept, which must be modified by the
Curtin-Hammett principle when side reactions occur. This concept corresponds to the minimum Gibbs free
energy and the presence of pure liquids and solids is ignored for the heterogeneous type. The law of mass
action can be used to find this concept's constant, and the effect of a shift in this state can be predicted by
Le Chatelier's principle. Existing when the forward and reverse rates of a reaction are the same, name this
chemical condition in which the concentrations of reactants and products do not change.
ANSWER: chemical equilibrium
The relationship between the constant associated with this state and temperature is given by the van't
Hoff equation. That constant is equal to the reaction quotient at an infinite time. Le Chatelier's
(shah-tuh-lee-AIRS) principle governs how this changes in response to a stimulus. The thermodynamic
variety of this occurs when two systems are at the same temperature. This state occurs when the rate of the
forward reaction equals the rate of the reverse reaction. For 10 points, name this state at which the amount
of products and reactants remains constant over time.
ANSWER: equilibrium
The derivative of the natural log of this quantity with respect to temperature is equal to the change in
enthalpy divided by the product of the gas constant and temperature squared. This quantity is equal to e
raised to the opposite of the change in Gibbs free energy divided by the gas constant times temperature. A
more general form of this quantity is the reaction quotient, which changes to match this value after a change
in reaction conditions occurs, according to Le Chatelier's principle. Equal to the ratio of the forward and
backward rate constants, for 10 points, name this quantity defined as the product of the products and
reactants each raised to their respective stoichiometric coefficients, symbolized K-sub-eq.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [prompt on K, accept Keq or K-sub-eq before mention.]
The change in Gibbs free energy is proportional to the negative natural log of this value. The most
accurate method of computing it involves using activity. The relationship of the reaction quotient to
this value is used to evaluate the effects of Le Chatlier's principle. This value is the ratio of the rate
of the (*) forward reaction to that of the reverse reaction, and it is usually calculated as reactant
concentrations over product concentrations. For 10 points, name this chemical value symbolized K.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [or K before mention]
For coordination complexes the value of this quantity for the whole complex, known as the stability
constant, is equal to the product of the stepwise values. The derivative of the natural log of this value with
respect to the inverse temperature is equal to the negative change in enthalpy over R. Activities are
approximated by using concentrations in the standard definition of this quantity in the law of mass action,
and it is equal to the ratio of the rate of the forward and reverse reaction. For 10 points, name this chemical
value equal to an expression involving the concentrations of products over reactants, symbolized K.
ANSWER: Equilibrium Constant [or K before mentioned]
For a certain phenomenon occurring in water, this quantity equals approximately 10 to the minus 14 at room
temperature. The logarithms of these quantities are proportional to changes in Gibbs free energy. ICE tables
are a bookkeeping method used in computing these quantities. Solid and inert reagents do not affect these
quantities, which are equal to the ratio of the forward and reverse rate constants. They are approximately
computed using the law of mass action and qualitatively evaluated using Le Chatelier's principle. For 10
points, name these constants, which indicate the degree to which a reaction will proceed before its
namesake state is reached.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [accept Keq; accept Kw; prompt on "reaction quotient"; prompt on "dissociation constant"]
The derivative of the natural log of this quantity with respect to time is equal to the enthalpy change
over R times T squared, according to the Van't Hoff equation. A constant calculated in the same
method as this one is Q, the reaction quotient, and (*) pure and inert substances do not affect its
calculation. This constant has forms named for the solubility product and acid dissociation, and it can be
calculated using the concentrations of the reactants and products. The state at which the rates of the forward
and backwards reactions are equal is represented by, for 10 points, what constant symbolized capital K?
ANSWER: equilibrium constant (or K, Keq, Ksp, Kc, Kp, Ka, or Kb before K is read)
For a complex, this value increases down the Irving-Williams series. The negative of this value is
the slope of a line in a Scatchard plot. One form of this quantity can be converted into another by
multiplying by RT raised to the difference in the number of moles of gas. The change in this quantity
for a given change in temperature is related to the enthalpy of the reaction by van't Hoff's equation.
The change in Gibbs free energy for a (*) reaction equals negative RT times the natural log of this
quantity. The law of mass action equates this value to the concentrations of the products divided by the
concentrations of the reactants. For 10 points, name this constant representing a chemical system where the
forward and reverse reactions have the same rate.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [or K; accept stability constant, association constant, dissociation constant, or binding constant]
For coordination complexes, this value is called the stability constant. The derivative of the log of this
quantity with respect to temperature is given by the van't Hoff equation. The natural log of this quantity is
proportional to the Gibbs free energy. This quantity is more accurately calculated using activities, and it is
found using the law of mass action. For 10 points, name this value symbolized K, which is found by taking
the ratio of the products to the reactants.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [or K until it is read]
In the denominator of the Hill equation, one form of this quantity is added to ligand concentration raised to
the nth power. A plot of the log of this quantity against one over temperature has a slope of negative
enthalpy divided by the gas constant. The change in Gibbs free energy in a reaction equals negative RT
times the log of this quantity. Le Chatelier's principle states that a shift to the right occurs when the reaction
quotient is less than this value. The law of mass action sets this quantity equal to the molarity of the
products over the reactants, each raised to their stoichiometric coefficients. For 10 points, name this
constant written K-sub-eq.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [or dissociation constant; or Keq before mention; do not accept "rate constant"]
For palladium (II) cyanide and EDTA ("E"-"D"-"T"-"A"), this value is found by introducing a weaker
ligand in the so-called competition method. In most circumstances, the activity coefficients are removed
from the equation to calculate this quantity, which for gas phase species is approximated by fugacity over
standard pressure. The van't Hoff equation states that for exothermic reactions, it decreases with increasing
temperature. This value is equal to x, x squared, 2 x cubed, and so on, if x is the molar solubility and the
reaction is dissociation. The law of mass action is used to find this quantity, which, if greater than Q, favors
the forward reaction. For 10 points, name this constant that relates concentrations of products and reactants.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [or Keq; or Keq]
This quantity increases as one goes up the Irving-Williams series, and Bjerrum developed a method
of calculating these values by altering the pH of a solution. For a metal-ligand complex, this value is
equivalent to the stability constant of the complex. The change in Gibbs free energy is proportional to
the negative ln of this value, which can only be calculated using activities of the species involved. This
value was defined by Guldberg and Waage in their Law of Mass Action, and this value is equal to the
rate of the forward reaction divided by the rate of the reverse reaction. Comparing this value to the reaction
quotient is a common method of applying Le Chatlier's principle. For 10 points, name this constant
calculated as products over reactants, usually symbolized K.
ANSWER: Equilibrium Constant [or K or stability constant before mention]
The equation stating that the derivative of this quantity's natural logarithm is inversely
proportional to heat and directly proportional the square of temperature is named after van't Hoff.
By the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, pH is equal to the base ten logarithm of this quantity for a
(*) half-dissociated acid. If two moles of A turn into three moles of B, then this quantity can be calculated
as the concentration of B, cubed, over the concentration of A, squared. For 10 points, name this constant
that equals one when the forward and reverse reaction rates are equal.
ANSWER: the equilibrium constant
An expression for this quantity involving partial fugacity is called the thermodynamic form of this quantity.
The change in enthalpy over the gas constant times the temperature squared is the logarithmic derivative of
this quantity with respect to temperature according to the van 't Hoff equation. The direction of a reaction
can be determined by comparing this quantity to the reaction quotient. This quantity is equal to the
concentrations of the products raised to their stochiometric coefficients divided by the concentrations of the
reactants raised to their stochiometric coefficients. For 10 points, name this constant that is attained when
there is no net reaction.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant
For nonideal gases, this quantity can be expressed in terms of the fugacity of each gas, while for aqueous
solutions the activity coefficient must be used. The natural log of this quantity multiplied by the negative of
the ideal gas constant and temperature equals Gibbs free energy. In some cases, the reaction quotient must
be used in place of this quantity. This quantity can be calculated by dividing the concentrations of the
products of a reaction by the concentrations of the reactants in the law of mass action. For 10 points, name
this constant symbolized by a capital K, which represents the point where a reaction has stabilized.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [accept Kc; accept Keq; accept K before it is mentioned]
At high concentrations, this quantity should be calculated with activity coefficients. The van't Hoff equation
relates this quantity to temperature, and the natural log of this quantity is directly proportional to the Gibbs
free energy of a reaction. Calculated without using liquid and solid species, for 10 points, name this
quantity, symbolized K, which is equal to ratio of the products to the reactants when the forward reaction
equals the reverse reaction.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant
Pure species are ignored during the computation of this value because they have no activity. The change
in Gibbs free energy is equal to negative RT times the natural log of this value. Comparing this value to the
reaction quotient is used to apply Le Chatlier's law, and this quantity is usually calculated as products over
reactants. For 10 points, name this quantity used to characterize reactions in which the forward and reverse
rates are equal, usually symbolized K.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [or mass action constant; accept K before it is read; accept reaction quotient or Q before it is read]
Multiplying one of these by RT raised to the delta-n power yields a different one of these, and standard
enthalpy change over R times T-squared is set equal to the change in the natural logarithm of one of these
with respect to temperature in the Van't Hoff equation. These are calculated as the product of the
concentrations of the products over the product of the concentrations of the reactants when the reverse and
forward reactions are proceeding at equal rates. Including acid and base dissociation varieties, For 10
points, name these constants denoted by K.
ANSWER: Equilibrium Constant
This value is proportional to an exponential of the negative columbic potential over RT in the FuossEigen equation. Along with stoichiometry and enthalpy changes, this value can be directly measured
in isothermal titration calorimetry, and it is found from the slope of a Scatchard plot. In coordination
complexes, the Irving-Williams series arranges metals by this property, which is equivalent to the
stability constant. The change in (*) Gibbs free energy is equal to the negative RT times natural log of
this value, which is actually a ratio of activities. First outlined by Guldberg and Waage in the law of mass
action, this quantity is equal to the ratio to the forward rate constant to the reverse rate constant. For 10
points, name this value which is a ratio of concentrations of reactants and products, symbolized K.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant [or mass action constant or binding constant or stability constant or Ka or Keq before mention]
The Curtin-Hammett principle states that product ratios are based on transition state ratios and not
this conformation value. The rate constant is related to this value by the Bronsted relation and its
temperature dependence is given by the (*) van't Hoff equation. It can be obtained from activities
through the law of mass action. The natural logarithm of this value times the gas constant and temperature
yields the standard Gibbs energy change of a reaction. For 10 points, name this constant that changes
according to Le Chatelier's principle.
ANSWER: equilibrium constant (or Keq, prompt on K)
This man's son, along with Plochl, developed a method using oxazolone and azlactone to synthesize
complex amino acids from glycine. This man names a rule stating that the ketone in a keto-enol
tautomerism is favored. While at the Munich Polytechnic School, this man designed an object that has a
narrow cylinder-shaped neck in order to stop spilling. For 10 points, name this German chemist who
developed a namesake conical flask.
ANSWER: Richard August Carl Emil Erlenmeyer
Some models of this process have a LS factor, and the most common model for it is the revised USLE.
This process comes in sheet, rill, and gully forms. It opposes orogeny and loosens the ped structure. The
products of this process can undergo deposition. Fluvial, aeolian, and glacial processes cause this process,
which can be increased by a lack of vegetation. It is similar to, but not the same as, the related concept of
weathering. For 10 points, name this process by which materials such as soil are moved, such as when a
stream wears down its banks.
ANSWER: erosion
Hugh Hammond Bennett was one of the first to study this phenomenon, calling it "a national menace" in the
title of a paper. An equation modeling this process includes factors for topographic effects and crop
management and is called the USLE. It's not the dispersal of fungal spores, but one mechanism by which
this process occurs is called rain splash. A gabion is a structure built to prevent this phenomenon, which
may involve particles moving by either saltation or creep. When the products of this process, which is often
paired with weathering, are deposited, they become sediment. For 10 points, name this process by which
soil and rocks are broken down by wind or water.
ANSWER: soil erosion
One of these events created the Siberian Traps and caused the Permian-Triassic extinction.
Lapilli and other tephra are produced by these events. These events can be classified as Strombolian
or Plinian. These events can cause a global decrease in temperature, such as the "winter" caused by
Pinatubo's. They are responsible for (*) lahars, which are similar to pyroclastic flows but contain more
water. These events create ash clouds and lava flows. For 10 points, name this event in which material is
ejected from a volcano.
ANSWER: volcanic eruptions [accept obvious equivalents such as a volcano erupting]
If this process occurs underneath a glacier, then sideromelane may be produced. Density currents
generated by this process deposit ignimbrite. The mixing of groundwater with the products of this
process leads to the creation of maars. A type of this process involves the formation of gas slugs, tuff,
and the creation of cow-pies, so named because they resemble manure. More generally this process
produces a namesake column whose height is proportional to the silica content of the (*) liquid
involved. Types of this process include phreatic, which leads to an explosion of steam, or Strombolian, in
which lapilli, ash, and bombs are expelled as tephra. For 10 points, name these events which might occur in
active, but not extinct, volcanoes.
ANSWER: volcanic eruptions [do not prompt on "volcanoes"]
The fissure type of this process tends to form spatter ramparts. A namesake column due to this
process results from volatiles, such as water, forming bubbles. Rapid ascent through a diatreme in
this process can create a "neck." The magnitude of this process is measured on the VEI scale. When
the product of this process is majorly andesitic, it forms a discontinuous or blocky surface; that product
of this process has its viscosity affected by temperature and silica and gas content. Types of this process
include Hawaiian, Strombolian, and Plinian. This process involves structures that can come in shield, stratoand cinder cone varieties. For 10 points, what is this process in which molten rock is spewed out on the
surface of the Earth?
ANSWER: volcanic eruptions [or volcanism; or fissure eruptions; prompt on obvious equivalents, such as lava coming out of volcanos onto the surface of the Earth]
Categories of items created by these events include lapilli and "bombs," and can be more generally
referred to as tephra. These events can cause the formation of lahars, which are composed of swiftly
flowing mud and pyroclastic debris. The (*) phreatic type of this event primarily produces steam, while
the Plinian type results in a column of gas and ash and ejects large amounts of pumice. Occurring constantly
at the Hawaiian Mauna Loa, for ten points, what are these events, which have occurred at Mount Vesuvius
and Mount St. Helens, often resulting in a flow of lava?
ANSWER: volcanic eruptions (prompt on volcano)
Cow-pie bombs are among the types of tephra that can be produced by these events. The Plinian
type of these occurrences is named after a man who wrote about one, and other types of them are
named after Pele and Stromboli. An extremely large one of these events occurred at Lake Toba, and
the loudest recorded sound in history came from one at (*) Krakatoa. The most dangerous parts of these
events are lahars and pyroclastic flows. For 10 points, identify these events in which lava is launched from
a mountain, such as at Mt. St. Helens or Vesuvius.
ANSWER: volcanic eruptions
The phreatic type of these events is characterized by large volumes of steam. The VEI scale can be used
to quantify the strength of these events, during which fumaroles and fissure vents may form. One of these
events caused the "Year Without a Summer" in 1816. These events can create pillow basalts when they
occur underwater, while scoria and pumice are often constituents of pyroclastic flow resulting from these
events above ground. For 10 points, identify these phenomena often accompanied by the expulsion of lava.
ANSWER: volcanic eruptions [or obvious equivalents]
One of these phenomena almost caused the destruction of the Aeta people and Clark Air Base, while
a recent one in the United States was classified as Pelean. Lake Toba was formed by one of these
actions and tuya form when this action occurs beneath a glacier. In February 2001, the most severe
recorded instance of this action in the solar system took place on [*] Io. These actions produce tephra,
which can be classified as blocks, bombs, or lapilli, and they can form calderas and pyroclastic flows. For
10 points, name these lava-spewing actions performed by explosive mountains like Vesuvius and Mt. St.
Helens, one of which caused the burial of Pompeii.
ANSWER: volcanic eruptions [accept equivalents; prompt on "eruptions"]
The phenyl types of these compounds are reactants in the Fries rearrangement, and di- examples of these
compounds are converted to a ring structure in the Dieckmann condensation. Members of this class will
react with Grignard reagents to yield tertiary alcohols, and cyclic molecules in this class are called lactones.
This class forms such polymers as plexiglass, mylar, and the synthetic fabric Dacron, while naturally
occuring members include amyl acetate in bananas and ethyl butyrate in pineapples. Commonly synthesized
by the Fischer mechanism and noted for their pleasant odors, name this class of compounds usually formed
by combining a carboxylic acid with an alcohol.
ANSWER: ester
In the presence of ethanol and sodium, these compounds can be reduced to primary alcohols in a
reaction named after Bouveault and Blanc. The heterocyclic amine of DMAP attacks the lesshindered carbonyl of an anhydride to form an intermediate that reacts with alcohol to produce one
of these in one reaction. A reaction that forms another type of these compounds is reacts a ketone
with a peroxyacid. Both of those reactions, the (*) Yamaguchi and Baeyer-Villiger reactions, can
synthesize the cyclic version of these compounds, which are called lactones. They can be synthesized in by
heating carboxylic acids with alcohols in the presence of an acid catalyst. For 10 points, name this
functional group which has a carbon single-bonded to one oxygen and double bonded to another, commonly
created in a reaction named for Fischer.
ANSWER: esters
A ketone can form this molecule through Baeyer-Villiger oxidation upon reaction with hydrogen peroxide
and the cyclic version of this type of molecule is called a lactone. They are typical reactants for Claisen
condensation, and hydrolysis of these molecules under basic conditions is called saponification. A common
way to synthesize these molecules is through a condensation reaction between an alcohol and an acid. Their
limited ability to form hydrogen bonds makes them less water soluble and more volatile than the
corresponding carboxylic acid. For 10 points each, name this class of molecules that consists of an oxo
group adjacent to an alkoxy group, known for their pleasant smell.
ANSWER: esters
Two molar equivalents of Grignard reagent are required to reduce compounds with this functional
group. The Claisen condensation creates one of these compounds with a beta-carbonyl group, while
they are hydrolyzed into soaps through saponification. They can be produced by adding an acid to
the parent alcohol in a reaction named for (*) Fischer. In DNA, phosphorus simultaneously forms two of
these functional groups in a namesake type of bond. These compounds have a carbonyl group single bonded
to an oxygen atom, and often smell fruity. For ten points, name this functional group, the "poly" form of
which is a common fabric.
ANSWER: esters
The phenyl types of these compounds are rearranged in a reaction named for Fries [FREEZ]. A tertiary
alcohol with two identical substituents is the result of reacting these compounds with an excess of Grignard
reagent. Two of these compounds can participate in the Claisen condensation, and the cyclic types are
called lactones. The neurotransmitter acetylcholine is one of these compounds, as is triglyceride. In an acidcatalyzed nucleophilic acyl substitution, these compounds are formed by an alcohol and a carboxylic acid.
In addition to that reaction named for Fischer, these compounds undergo saponification when heated with a
strong base. For 10 points, name these compounds noted for their fruity smells.
ANSWER: esters
One bicyclic compound named with the naming scheme of this functional group is formed by the exhaustive
alkylation of an activated carboxylic acid with a Lewis acid, and is called the OBO protecting group. This
functional group is formed along with triphenylphosphine oxide in a reaction for which Bruce Lipshutz
developed a cleaner modification. Perkin alicyclic synthesis results from the intramolecular synthesis of the
malonic variety of one of them. DCC and DEAD are used in the Steiglich and Mitsonobu syntheses of this
functional group, which is formed when protonation of a carbonyl oxygen enables the carbonyl carbon to be
attacked by a weakly nucleophilic alcohol. For 10 points, name this functional group formed by the Fischer
reaction, with formula RCOOR' and a fruity smell.
ANSWER: esters
This functional group can be formed by a reaction named for Steglich. In the Fries rearrangement, one of
them is reacted with a Lewis acid. A cyclic one is known as a lactone, and ethyl formate is one example of
this functional group. The Claisen condensation occurs between two of them, or one of them and a
carbonyl. It can be formed by reacting an oxoacid with an alcohol. For 10 points, name this functional
group which gives many fruits their distinctive smells.
ANSWER: ester
The phenyl type of these compounds are converted to hydroxy aryl ketones in the Fries rearrangement, and
Dieckmann and Claisen condensations occur between these compounds. Under basic conditions, they can
be hydrolyzed to form soaps, as triglycerides are examples of these compounds. They can be produced by
refluxing the reagents with a sulfuric acid catalyst in a reaction named for Fischer. Characterized by a
carbon atom single-bonded to one oxygen atom and double-bonded to another, they are often fruitysmelling. For 10 points, name these organic compounds formed in the reaction of a carboxylic acid with an
alcohol.
ANSWER: esters
The formation of this class of compounds is used to connect omega hydroxy acids to form
cutin [KYOO-tinn]. One example of this class is used in the Tennessee Eastman acetic anhydride
process. That chemical in this class, methyl acetate, can be formed by combining acetic acid
with methanol using sulfuric acid as a catalyst. One lipid in this class includes triglyceride, which
is hydrolized in saponification. The combination of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol produces
compounds in this class using a process named for Emil Fischer. Name these compounds often used
to create a fruity odor.
ANSWER: esters
Phenyl versions of these form acylium ions in a rearrangement catalyzed by Lewis acids, a reaction that can
also occur via photochemical excitation, while an example of another reaction involving them uses high
heat to create acrylic acid. In addition to the Fries rearrangement and their namesake pyrolysis, molecules
with two of their functional group can react intramolecularly to form cyclic ketones, and these molecules are
commonly created by another reaction that involves an alcohol and carboxylic acid with acid catalysis.
Involved in reactions named for Dieckmann and Fischer, this is, for 10 points, what class of molecules that
contains a carbonyl group adjacent to an oxygen atom bound to a carbon atom and known for their odors?
ANSWER: esters
In one reaction, large cyclic examples of these compounds are synthesized using a 2,4,6trichlorobenzylchloride catalyst. Another reaction to synthesize these compounds converts DCC to
dicyclohexylurea with DMAP as a catalyst. When two enolizable examples of these compounds are
reacted together with a base, the product is a single compound containing this functional group beta
to a ketone. Those reactions are named for Yamaguchi, Steglich, and (*) Claisen. The suffix -oate is
used to refer to these compounds. The most famous synthesis of these compounds is an acid-catalyzed
reflux of a carboxylic acid and an alcohol and is named for Fischer. For 10 points, name these compounds
with general formula R-C-O-O-R-prime which are renowned for their fruity smell.
ANSWER: esters [accept "macrolactones" since the Yamaguchi clue is sometimes referred to as a "macrolactonization," although it just makes esters in general]
An aryl variety of one of these compounds participates in the Fries rearrangement. Their reaction
with alcohols in basic conditions under heat is referred to as saponification, while they may be
generated from an alcohol and carboxylic acid in a reaction named for Fischer. They provide the (*)
linkages between the glycerol head and the fatty acid tails of a lipid. Like carboxylic acids, they contain a
carbon double-bonded to one oxygen and single-bonded to another oxygen. For 10 points, name this
class of organic compounds, known for their attractive scents.
ANSWER: esters
This functional group is produced in a condensation reaction which sees the addition of an alcohol in the
presence of a catalytic amount of a strong acid which is sometimes named for Speier. This type of
compound is broken down by water in a reaction catalyzed by bases, the saponification reaction, and three
of them are found on a glycerol backbone in fats. Consisting of a two R groups bonded to a carbon double
bonded to an oxygen and single bonded to another oxygen, for 10 points, name this class of fruity smelling
organic compounds.
ANSWER: esters
The phenyl type of these compounds can be reacted with a Lewis acid to form a hydroxy aryl ketone via the
Fries rearrangement. They can be made from Pinner salts and water, or in the Favorskii rearrangement by
reacting an alpha-halo ketone with an alkoxide. Cyclic beta-keto ones are formed from a molecule with two
of its defining functional groups in the Dieckmann cyclization, and the base-catalyzed hydrolysis of their
namesake linkages, especially in fat, is known as saponification. For 10 points, name these often fruity
smelling compounds formed in a process named for Fisher in which an alkyl group replaces the acidic
hydrogen in carboxylic acids.
ANSWER: esters
DCC and DMAP is used to synthesize these compounds in the Steglich reaction, and they're also created by
reacting haloketons with a base in the Favorskii rearrangement. Trichlorobenzoate followed by DMAP
treatment is used to create them, as is reacting alcohols with DEAD and PPH3. The synthesis named for the
malonic type of these compounds is used to create acids of any length, and cyclic ones are called lactones.
Besides the Yamaguchi and Mitsunobu reactions, one common method of creating them uses a Dean-Stark
trap to remove water, and reacts an alcohol with a carboxylic acid. FTP, name these compounds that are
combined in the Claisen condensation and created by the Fischer reaction, which are sweet smelling and
contain a carbon single bonded to one oxygen and double bonded to another in the middle of a chain.
ANSWER: esters
These can be formed in a basic solution by alpha haloketones and can also be formed by reacting a nitrile
and an alcohol in an acidic environment, known respectively as the Favorskii Rearrangement and the Pinner
Reaction. The Baeyer-Villiger reaction can also produce these compounds from ketones in the presence of a
peroxy-acid. The presence of two of these functional groups on a molecule allows for the formation of betaketo ones via the Dieckmann condensation, which is a modification of the Claisen Condensation. For 10
points, name this functional group, a carboxylic acid whose terminal hydrogen is replaced with an alkyl
group, which are useful for their various fragrant odors.
ANSWER: esters
A carbon alpha to two carbons with this functionality is alkylated and then decarboxylated in a
reaction named for the malonic type of these compounds. An ortho, para selective rearrangement
that yields acyl phenols reacts one of these compounds with a Lewis acid. Compounds with a
carbonyl functionality two carbons away from this functionality are synthesized from compounds
that have two instances of this functionality in the (*) Dieckmann condensation, which produces the
"beta keto" variety of these. Alcohols are refluxed with carboxylic acids to synthesize these compounds.
Triglycerides feature three of these compounds' functionality because fatty acids have been joined to a
glycerol backbone. For 10 points, name these compounds produced in a reaction named for Fischer, which
have an R-COOR structure.
ANSWER: esters
These compounds become isocynates via a hydroxamic acid intermediate in the Lossen rearrangement, and
undergo alpha-hydroxylation in the Chan reaction. Methods of synthesizing them include a migratory
insertion which uses MCPBA on a ketone, and carboxylates of any length can be created using the synthesis
named for the malonic type of them. Cyclic ones are known as lactones, and in addition to the
aforementioned Baeyer-Villiger oxidation, they can be synthesized under reflux conditions in a reaction
named for Fischer that uses an acid and an alcohol. Also undergoing the Claisen condensation when reacted
with a base. FTP, name these organic compounds responsible for the sweet smell of fruit.
ANSWER: esters
Tischenko names a disproportionation reaction that forms these compounds following a 1,3 hydride shift.
One reaction that forms these compounds uses DMAP with a mixed anhydride and is named for
Yamaguchi. A reaction between a cyclic ketone and a peroxyacid can generate these compounds, while a
functionality where three alkoxy groups bond a single carbon is known as an ortho-this. An intramolecular
reaction between two examples of this functionality is named for Dieckmann; that reaction is a special case
of the Claisen condensation. These compounds are reacted with a base in saponification. For 10 points,
name these organic compounds known for their pleasant smells, which feature an alkoxy group bound to a
carbonyl.
ANSWER: esters
These compounds can undergo the Chan rearrangement, and their reduction with DIBAL yields an
aldehyde. Compounds with two of these functional groups can undergo the intramolecular Dieckmann
condensation. Two molecules with this functional group can react to form a beta-keto type of this group in
the Claisen condensation. They can be derived from the addition of an alcohol to an acid chloride. Under
basic conditions, they undergo saponification to form a carboxylate anion and an alcohol. For 10 points,
name this functional group that consists of a carbonyl and ether, and is often noted for its strong fragrances.
ANSWER: esters
These compounds react with a Lewis acid to produce a ketone in the Fries rearrangement. Its betaketo variety is formed when two of these compounds react in the Claisen condensation, and they can
be hydrolyzed under basic conditions to form soaps. Nitroglycerin is an explosive one of these
compounds, and (*) ethyl acetate is another one found in wines. In the presence of an acid catalyst, these
compounds can be synthesized by reacting a carboxylic acid with an alcohol in a process named after
Fischer. For ten points, identify these organic compounds which are notable for their fruity scents.
ANSWER: esters
One reaction to produces this functional group produces dicyclohexyleurea as a byproduct and is
performed by adding DCC and DMAP to a molecule commonly-used in preparing these. These
functional groups are often used as plasticizers to reduce the brittleness of polyvinyl chloride.
Peracids are applied to ketones to produce this functional group in the Baeyer-Villiger Oxidation. In
one reaction, this functional group is formed after a water molecule leaves a tetrahedral intermediate. In
biology, fats are lengthy examples of this type of functional group. These functional groups can be formed
by taking a carboxylic acid and replacing the hydrogen of the hydroxide group with a hydrocarbon chain.
Cyclic examples are called lactones. For 10 points, name these functional groups created in a reaction
named for Fischer, which have a sweet smell.
ANSWER: esters
Removing water through a Dean-Stark apparatus or using a dehydrating agent improves the yield of the
Steglich type of this reaction. The trans-version of this reaction is usually used in the degradation of
triglycerides. Diazomethane can prompt this reaction in carboxylic acids. Saponification, another type of
these reactions, is the basis of the creation of soap. Refluxing a carboxylic acid and an alcohol in the
presence of an acid catalyst is the basis of a version of this reaction named for Fischer. Name this type of
reaction between two compounds, usually an alcohol and an acid, that produces the namesake fruitysmelling compound.
ANSWER: esterification
An alternative to mercury thermometers are red thermometers, which most often contain this molecule
with red dye. A solution consisting 96% of this compound and 4% water is an azeotrope. Glucose is
industrially fermented to form two carbon dioxides and two of these molecules. The liver uses ADH to
convert this molecule into acetaldehyde, and it is used as an additive to gasoline. For 10 points, identify this
two carbon molecule found in alcoholic beverages.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol; or drinking alcohol; or grain alcohol; prompt on alcohol]
One compound that is sometimes mistaken for this resource is created by crushing jatropha seeds.
Companies such as Lignol and Novozymes have worked to create the "cellulosic" form of this
resource from wood chips. Support for American production of this resource has led to decreased use
of MTBE, and previously spurred on a controversial 54-cent tariff on (*) imports of this resource from
its most extensive user. Concerns about food prices have caused criticisms about the use of land to produce
this resource, which powers automobiles in Brazil. For 10 points, name this petroleum substitute that is
often made of sugarcane or corn.
ANSWER: ethanol
FPLC columns are stored in a 20% solution of this substance, whose hydrogen NMR spectrum
shows a quadruplet around 3.7 ppm, a triplet around 1.2 ppm, and a broad singlet around 2.6 ppm.
It can be purified to 96% by volume before dessication must be used, because this substance forms
an azeotrope with water at that concentration. It is oxidized to acetaldehyde in biological systems.
One method of obtaining this compound involves using enzymes capable of breaking down (*)
cellulose; that method is used to extract this substance from corn. This substance is more commonly
produced from yeast using fermentation. For 10 points, name this substance with formula C2H5OH, a
two-carbon alcohol found in drinks.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol or EtOH; accept C2H5OH or C2H6O until the formula; prompt on "alcohol"]
This compound can be formed by the reaction of formaldehyde with methylmagnesium bromide in an acidic
solution. Since this compound forms an azeotrope in a nineteen to one ratio with water, a dehydrating agent
must be used to produce the one hundred percent, or "absolute", form of this compound. It can be produced
by the addition of water to ethylene, and can lose the hydrogen from its hydroxyl group to form ethoxide.
When yeast enzymes react with glucose they produce two molecules of carbon dioxide and two of this
molecule, which is why it is sometimes known as grain alcohol. For 10 points, name this compound with
formula CH3CH2OH, the alcohol present in alcoholic beverages.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol; prompt on "alcohol"]
After a phenol-chloroform extraction, this substance is used to precipitate the extracted DNA. A
beta-mercapto form of this compound is a powerful reducing agent used in protein gel
electrophoresis. Zymase and invertase are used by baker's (*) yeast to produce it from sugars, and
over-consumption of this substance leads to cirrhosis of the liver. For 10 points, name this substance which
is formed in fermentation, an alcohol with formula CH3CH2OH.
ANSWER: ethanol or ethyl alcohol [prompt on alcohol]
This compound and carbon dioxide are a products of the reaction catalyzed by
zymase [ZY-"mace"]. High use of this compound can lead to thiamine [THY-uh-min]
deficiency, which causes Wernicke [VAIR-nih-kee]-Korsakoff syndrome. This compound's
dehydrogenase [dee-hy-DRAH-juh-nayss] converts it to acetaldehyde [uh-see-TAAL-duh-"hide"],
and a variation in that enzyme can make this compound cause red skin coloring. That red coloring
is commonly found in Asian populations and is known as a flush or a "glow". Excessive intake of this
compound can cause cirrhosis, and this compound is produced when yeast ferment glucose. Name
this compound found in beverages such as wine and beer.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol]
When this compound is analyzed in mass spectrometry, prominent peaks appear at the 45 and 31 mass-tocharge ratio regions. A solution consisting of 4.4% water and 95.6% of this substance boils at a lower
temperature than either compound separately, thus making the mixture a positive azeotrope. Because of its
high osmotic pressure and slower protein denaturing ability, a 70% solution of this substance is best for
sterilizing laboratory equipment. In the liver, this compound is oxidized into acetaldehyde by alcohol
dehydrogenase. For 10 points, name this alcohol which contains one more carbon atom than methanol.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol; or C2-H5-OH; or C2-H6-O]
Johann Lowitz first obtained the "pure" type of this compound by filtering its distilled form through
activated charcoal. Toxins such as pyridine and naphtha are agents added to make the "denatured"
variety of this substance, while the "absolute" variety of this substance can be obtained by using a
small quantity of (*) benzene. In the presence of a phosphoric acid catalyst, this compound is formed by
the hydration of ethylene, and its most common application is as a biofuel additive for gasoline. A
byproduct of yeast cells undergoing fermentation, for ten points, name this compound with formula
C2H5OH that is commonly found in liquor.
ANSWER: ethanol (accept ethyl alcohol; prompt on "alcohol")
When this compound reacts with chloroethane in the Williamson synthesis, a symmetrical ether is formed.
The oxidation state of one atom in it increases by 4 when it is oxidized to acetic acid. When used in the
laboratory, it is often denatured by the addition of a related 1-carbon compound. As part of a mixture
containing 4.4% water, it forms an azeotrope. Sugarcane and corn are the main sources of this compound
when used as a fuel additive, and E10 is a common mixture containing it. Members of genus
Saccharomyces produce this and CO2 as a byproduct of sugar fermentation. For 10 points, name this 2carbon alcohol with formula CH3CH2OH that causes inebriation.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol; prompt on "alcohol"; prompt on "drinking alcohol"]
CYP2E1 enzyme activity is required for the metabolism of this compound via the MEOS pathway. The
proton NMR spectrum of this compound results in a triplet at around 1.2, a quartet at around 3.6, and a
singlet at around 5.2. This compound's presence is detected by a color change when it reacts with sulfuric
acid and potassium dichromate to form chromium sulfate. A common example of an azeotrope is a solution
of 96% of this compound and 4% of water. This compound's namesake dehydrogenase catalyzes the
reformation of NADH and the conversion of it into acetaldehyde, resulting in a hangover. For 10 points,
name this compound with formula C2H5OH, an alcohol.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol; or grain alcohol; or drinking alcohol; prompt on alcohol for the sake of this question]
A mixture of dry ice and this substance is used to snap-freeze cells and food items, and this
substance burns with a pale blue flame. This substance is used to precipitate nucleic acids, and it is
oxidized to acetaldehyde in humans. This substance forms an azeotrope with water at 96%
concentration, and this substance can be created from cellulose or from yeast under (*) anaerobic
conditions in fermentation. For 10 points, name this substance found in fermented beverages.
ANSWER: ethanol
Like barbiturates, this compound binds to GABA-A receptors in the body. One method for detecting
this compound is by mixing it with chromic acid to produce chromium (III) and acetic acid. Fractional
distillation can purify this compound up to about 95%, with a desiccator required for higher purity. Corn
and sugar cane are popular sources of this compound when used as a biofuel. Its concentration is often
measured in "proof." For 10 points, name this alcohol with formula C2H5OH that is consumed in liquor.
ANSWER: ethanol [or ethyl alcohol; or C2H5OH before it is read]
Chromates oxidize this compound to acetic acid, and change color from orange to green when it is
present. Methanol poisoning is usually treated with this compound. This compound forms an azeotrope
with pure water at 96 volume percent. Because its boiling point is 78 degrees Celsius, thermometers that
use this liquid instead of mercury only function up to that temperature. Yeasts convert glucose to carbon
dioxide and this organic molecule in fermentation. For 10 points, name this alcohol found in beer.
ANSWER: ethanol [or C2H5OH; or C2H6O; prompt on alcohol before it is read]
Lignocelluosic biomasses can create its cellulosic variety, which is often produced from Switchgrass
and Miscanthus. As a chemical, it combines with chlorine to form chloral and hydrochloric acid.
Combining it with benzene in water yields a (*) trinary that allows for the purification of its absolute
variety, which is often assigned 200 proof, though 95% or 70% varieties are often used in the lab. It can be
used to treat methanol poisoning, and in a Fischer esterification, it combines with carboxylic acids to
produce ethyl esters. For 10 points, name this two carbon product of fermentation, an alcohol with formula
C2H5OH.
ANSWER: ethanol [accept ethyl alcohol]
A version of this type of compound that includes silicon is commonly used as a protecting group for
hydroxyl groups, while the crown variety is synthetically useful to form complexes with metal cations. They
are commonly formed via the Williamson synthesis in which an alkoxide attacks an alkyl halide through an
SN2 mechanism to form both symmetrical and asymmetrical versions. Epoxides are a cyclic version of
them, with the simplest being ethylene oxide. FTP, name this functional group, an oxygen atom single
bonded to two carbon atoms.
ANSWER: ether
One subclass of these compounds was shown by Charles Pedersen to allow potassium
permanganate to dissolve in benzene. This functionality, produced in the Ullman reaction, is
exemplified by tetrahydrofuran, and its polycyclic form is its crown variety. An alkyl halide reacts
with an alkoxide ion to produce these compounds in the Williamson synthesis, and they are defined
by the presence of an (*) oxygen atom bonded to two aryl or alkyl groups. For 10 points, name these
compounds whose diethyl variety was once used as an anesthetic.
ANSWER: ether
This functional group can be synthesized by reacting alkenes with a per-acid like MCPBA, and two of these
functional groups are attached to one carbon in acetals. Industrial quantities of these compounds are formed
by the bimolecular dehydration of alcohols, and cyclic versions of these compounds are substituted
differently depending on whether they are opened by an acid or a base. These are synthesized by reacting an
alkoxide with a primary alkyl halide, and these compounds have similar reactivities to sulfides, which are
also called "thio" ones of these. For 10 points, name this these compounds formed in the Williamson
synthesis, which have a general formula R-O-R.
ANSWER: ethers [accept epoxides before "acetal" but ask for a less specific answer afterwards]
As heterocyclic chemical compounds, rings containing multiples of this functional group are useful as phase
transfer catalysts. A special, especially reactive class of these can be formed by the reaction of
trifluoroperacetic acid with an alkene. Other classes of this functional group include ketals and acetals. Its
120 degree bond angle results in a dipole. A common synthesis technique features the deprotonation of an
alcohol, which subsequently reacts with an alkyl-halide. Other means of synthesis include Ullman
condensation and the dehydration of alcohols. Used to link the monomers of carbohydrates, this functional
group also serves as a both a Lewis and an Bronstead base. For 10 points, identify this functional group
which is an alkoxy-substitued alkyl, alkene, or alkyne: an oxygen atom linking the carbons of two
hydrocarbons.
ANSWER: ether
Functional groups equivalent to small cyclic ones may be formed from alkenes in a reaction named
for Sharpless. Typical examples are excellent solvents, commonly used for Grignard reagents because
they are aprotic. One cyclic type of these is commonly used to dissolve cations in nonpolar solvent, the
crown type, and the most common synthesis of them is named for Williamson. For 10 points, identify
this class of organic compounds whose diethyl example was a common anesthetic.
ANSWER: ethers
One method for producing these compounds involves using a mercury trifluoroacetate catalyst to
electrophilically add alcohols to alkenes. Another method that creates aryl versions of these
compounds utilizes the coupling of phenol with a halide and is called the (*) Ullmann condensation. A
more common method of creating them involves the reaction of an alkyl halide and an alkoxide ion. One
class of these molecules has high affinity for cations and is thus useful in phase transfer catalysis; these
molecules are cyclic and referred to as the 'crown' variety. Defined by a structure in which an oxygen atom
is bound between to alkyl or aryl groups, FTP, identify this class of organic compound that can be produced
in a synthesis named after Williamson and has a diethyl type which can be used as an anesthetic.
ANSWER: ethers
The Zeisel method can test for the presence either of esters or of these compounds. Anisole
contains this functional group, and THF and dioxane are two of them commonly used as
solvents. Two primary alcohols can be reacted with an acid catalyst in a condensation reaction
to create these compounds. One cyclic variety is called "crown" ones, and reacting primary alkyl
halides with alkoxides is the Williamson synthesis of these. For 10 points, name this class of
organic compounds of the form R-O-R prime, one of which was once used as an anaesthetic.
ANSWER: ether
The Claisen rearrangement operates on allyl vinyl examples of this functionality, a special type of which is
created using a sulfur ylide in the Corey-Chaykovsky reaction. Some cyclic examples of this functionality
are known as oxiranes, minimal examples of which result from the reaction of an alkene with mCPBA. One
type of this functional group useful in phase transfer are the crown ones. Grignard reagents are stored in one
member of this functional group. One synthesis of them reacts an alkyl halide with an alkoxide ion in an
SN2 mechanism and is named for Williamson. Coming in a diethyl variety once used as an anaesthetic, for
10 points, name this functionality with two alkyl groups bonded to an oxygen atom.
ANSWER: ethers
The Zeisel test can be used to detect them, and the compound THF is a very polar example of one. The
"crown" varieties are cyclic and can be used as solvents in Grignard reagents due to their low reactivity.
These compounds can be produced by the Williamson synthesis or by the dehydration of alcohols. For 10
points, identify these chemical compounds, characterized by two alkyl groups single bonded to an oxygen,
whose diethyl version used to be used as an anesthetic.
ANSWER: ethers [accept esters before "THF"]
The dinoflagellate Karenia Brevis produces brevetoxin, which has a form of this group. Symmetric ones can
be created by dehydrating an alcohol at high temperature in the sulfuric acid process. A cyclic type of this
compound can be made by a reaction that goes through the "butterfly mechanism," the Prilezhaev reaction.
Another reaction that makes them adds an alkoxide to an alkyl halide. Grignard reagents are made by
adding an organic halide to magnesium suspended in this kind of solvent. Examples of them include anisole,
THF, and the one cyclic variety used as phase transfer catalysts. A synthesis named for Williamson makes,
for 10 points, what class of compounds that has an oxygen singly bonded to two functional groups?
ANSWER: ethers [accept crown ethers or epoxides]
Aryl versions of this functional group can be synthesized with an arylboronic acid and an alcohol in ChanLam coupling, or via the Mitsunobu reaction using phenols. Phospholipids in archaebacteria use this
functional group to join fatty acids to glycerol, as this group is more resistant to oxidation than esters.
Molecules with this functional group are relatively inert except under highly acidic conditions, where they
undergo cleavage. Cyclical examples such as THF are often used as solvents. Two methods leading to their
formation are alkoxymercuration-reduction and the reaction of an alkoxide and a haloalkane, a reaction
named for its discoverer, Alexander W. Williamson. For ten points, name this functional group that consists
of an oxygen attached to two carbon chains.
ANSWER: ethers
Grignard reagents can be dissolved in one of these, THF, and a five-membered aromatic one is called furan.
Compounds of this type with a triangular ring are called epoxides. Phase transfer catalysis makes use of one
oligomeric type which forms coordination complexes. Their synthesis occurs in an SN2 reaction of an
alkoxide ion with an alkyl halide. With a ring-shaped "crown" type, their synthesis reaction is named after
Williamson. For 10 points, name these organic compounds with two R groups bonded to an oxygen atom,
whose diethyl type is a solvent and anesthetic.
ANSWER: ethers
These compounds can be synthesized from prochiral allylic alcohols in the Sharpless reaction. One reaction
involving displacement of alkyl halides by alkoxide ions synthesizes the "crown" type of these compounds.
They have 110 degree bond angles that result in a dipole, and oxidation of alkenes can produce ones with
three-membered rings called epoxides. Glycosidic linkages are composed of these compounds. For 10
points, name these compounds characterized by two R groups bonded to an oxygen atom, whose diethyl
type is used as an anaesthetic.
ANSWER: ethers
Copper catalysis is used to effect the synthesis of aryl ones through the Ullman condensation. The
compound BADGE, which has one of these functional groups, is an agonist for the PPAR gamma
transcription factors. The Brook rearrangement is used to produce silyl forms of these, while another
type which often used for phase transfer catalysis are known as the "crown" variety. Secondary ones have
a tendency to spontaneously form peroxides. Cyclic ones are known as oxiranes, and when they come in
three-membered rings, they are called epoxides. For 10 points, identify this functional group, which consists
of two alkyl groups connected to an oxygen.
ANSWER: ethers
These compounds react with hydroiodic acid to give alcohols in the Zeisel test. One type of these
compounds can coordinate potassium ions and are useful as phase-transfer catalysts. After long periods of
storage, they may oxidize into explosive peroxides. Ring-shaped molecules of this type are called "crown,"
and three-membered cyclic ones are called epoxides. They are synthesized from alkyl halides and alkoxide
ions in a reaction named for Williamson. For 10 points, name these compounds with two R groups bonded
to an oxygen atom, whose diethyl type used to be a common anesthetic.
ANSWER: ethers
One of these organic compounds reacts with phosphorous pentaflouride to form Lawesson's reagent and is
known as anisole. Another one of these organic compounds is a common solvent for Grignard's reagent and
is often referred to as THF. One of these occurs as an oligomer and can form complexes with metals like
potassium and lithium; these are known as the "crown" type of these organic compounds. The simplest one
reacts with carbon monoxide and water to form acetic acid and is the "dimethyl" type of this compound
while the simplest cyclic one of these is known as ethylene oxide. FTP, identify these organic compounds
consisting of an oxygen bonded between two functional groups, whose diethyl variety is used as an
anesthetic.
ANSWER: Ether
One of these substances with phenyl and methyl substituents is known as anisole, while a cyclic type of
these compounds features electronegative interior atoms which capture cations. Along with the "crown"
type, epoxides are another class of these compounds which can be synthesized from alcohols and
halocarbons in the Williamson synthesis. Containing an oxygen atom bonded to two hydrocarbon groups,
for 10 points, name this class of organic compounds derived from the name of a classical Greek heavenly
element, the "diethyl" variety of which was formerly used as an anesthetic.
ANSWER: ether
A proton-ionizable group is found in the "lariat" form of these compounds, which are NOT cleaved into
carboxylic acids during a positive result in the Zeisel method. Lithium-containing compounds are used to
transform them in the 1,2-Wittig rearrangement, and they easily undergo oxidation to form peroxides. An
acid catalyst and two primary alcohols are needed in a condensation reaction to create these compounds
while the most famous way to produce them involves nucleophilic substitution of an alkyl halide by an
alkoxide. For 10 points, name this class of molecules with formula R-O-R that are produced in a reaction
named for Williamson.
ANSWER: ethers
The name for this type of organic compound was first used in 1730 by F.G. Frobenius, and nonIUPAC names for some include anisole and phenetole. Used as solvents for Grignard reagents, and as
inert media for reactions like the Grignard and Wurtz-Fittig reactions, along with esters, these can
be tested for by splitting them with hydroiodic acid, known as the Zeisel method. These are soluble in
organic liquids, but most are not soluble in water, an exception to which is dioxane, a (*) cyclic one of
these. They are generally synthesized by reacting alkyl halides with sodium alcoholates, a process known as
Williamson synthesis. Featuring two R groups connected to an oxygen, FTP, name this group of organic
compounds whose diethyl type is often used as an anasthetic.
ANSWER: ethers
These compounds can be formed by alkoxy-mercuration between an alkene and an alcohol. Their
sulfurous equivalents are known as sulfides, while cyclic ones are formed by reacting an alkene with
a peroxy-acid and are known as epoxides. Another cyclic class is known as the crown type, and they
are most often produced in an SN2 reaction between an alkoxide and an alkyl halide, known as the
Williamson synthesis. For 10 points, name this class of compounds with an oxygen atom between two
carbons, whose di-ethyl variety was commonly used as an anesthetic.
ANSWER: ethers
A quantitative test for them involves the addition of alcoholic silver nitrate solution, which follows the
Zeisel test where they are cleaved using strong acids. Anisole and THF are compounds with this functional
group, and a special type of these can be produced by reacting alkenes with peroxy acids. They can be
produced by reacting an alkyl halide with an alcoxide produced from an alcohol in the Williamson
synthesis, and the Crown varieties are used as solvents for Grignard reagents. For 10 points, identify this
functional group, where two carbon molecules are single bonded to an oxygen molecule, whose diethyl
variety was once used as an anesthetic.
ANSWER: ethers
Molecules of this type are often made using an alumina catalyst, but a side product of an alkene is also
produced in that process. Jain and Pillai found that when phenol is added to that reacting system, the rate of
alkene production is greatly increased, while the rate of production of these is reduced drastically. When an
aldehyde is placed in an acidic alcohol solution an acetal is often formed, which contains two of this
functional group. One common synthesis of one of these uses an SN2 mechanism in which an alkoxide
attacks an alkyl halide, named after Williamson, and due to their low reactivity they are used as solvents in
the Grignard reaction. For 10 points, name this functional group which consists of an oxygen single-bonded
to two carbon atoms.
ANSWER: ethers
An allyl vinyl form of these compounds can undergo the Claisen rearrangement. This functional group is
present in the polar solvent tetrahydrofuran. Tert-butyl hydroperoxide and an alcohol containing a double
bond react to create these compounds in the Sharpless epoxidation. The aforementioned reaction creates
epoxides, cyclic forms of this group. The Williamson reaction creates one of these compounds from an
alcohol and an organohalide, and these groups connected in a ring form the "crown" type. A diethyl form of
this functional group serves as an anesthetic. For 10 points, name these compounds that consist of an
oxygen bonded to two alkyl or aryl groups.
ANSWER: ethers
This compound is the starting ingredient in an industrial process where it complexes with palladium
tetrachloride and is attacked by a water molecule to form an alcohol intermediate; that process gives
acetaldehyde from this compound and is called the Wacker process. The catalytic activity of a titaniumaluminum complex in promoting the polymerization of this compound was discovered by Karl Ziegler, and
the simplest cyclic ether is a derivative of this compound called oxirane. The diol of this compound is
commonly used as an antifreeze agent and is known at its namesake glycol. For 10 points, identify this
chemical, the simplest alkene with formula C2H4.
ANSWER: ethylene [accept C2H4 until mentioned; accept ethene]
This compound is the starting ingredient in an industrial process where it complexes with palladium
tetrachloride and is attacked by a water molecule to form an alcohol intermediate; that process gives
acetaldehyde from this compound and is called the Wacker process. The catalytic activity of a titaniumaluminum complex in promoting the polymerization of this compound was discovered by Karl Ziegler, and
the simplest cyclic ether is a derivative of this compound called oxirane. The diol of this compound is
commonly used as an antifreeze agent and is known at its namesake glycol. For 10 points, identify this
chemical, the simplest alkene with formula C2H4.
ANSWER: ethylene [accept C2H4 until mentioned; accept ethene]
This chemical can be produced through the OMEGA-Process and was first used as a substitute for glycerol
in explosives, for which the first plant in the United States to manufacture it on a large scale was built in
South Charleston, West Virginia in 1925 by a company now known as Union Carbide. Found in almost all
dynamite after 1929, it is now mainly used in the automotive industry and is problematic due to the
combination of its sweet taste and utter lethality when ingested. For 10 points, what is this compound with
molecular formula C2 H6 O2, better known as antifreeze?
ANSWER: Ethylene Glycol [accept antifreeze before it is mentioned]
One method for producing this compound was developed by Lefort in the 1930s.The surfactant tween
contains hydroxyl terminated chains made of this compound's polymerization product and that hydroxyl
terminated polymer chain is sometimes attached to drugs like Interferon 2-alpha to increase bioavailability.
It's not formaldehyde, but in a gaseous form, this compound is used as a sterilizing agent because of its
alkylating abilities. Its reaction with a Grignard reagent yields a primary alcohol that has two more carbons
than the Grignard reagent. Crown ethers are composed of units of this compound. Low concentrations of
acid can catalyze the conversion of this high ring strain compound into ethylene glycol. For 10 points, name
this simplest epoxide.
ANSWER: ethylene oxide [or oxirane; or 1,2-epoxyethane; prompt on ethylene glycol before sterilizing]
Although it is not sublimation, this process is used by an apparatus that contains a cold finger over a
collecting flask, and rotates a flask in a vacuum in order to isolate the solids in the flask. This process
is used to remove volatile solvents in a rotovap [ROH-toh-vaap], and the rate at which it occurs is
proportional to vapor pressure. When this occurs to water, the surroundings are cooled, which is
why perspiration helps cool bodies. Unlike a similar process that occurs at higher temperatures, this
process occurs at the surfaces of a substance. Name this process that turns a liquid into a gas and is
slower than boiling.
ANSWER: evaporation [accept word forms; prompt on vaporization or word forms thereof; do not accept "boil(ing)")]
This function of distance appears in the radial wavefunction for s orbitals. The vapor pressure of a liquid
may be approximated by this function of negative one over temperature. When a reaction is said to be "nthorder", the "n" refers to the argument of this function, and a first-order reaction obeys an integrated rate law
that contains it. This function's inverse is applied to the reaction quotient in the Nernst equation. This
operation, followed by division, is performed on individual concentrations to compute the equilibrium
constant using the law of mass action. For 10 points, name this operation which may be applied to a pKa to
find the Ka, and which is the inverse of the logarithm.
ANSWER: exponentiation [or raising something to a power; or equivalents; do not accept "multiplication"]
For a monatomic crystal with this structure, the structure factor is either four times the atomic form factor
when the Miller indices are all even or all odd, or zero. The Burgers vector one-sixth times angle bracket
one one two, close angle bracket, represents a Shockley partial dislocation occurring in this type of lattice
structure. Like the hexagonal close packed structure, this structure has the maximum regular packing
fraction of about 0.74, and also like the hcp, it has a coordination number of 12. This lattice structure's
reciprocal lattice is the body-centered cubic. For ten points, identify this lattice structure which, like the
body centered cubic is a special case of the centered tetragonal structure and which contains lattice points
both on the corners and in the middle of each face.
ANSWER: face centered cubic [prompt on "tetragonal" before mention]
This scientist gives his name to a measure of how efficiently electrons are transferred in a reaction, as
described in his two laws of electrolysis. A constant named for this man is equal to the charge per
mole of electrons, and he also names a physical law of (*) induction as well as a "cage" that shields its
contents from electric fields. For 10 points, name this British electrochemist, the namesake of the SI unit of
capacitance.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday
Horsts and nappes can be found above these structures. Thin-skinned deformation occurs when these
structures do not cover basement rocks. Imbricates are formed by the duplex form of these structures, which
are the source of grabens and which sometimes form escarpments. The lack of a junction differentiates the
transcurrent form of these geological structures from another type which can be found near rift valleys. The
hanging wall and footwall are found in these structures, which come in a strike-slip variety. For ten points,
name these geological features that mark the border between tectonic plates.
ANSWER: faults
One type of this geologic feature separates horsts and grabens from each other. Low dip angles can
lead to stratigraphic position changes in the thrust variety of these. The strike-slip variety can move
laterally, as in the New (*) Madrid set of these in the US Midwest. For 10 points, name these geologic
features related to plate boundaries, including California's San Andreas, where energy buildup is released in
the form of earthquakes.
ANSWER: faults
One of these structures offset from the master and proceeding in the opposite direction is called
"antithetic". Segmented types of these structures are separated by relay ramps, which are eventually
breached. Anderson's theory of these structures assumes that only one principal stress is
perpendicular to the Earth while the other two are parallel. Marker horizons and piercing points can
be used to determine directions for these structures. Psuedotachylite and cataclasites often form in the core
of these structures. These structures separate horsts and grabens, and they are classified based on the
movement of their hanging wall in relation to their footwall. For 10 points, identify these zones of visible
shear displacement that are exemplified, in the US, by the San Andreas one.
ANSWER: faults [or shear fractures; or fault zones; or shear zones]
When these landforms lie parallel to one another, they create raised and lowered areas called horsts and
grabens. Flat irons form from scarps, which are located along these features. These features divide a surface
into a hanging wall and a footwall. At lower depths, they are called shear zones. If the movement of one of
these features has both strike and dip components, it is known as an oblique-slip one. They also come in
transform and strike-slip types. For 10 points, name these cracks in the Earth's surface, the movement of
which causes earthquakes.
ANSWER: faults
Horsts and Grabens are regions formed by the action of these, and slow constant movement at these
formations is called creep. Their line of action is their trace and fundamental ones penetrate the entire
lithosphere. Movement in the horizontal plane occurs in strike-slip ones and a notable intraplate example is
New Madrid (Mad-rid). Transform ones occur at plate boundaries. For 10 points, name these fractures in
the Earth's crust that are often associated with earthquakes, like the San Andreas.
ANSWER: fault
Horsts form between grabens at these geographic features. When these geographic features become eroded,
klippe is visible a short distance from nappe. The thrust type of these features is equivalent to the reverse
type but occurs underwater and can cause tsunamis. Tensional, compressional, and shearing forces all work
on these geographic features that come in oblique, dip, and slip -strike types. Earthquakes frequently occur
at these locations where two tectonic plates meet. For 10 points, name these boundaries, examples of which
include the San Andreas in California.
ANSWER: faults
Left-lateral and right-lateral are two subcategories of one variety of these entities that is characterized by
sideways movement of the objects involved; that variety is called strike-slip. Compressional forces create
reverse ones, while extensional forces produce normal ones by pulling the involved objects apart. Wasatch
and Liquine-Ofqui are examples of what boundaries between tectonic plates, a major example of which is
San Andreas?
ANSWER: fault (accept strike-slip fault before read)
One example of these objects was discovered by Andrew Lawson, and they are studied by an
observatory at Parkfield. Grabens (GRAH-benz) and horsts are bordered by either normal or reverse forms
of these boundaries, which consists of the hanging wall and the footwall. Depending on the direction of the
movement, they are characterized as either dip-slip or strike-slip. Between tectonic plates, they occur at
transform boundaries. For 10 points, name these fractures of the crust created by two plates moving past
each other, exemplified by the San Andreas one.
ANSWER: faults [or fault lines; or transform fault]
E. M. Anderson used Coulomb's criterion to explain these geological features in terms of three principal
axes. Slickensides are striations left by these features. Rocks that form near these geological features
include mylonite and cataclasite. Between two of the normal type of these features, horsts and grabens may
form. Disruptions are horizontal at the strike-slip kind of these features, which are called transform when
they occur near a plate boundary. For 10 points, name these large fractures in the crust that include the San
Andreas.
ANSWER: faults [or faultlines]
When continuity in these structures is maintained by ductile strain, they are called soft-linked. Slickenlines
can be used to identify the orientation of these entities. Rocks associated with these structures include
cataclasites, of which namesake breccias and gouges are a member. Using a piercing point, one can divide
one type of this structure into dextral and sinistral classes. These structures are at the center of elasticrebound theory. Another type of them demarcates horsts and grabens; in that type, hanging walls move
down relative to footwalls. Their types include normal, reverse, thrust and strike-slip. For 10 points, name
these domains of localized displacement in the Earth's crust that are often found at plate boundaries and
along which earthquakes generally occur.
ANSWER: tectonic faults [or shear zones]
One of these objects was mapped and named by Andrew Lawson. In the normal type of these boundaries, a
graben [GRAH-buhn] is a downthrown block, and the hanging wall drops downward relative to the
footwall. Up and down movement is associated with the dip-slip type of these features, some of which occur
near the edges of tectonic plates. For 10 points, name these fractures in the earth's crust, one of which is
named for San Andreas.
ANSWER: faults
Pseudotachylite is generally found near these geologic features, whose surfaces can feature slickenlines and
chatter marks. These features are commonly represented on geologic maps by a ball and a bar. Drag folds as
well as gash fractures can be used to determine the orientation of these features, along which grabens may
form. Compressive stress can force a hanging wall up and over a footwall, leading to the reverse variety of
these structures. For 10 points, name these geologic structures that come in a strike-slip form exemplified
by the San Andreas one.
ANSWER: faults [accept more specific kinds until "reverse"]
Cataclastic rocks are mainly found in these systems. Horst and graben are separated by these
systems. Stress buildup in them was the subject of Henry Reid's elastic rebound theory. Their upper
and lower blocks are called the hanging (*) wall and footwall. These systems are fractures in the rocks of
the Earth's crust along which rocks are displaced relative to each other. Two types are dip-slip and
strike-slip. For 10 points, name these systems that are the origin of most earthquakes and include the San
Andreas.
ANSWER: fault zones [prompt on tectonic plate boundaries]
These structures may be governed by the theory of accelerating moment release, which would facilitate
efforts to predict their movement. You can measure the separation caused by these structures in terms of
both heave and throw. These structures are composed of both a hangingwall and a footwall. These
geological features come in dip-slip and strike-slip types. For 10 points, name these displacement-causing
fractures in rock, an example of which is the San Andreas one in California.
ANSWER: faults [or fault lines]
These regions are the bounding areas of horsts and grabens. These regions can create a namesake
type of breccia. A theory about these regions states that they can suddenly elastically rebound. The
thrust type of these regions can create mountains. These regions are split into a hanging wall and a
(*) foot wall, and can be classified as normal and strike-slip. These discontinuities in the crust release
energy during earthquakes. For 10 points, identify these regions which include the San Andreas one.
ANSWER: faults [or fault zones; or fault lines; prompt on convergent plate boundary]
Lines of springs are characteristic of these objects, and the classic theory of their formation is
named after Anderson. One type of these objects is divided into "leaky" and "transpressional" types,
and in a "reverse" one, the hade is toward the upthrow side. A "reverse" one is almost always a (*)
dip-slip type, since in the strike-slip type the walls move horizontally rather than vertically. For 10 points,
name these "cracks" in the Earth's crust where one part of the crust moves against another part, a
prominent example of which is the San Andreas.
ANSWER: faults [or faultlines; prompt on transverse plate boundaries]
Cataclasites are rocks associated with these structures. These geologic structures separate horsts and
grabens. These structures are the subject of elastic-rebound theory. They can be classified depending on the
direction their hanging wall moves in relation to their footwall. Types of these structures include normal,
reverse, thrust and strike-slip. They are breaks in the Earth's crust along which rocks have moved past each
other. For 10 points, identify these structures along which earthquakes generally occur and which include
the San Andreas one.
ANSWER: tectonic faults [or shear zones]
This mineral is a tectosilicate whose forms are either monoclinic or triclinic. One type of this mineral
corresponds to the continuous branch of Bowen's reaction series, and the angle between its two cleavage
planes is used to classify it into two types. Forms of this mineral include labradorite, albite, and microcline,
and the presence of calcium, sodium, or potassium distinguishes this mineral's plagioclase and orthoclase
varieties. For 10 points, name this aluminum silicate mineral, the most abundant in the earth's crust.
ANSWER: Feldspar [accept Plagioclase Feldspar or Orthoclase Feldspar]
One group of these minerals is further divided into a sanidine variety, and these minerals can be
distinguished from a similar group of minerals because these minerals cleave across planes. These minerals
have a K-type and are exemplified by labradorite. Members of this group of minerals have varying number
of aluminum and silicon atoms, but all of these minerals have eight oxygen atoms. One subset of these
minerals has a value of 6 on the Mohs hardness scale, and on the Bowen's reaction series, these minerals
make up the continuous branch. For 10 points, name these minerals that make up a majority of the Earth's
crust, which are classified as orthoclase or plagioclase
ANSWER: feldspars [accept specific types].
Members of this group of minerals can be used in thermoluminescence and optical dating. Barium varieties
of this mineral include hyalophane and celsian. Its crystals tend to twin easily and normally have a dull
luster, and main properties used to describe members of this include the percentage of albite and anorthite
endmembers. All members of this mineral family are silicates with eight oxygens in each molecule and
common forms of them include orthoclase and plagioclase. Having an average hardness of 6 on the Mohs
Scale, FTP, name these common minerals that make up more than half of the Earth's crust.
ANSWER: Feldspars
Those classified as plagioclase are triclinic and include andesine and anorthite, while barium ones
are monoclinic and include celsian and hyalophane. Another classification, alkali, applies to those
such as orthoclase and microcline that fall between the (*) potassium variety and albite. These rocks
have a name from the German for field rock or rock without ore, and their crystals can sometimes be found
in granite. For 10 points, the orthoclase type of what group of minerals, the most abundant group found in
the earth's crust, has a Mohs hardness of six?
ANSWER: feldspars
One division of them shows a characteristic repeated lamellar twinning in accordance with albite's twin law.
That subdivision makes up the continuous branch of Bowen's reaction series, with another member anorthite
exclusively having calcium instead of sodium. This is in contrast with the alkali types of these rocks which
are a mix of sodium and potassium silicates. Often found in igneous rocks such as gneiss and granite, these
are, for 10 points, what type of aluminosilicates which come in the aforementioned plagioclase variety and
whose orthoclase classification is six on Mohs' scale.
ANSWER: plagioclase feldspars [prompt on plagioclase before mentioned]
One type of them is often twinned according to the Baveno and Carlsbad laws, and two types of them are
the namesakes of the QAPF diagram. Celsian is one type composed of barium, and another type has
cleavage planes that form slightly oblique angles; triclinic members of that type include albite, anorthite,
and labradorite. One type of this mineral has a value of six on the Mohs hardness scale, and another type is
located on the continuous branch of Bowen's reaction series. Approximately sixty percent of the Earth's
outer crust is composed of this group of minerals, whose members are silicates of aluminum. FTP name this
rock-forming group of minerals whose types include orthoclase and plagioclase.
ANSWER: feldspars
Gneiss can be differentiated from schist by the amount of this mineral present. Along with quartz
and foid, two major types of this mineral make up the QAPF diagram for classifying granites. One type
of this mineral is the last one on the continuous arm of Bowen's Reaction Series, and varieties of this
mineral include labrodorite and anorthosite. For 10 points, name this most abundant class of minerals
in the earth's crust, consisting of orthoclase and plagioclase varieties.
ANSWER: feldspars
In optical luminescence dating, these minerals are exposed to bright infrared light to determine when
they were last exposed to natural sunlight. Minerals of this type that contain barium are monoclinic
and examples include celsian and hyalophane. Triclinic examples of this mineral include bytownite
and (*) labradorite while the more common alkali type is exemplified by perthite. This type of mineral
forms the last group before the branch fork in Bowen's reaction series and anorthosite denotes rocks formed
entirely of the plagioclase variety of it. Also existing in an orthoclase variety, FTP, identify this type of
silicate mineral known for forming white or pink crystals white a Mohs hardness of 6.
ANSWER: feldspars
Parallel, millimeter-thin layers of mineral that occur perpendicular to the "b" crystallographic axis
form a type of twinning named for one mineral of this class that also exhibits twinning via the
Manebach, Baveno, and Carlsbad laws. At the low anorthite end of a series, Albite is a transition
between two classes of this mineral. Minerals of this type with only Potassium or Sodium as metals
are known as the alkali class of these tectosilicate minerals whose other major class forms the continuous
branch of the Bowen's reaction series. The Calcium rich Plagioclase and the Potassium rich Orthoclase are
the most observed members of, for 10 points, which mineral class which is a 6 on the Mohs scale of
hardness and whose name comes from the German for Field Rock.
ANSWER: feldspars [accept twinning before mention]
These minerals have two perpendicular planes of cleavage and thus tend to form irregular rectangular
blocks, and one of the two major classes of these minerals display striations along cleavage planes.
Examples of these minerals include labradorite and microcline, and the evolution of these minerals is
described by the continuous branch of Bowen's Reaction Series. These minerals are grouped as being
alkalai or plagioclase, and the orthoclase type of these aluminosilicate minerals defines a Mohs hardness
value of six. Granite is primarily composed of quartz and these minerals. For 10 points, name this most
abundant type of mineral on Earth.
ANSWER: feldspars [accept alkali feldspars or K-feldspars or potassium feldspars before "labradorite"]
Alternating layers of albite with layers of one type of this mineral results in a silicate which exhibits a milky
luster. That phenomenon, adularescence, is found in moonstone. As mafic magma cools, one type of this
mineral progresses from being calcium-rich to sodium-rich on the right-hand continuous branch of Bowen's
reaction series. That is the plagioclase variety of these minerals, which is often found in granite along with
quartz. For 10 points, name this class of tectosilicate minerals, the most abundant mineral group in the
Earth's crust, whose orthoclase variety has a Mohs hardness of six.
ANSWER: feldspars [accept orthoclase feldspars before "Bowen's reaction series"]
A solid-solution of two types of this mineral can exsolve to form perthites. The continuous branch of
Bowen's reaction series consists of this mineral's forms as various solid-solutions of albite and anorthite.
Those forms characterized by the presence of sodium or calcium comprise the plagioclase series.
Potassium characterizes microcline and orthoclase, members of the alkali type of this mineral. A six on the
Mohs scale, For 10 points, name this aluminosilicate mineral, the most common in the Earth's crust.
ANSWER: Feldspar
One member of this group names a law that all members of the group follow, specifying that
lamellar crystal twins are formed in stacks. That member, albite, falls with anorthite and oligoclase
into one variety of this group, while the most prominent member of its other group is (*) orthoclase. It
is classified around six on the Mohs scale, and all examples are aluminum-containing silicate minerals.
For 10 points, name this group of minerals, classified into potassium and plagioclase varieties, the most
abundant mineral group on Earth.
ANSWER: feldspars
Arkoses are sandstones with substantial amounts of this type of mineral. One type of this mineral can
be identified by its two cleavage angles and a banding pattern known as polysynthetic twinning. One
type of this mineral is an intermixture formed when its original phase exsolves; that potassium-heavy
type of this mineral is called perthite. Albite and (*) anorthite are end-members of a series of one type of
this class of mineral. These weather into clay minerals. The continuous branch of Bowen's reaction series
runs from the calcium rich to sodium rich types of one member of this class of minerals, plagioclase, before
reaching another member, orthoclase. For 10 points, name this class of silicate minerals, which makes up
about 60% of the earth's crust and has a Mohs hardness of six.
ANSWER: feldspar
The chemical weathering of this mineral can yield kaolinite. The two major classes of this major
mineral are distinguished by the presence of striations. The continuous branch of Bowen's reaction
series contains one major class of this mineral; that branch meets the discontinuous branch at the
other major class of this mineral. Those classes of this mineral are (*) plagioclase and orthoclase. For
10 points, name this silicate mineral that makes up most of the Earth's crust.
ANSWER: feldspar
One type of these substances commonly contains two elongated regions separated by a composition
plane in Carlsbad twinning. The general molecular formula for common examples of these minerals
includes eight oxygen atoms. Microcline, orthoclase, and sanidine are the three main varieties of a
type of these minerals designated with the letter (*) "K." A type of this mineral appears at the top of the
continuous column in Bowen's reaction series. That series of this mineral are the plagioclases. For ten
points, name these minerals which are a six on the Moh's hardness scale and are the most abundant on
Earth's crust.
ANSWER: feldspar (accept "plagioclase" until "eight")
One type of this substance corresponds to the continuous, or rightmost, branch of Bowen's reaction
series; another type is polymorphous with microcline and sanidine. Three types of this non-quartz
material are used in the QAPF diagram to classify other substances. One variety has [*] sodium or
calcium in its chemical formula, while another contains potassium and is a 6 on the Mohs scale; those
varieties are plagioclase and orthoclase. For 10 points, name this class of aluminum silicate minerals, which
make up about 60% of the earth's crust.
ANSWER: feldspar [accept plagioclase feldspar until "another type" is read]
A gene-sensing system using this compound relies on the fact that double stranded DNA is shorter than
single stranded DNA. This setup uses the electrical properties of the compound to sense the small change in
length that occurs upon DNA hybridization. Paulson and Kealy accidentally prepared this compound while
trying to produce fulvalene. The coordination number of the metal that it contains was deduced based on its
reactivity to be 10. It is the internal standard for redox potentials in non-aqueous electrochemistry. For 10
points, name this compound that is made up of two cyclopentadienyl anions and iron arranged in a sandwich
shape.
ANSWER: ferrocene
Their formulator confirmed the predictions of these relations by showing that a non-linear profile of specific
gravity versus distance was obtained for water when it was placed in flasks containing sodium chloride with
varying funnel areas. One of these expressions is analogous to Fourier's law of heat conduction. The second
of these relations can be obtained by substituting the first into the continuity equation, and the first one
describes the linear dependence of mass flux on the molar average velocity of the species. For 10 points,
identify these laws which relate the diffusive flux to a phenomenological diffusion coefficient, and which
were developed after Graham's law of effusion.
ANSWER: Adolph Fick's Laws of diffusion
A piece of equipment often used in this process is similar to an Erlenmeyer flask but with an opening
for a tube at the top allowing for the connection of a suction device. That object is named for
Ernst Buchner, as is the funnel that typically is placed on top of that flask during this process.
Methods for performing this process are classified as volume or surface, the latter of which often
uses semi-permeable paper that can be rated for porosity. This process often is used to purify air or
water, and a simple device for performing this process is a sieve. Name this process of removing solid
objects from gases and liquids.
ANSWER: filtering [or filtration]
One type of this technique uses either a Buchner or a Hirsch funnel, and cannot be used if the
solvent has a low boiling point as it will evaporate before this technique can be finished. A second kind
of this technique uses the "fluted" form of a special kind of paper. This process, including the
aforementioned "vacuum" and "gravity" types, is designed to remove solutes from solution by forming
small pores that liquids can pass through but not solids. For 10 points, identify this technique often
performed by water purification systems.
ANSWER: filtration [accept equivalent answers such as filtering]
In microscale, Craig tubes are used for this procedure, which can be quantified using the beta ratio. Celite
(SEE-LIGHT) is often added to Pasteur pipettes used for this process. The final step of a re-crystallization
involves cooling a sample down, then doing this process. When it occurs in the presence of a vacuum,
Buchner (BYOOK-NER) funnels are often used. This process commonly utilizes sand when it is applied to
raw water. Unlike sieving, this procedure makes use of multiple separation points. When only using gravity,
this process requires special porous paper. It is often used to separate precipitates from saturated solvent.
For 10 points, name this method of separating solids and liquids.
ANSWER: filtration [or word forms; accept specific forms like "vacuum filtration"]
A rotary vacuum drum can be used to perform this technique, while the crossflow variety of this
technique can be used to purify antibodies. Aids used in this process include kieselguhr and perlite,
both of which can decrease resistance and obtain a cleaner product. It differs from adsorption as this
process depends not on surface charge, but rather on particle size, and it is commonly used in (*)
sewage treatment to extract solid wastes from water. For ten points, name this technique which separates
mixtures by passing them through a semipermeable membrane and can be performed with a paper and
funnel.
ANSWER: filtration (accept word forms)
Dicyanoacetylene and cyanogen are known for producing an extreme form of this phenomenon. In
zero gravity, it has a spherical front because convection does not work. Sodium ions can be
distinguished from potassium ones by using a test named for this entity, which is produced by a
common laboratory (*) apparatus named for Robert Bunsen. This phenomenon sometimes consists of
plasma formed from ionized gases, and it is the visible manifestation of combustion reactions. For 10
points, name this phenomenon that requires oxygen, heat, and fuel to appear.
ANSWER: fire [or flame]
Hydrocarbons are ordered based on the "adiabatic" temperature at which this condition occurs. According
to the NFPA rating system, the red number represents susceptibility to this condition. A common test for
either the presence of hydrogen gas or oxygen gas involves introducing this condition. Atomic emission
spectroscopy relies on the emission spectra produced when this is introduced to various metals, causing a
red color for lithium and a yellow color for sodium; that's called its namesake "test". Robert Bunsen
invented a lab device used to create it. For 10 points, name this form of ionized plasma that results from
combustion reactions.
ANSWER: fire [or flames; or combusting; or combustion; or being flammable; or being near a fire; or glowing splint; or burning splint; or really anything in that vicinity that has something to do with ignition]
One reaction with this eponym has products that follow the Anderson-Schulz-Flory distribution. Another
reaction with this eponym is modified by first combining an aryl bromide and a hydrazone in one step,
known as the Buchwald modification. Other reactions with this eponym include one that uses
phenylhydrazines to distinguish between epimeric sugars, and one that uses a cyanohydrin to produce an
oxazole. This name is given to a reflux of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol and strong acid, as well as a
construct commonly used to represent sugars, a certain "projection". For 10 points, give this name shared by
chemists Franz and Emil, which also names the most common esterification reaction.
ANSWER: Fischer (Franz and Emil)
One scientist with this surname exploited the reactivity of iodine with sulfur dioxide under aqueous
conditions to measure the quantity of water in a system. In addition to that titration mechanism, another
scientist of this name first synthesized bilirubin which won him the 1930 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Yet
another scientist with this name is the namesake of an indole synthesis mechanism and also gives his name
to a system used to graphically depict sugar molecules in two dimensions. For 10 points, identify this name
common to Karl, Hans, and Emil, who names the aforementioned projections, as well as an esterification
reaction.
ANSWER: (Karl, Hans, Hermann Emil) Fischer
This person synthesized the galloyl glycoside tanning compounds long after discovering
phenylhydrazine, the first hydrazine base. This scientist proposed the "lock and key" model to
describe enzymes. One reaction named for this chemist uses high temperatures and an acidic
environment to convert an aryl hydrazone to an indole. Another reaction that he discovered
combines a carboxylic acid with an alcohol under reflux acid catalysis. (*) For 10 point, name this
organic chemist whose method for ester production was just described and who discovered a projection
used to show the chirality of sugars.
ANSWER: Hermann Emil Fischer
He is the namesake of reaction where a sugar reacts with an alcohol in the presence of a Lewis acid catalyst
to yield a glycoside. During his time at Strasboug, he discovered the similarity between hydrazobenzene and
phenyl-hydrazine, and the latter compound and a ketone are used to synthesize indole in a reaction named
for him. He also names a reaction where a tetrahedral intermediate is formed upon the nucleophilic attack of
an alcohol group which is followed by elimination of a hydroxyl group, and 2-dimensional structures used
to represent sugars are this man's namesake "projections." For 10 points, identify this German chemist who
lends his name to an esterification.
ANSWER: Hermann Emil Fischer
Ethanol and deionized water are possible controls in this technique. This technique often involves the use of
loops of platinum or nichrome wires, and compounds tested in this technique often contain nitrate or
chloride ions. Measuring the alkalinity of the resulting compounds is one way to distinguish lithium from
strontium using this technique, as both give a red result. For 10 points, name this technique of determining
the metal in a salt by placing it over a lit Bunsen burner.
ANSWER: flame tests
One of these named after Beilstein is used to detect organo-halogen compounds. Adding a saturated
ammonium bromide solution improves the results of the one involving calcium. Often performed using
a wire inoculation loop, it distinguishes between barium and boron in that the former yields alkaline
residues while the latter does not, and between strontium and lithium the same way. For 10 points,
name this test for detecting metals, in which strontium solutions turn red and sodium solutions turn
yellow when subjected to the namesake source of heat.
ANSWER: flame test
One suggestion for getting better results in this laboratory technique is to dip the wire loop in a solution
of hydrochloric acid before dipping it in the test solution. In this test, the presence of an alkaline residue
can distinguish between sodium and lithium. This test is based on the spectral emission lines of different
elements upon heating. For 10 points, a Bunsen burner is used to create the namesake heat source in what
test for visually identifying elements in an unknown solution?
ANSWER: flame tests
One variant of this piece of equipment has a protrusion called a hose barb that allows for simple
attachment of a vacuum pump. That variant is named for Eduard Buchner (BYOOK-nehr). One of
these objects with a thin neck and single marking is the volumetric variety. Another one of these
objects specifically designed to minimize loss by (*) evaporation is named for Emil Erlenmeyer
(EARL-len-mie-yer). For 10 points, name this basic piece of laboratory equipment, a vessel typically made
of glass that is used for measuring and holding liquids.
ANSWER: flasks
One of these devices named for Buchner is often attached to a vacuum source. The Florence variety of
this object is used for boiling and the Schlenk type features a side arm with a valve. One of these objects
named for Dewar is notable for its effective insulation. One of the most popular varieties of these objects is
sometimes known as the "E-spot" and is named for Erlenmeyer. For 10 points, name this multipurpose
piece of glass laboratory equipment which can be used for measuring, mixing, or heating.
ANSWER: flasks
Atmospheric nitrogen or vacuum reaction conditions can be simulated with the Schlenk variety of these
objects. Another variety can easily connect to vacuum filtration apparatuses via a sidearm. A more common
variety than the Buchner variety contains a fill-line for measuring high-precision. For 10 points, identify
these pieces of laboratory glassware that include a volumetric kind and a familiar conical variety known as
the Erlenmeyer kind.
ANSWER: flasks
A typical Dean-Stark apparatus contains two of these entities, one connected to a fractioning column
and the other below a tap on a burette. One of these entities is sometimes named for Kitasato, and
contains an arm that can be attached to an aspirator. In addition to that type named for Buchner, a
version of these entities can have gas introduced into them via a side-arm, in the type named for Schlenk.
The Florence type has a round bottom, and the version with vacuum-enclosing walls is named for Dewar.
For 10 points, name these common pieces of laboratory glassware, exemplified by the Erlenmeyer type.
ANSWER: flasks [prompt on more general answers that imply containers]
The Touchet Formation has been used to study a sequence of these events named for Missoula. Another of
these events destroyed Lake Bonneville fifteen thousand years ago. These events can be mitigated using
bunding. The areal form of these events can be predicted by data from Doppler Radar, and Riparian zones
are especially prone to these events. The destruction of wetlands has exacerbated the impact of these events,
which levees attempt to prevent. These events occur after soil is fully saturated, and cloudbursts can cause
their "flash" variety. For ten points, name these inundations of water.
ANSWER: floods
Deposits formed by these events are known as diluvium. J. Harlen Bretz researched a series of
them in the American Northwest named for Missoula. The exceedance probability can be used to
predict the "hundred-year" type of these events. Runaway subduction is one component of a largely
discredited theory in which one of these events is the main driver of geological history. (*) Storm
surges, heavy rain, or melting snow can cause, for 10 points, what events in which water covers normally
dry land?
ANSWER: floods
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, DAPI, shows an increase in this property when bound to DNA.
Similarly, tryptophan has this property with an emission peak from 300 nm to 350 nm depending on
solvation. This property, with efficiency measured by quantum yield, was named by Stokes in an
1852 paper, which mentions earlier work by Herschel on a quinine sulfate solution that caused light
to become "epipolized". Molecular oxygen and iodine can cause quenching, interfering with it, but dynamic
quenching can be exploited in FRET. For 10 points, name this property, exhibited by corundum and calcite,
which relies on the emission of longer wavelength light from an excited sample and has a longer time-scale
than phosphoresence.
ANSWER: Fluorescence
A form of magnesium named for Rieke is used to produce Grignard reagents containing this element.
A sodium aluminum salt used to dissolve alumina contains six atoms of this element, and uranium
oxide is converted into a salt of this element before it can be used to enrich uranium. The first
compound involving xenon contains also contains six atoms of this. Four atoms of this element replace
ethylene in the monomer of Teflon. It is the most electronegative of all elements. For 10 points,
identify this element with atomic number 9 and symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine [accept F before read]
This element and carbon are the only elements found in a polymer accidently discovered by Roy Plunkett at
DuPont. A compound with six atoms of this element and one atom of uranium is used for separating
isotopes U235 and U238 through gaseous diffusion. Along with nitrogen and oxygen, this element can be
either a hydrogen bond donor or acceptor. This element, which is found in Teflon, has a value of 3.94 on
the Pauling scale of electronegativity. For 10 points, name this most electronegative element and lightest
halide, with atomic symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine [accept F before read]
Free radical substitution of hydrocarbons using this element is uncontrollably exothermic and can cleave
carbon-carbon bonds. This element is the most common one in magic acid. Oxygen has a positive oxidation
state only when bonded to this element. This element is the strongest contributor to the inductive effect and
was the first one known to form noble gas compounds when it was discovered that four atoms of it bind to
xenon. Four atoms of it per monomer occur in Teflon, and along with chlorine, it is found in Freon. The
binary acid of this element can etch glass and dissolve bone. For 10 points, name this lightest halogen, the
most electronegative element.
ANSWER: fluorine [or F]
An ion of this element is used as a masking agent when performing an EDTA titration of a mixture of
magnesium and aluminum. A common inhibitor of serine proteases contains a phosphate group
attached to two isopropyl groups and an atom of this element. One compound that contains 3 atoms
of this element is used to cleave t-BOC during solid-phase peptide synthesis. When this atom is added
to the alpha carbon of acetic acid, it significantly strengthens it via the (*) inductive effect. A powerful
Lewis acid is a compound of three atoms of this element attached to boron. Four atoms of this element are
attached to the repeating element of Teflon, and an acid of this element is used to etch glass. An ion of the
element is commonly added to drinking water. For 10 points, name this most electronegative element with
atomic number 9 and symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine [or fluoride]
This element is bonded to sodium and aluminum in cryolite, and it can be found naturally in minerals
such as topaz and apatite. It was first isolated in the lab by Henri Moissan, and a compound
containing six atoms of this element is used during the uranium enrichment process. Neil Bartlett
created the first known noble gas compound using (*) xenon and this element. This element is found in
the polymer Teflon and is also bonded to carbon and chlorine in Freon. It is an extremely strong oxidizing
agent, since it has the highest electronegativity out of all the elements. For ten points, identify this lightest
halogen with atomic number 9 and chemical symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine (accept F before read)
The strongest known superacid features antimony [AN-tuh-moh-nee] bonded to six atoms of this element. A
radioactive isotope of this element is found in an analog of glucose used as a tracer in PET scans. Uracil
with one atom of this element at the five position is used in anti-cancer therapies. Teflon consists only of
carbon and this element, which is found with sodium and aluminum in cryolite. This lightest halogen has the
largest value for electronegativity on the Pauling scale. For 10 points, name this element whose ionic form
helps prevent tooth decay.
ANSWER: fluorine [do NOT accept "fluoride"]
The acid of this element is commonly used to etch silicon glass. A compound of uranium and this
element is commonly produced in nuclear reactors. The first known binary compound of a noble gas
consists of four atoms of this element bonded to xenon. PTFE, exclusively composed of carbon and
this other element, is commonly used in (*) non-stick cookware and is marketed as Teflon. Its anion is
commonly added to water supplies to prevent tooth decay. On the Pauling scale, it has a value of 4.0,
making it the most electronegative element. For ten points, name this lightest halogen with symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine (or F before mentioned)
A homonym of this element is a polycyclic aromatic compound formed by conducting vapors of
diphenylmethane through heated tubes and has formula C13H10. The introduction of this element into an
aromatic ring is performed with the Balz-Schiemann reaction. An atom of it is located in the one position of
Sanger's reagent used for polypeptide sequencing. Four of them are found in the repeating units of the
polymer Teflon, and six of them are bonded to a central sulfur in a notable octahedral compound. Along
with nitrogen and oxygen, this lightest halogen can participate in hydrogen bonding. FTP name this element
with symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine
In organic synthesis, an acetic acid derivative containing three atoms of this element is useful due to its
extreme acidity. A compound exhibiting pentagonal bipyramidal geometry contains 7 atoms of this element
bonded to iodine--that compound is stable since this element forms very small ions. A notably square planar
compound consists of a xenon atom bonded to 4 atoms of this element. An acid consisting of hydrogen and
this element has the ability to etch glass. The Pauling scale assigns the highest value of electronegativity to
this element, whose 19 isotope is used in NMR. For 10 points, name this lightest of the halogens, an
element with atomic number 9 and symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine
This element is bonded to carbon in a synthetic polymer used as a non-stick coating for cookware. That
polymer is Teflon and uranium is enriched in a process in which it is bonded to four atoms of this element.
When this element is ionically bonded to hydrogen, it creates a compound so caustic it can eat through
glass. This element has the highest electronegativity. For 10 points, name this element that prevents tooth
decay and has chemical symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine
Calcium gluconate gel is used to treat exposure to a compound containing an ion derived from this
element. Henri Moissan developed the electrolytic process still used today to isolate its diatomic form,
and it cannot form oxyacids because it lacks a d orbital. The first noble gas compound used several
molecules of this element, and it is the most electronegative element. For 10 points, name this element,
the last with a partially filled 2p subshell, which has atomic number 9 and atomic symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine [accept F before end of question; accept hydrogen fluoride before "ion," accept hydrofluoric acid before "ion;" accept fluoride before "element"]
Along with sodium and aluminum, this element makes up the uncommon mineral cryolite. This element
bound to carbon can be used to create Teflon. Freon was a brand name given to another combination of this
element with carbon and chlorine, which is considered a key agent in ozone layer depletion. This halogen
has an electronegativity of 4.0, making it the most electronegative element. For 10 points, name this
element whose anion is used in a process that makes public water healthier for teeth.
ANSWER: fluorine
This element was combined with xenon to form the first two-element noble gas compound, and its
compound with uranium is used as fuel for nuclear reactors. Compounds of this element with
chlorine and carbon were banned due to their depleting the (*) ozone layer. This element is added to
municipal water supplies and toothpaste to prevent cavities, and has the highest ranking on the Pauling
scale, meaning it is the most electronegative element. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number
nine and symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine
One example of this phenomenon, named for the Tule grass, forms upwind of the Sierra Nevada
mountains. The advective type of this phenomenon occurs when moist air is cooled by the wind. This
suspension of (*) water droplets in air is differentiated from haze by its water content. Visibility problems
in San Francisco are often caused by, for 10 points, what meteorological phenomenon, a dense cloud-like
mist near the ground?
ANSWER: fog
The disjunctive class of this property is split into stylolitic, anastomosing, rough, and smooth types.
The mylonitic subclass of this property is formed during ductile shearing. If a rock with this property
becomes folded and microfolds are created, a crenulation has resulted. This property replaces
bedding fissility before the growth of porphyroblasts. It often arises due to differential pressure
creating a preferred orientation, especially when the source rock is a (*) phyllosilicate. Because contact
metamorphism typically occurs at high temperatures but low pressures, the rocks it forms, like hornfels,
notably lack it. For 10 points, name this metamorphic texture that imparts a characteristic planar structure to
rocks and which is prominent in gneiss and schist.
ANSWER: secondary foliation [or cleavage; prompt on lineation, schistosity, or gneiss banding]
Ylides are molecules in which two adjacent atoms have opposite ones, and the most stable
resonance structure most often has the fewest of these. They assume homolytic bond cleavage and
approximate the amount of electron density surrounding an atom in a compound. The correct Lewis
structure for a molecule has, for 10 points, the fewest of what abstraction, typically calculated by
subtracting from the number of valence electrons the number of lone pair electrons and half the
number of shared electrons?
ANSWER: formal charges
Reacting this compound with hydrogen sulfide creates trithiane, while its suspended in an 18M
solution of sulfuric acid in the reagent used to test for MDMA, called the Marquis reagent. A 10%
Neutral Buffered solution of this compound is used as a histological fixative, and during
immunoprecipitation assays its used to crosslink proteins. In solution it polymerizes to either its
"para" form or trioxane, which is why its stored as a 37% solution. The Cannizzaro reaction of this
compound creates methanol and methanoic acid. For 10 points, name this simple carbonyl compound,
which is used to preserve cadavers and frogs.
ANSWER: Formaldehyde or Methanal or Formalin
Industrially, pentaerythritol is produced by reacting this compound with acetaldehyde, and when
dehydrated this compound yields trioxane. Under basic conditions, it undergoes the Cannizzaro
reaction to create methanol. The most common wood adhesive is formed by combining it with phenol,
and an elimination reaction between phenol and this compound creates (*) bakelite. Iron oxide with
molybdenum is the usual catalyst for producing it from methanol and diatomic oxygen, which produces
excess water. Often used as a preservative in laboratory experiments, this is, for 10 points, what compound
with formula CH2O, the simplest aldehyde?
ANSWER: formaldehyde [or methanal or formalin or formol or methyl aldehyde or methylene oxide]
A mixture of this compound and formaldehyde is used in the methylation of amines via the
Eschweiler-Clarke reaction. The ammonium salt of this substance is used to synthesize amines from
ketones in the Leuckhart reaction, and is a common mobile-phase additive in liquidchromatography/mass-spec experiments. A dimethylated amide derivative of this substance is a
popular solvent for SN2 reactions and is called DMF. It can be produced by heating oxalic acid in
glycerol or by treating ethyl isonitrile with (*) HCl. Adding sulfuric acid to this compound is an easy
way of liberating carbon monoxide, and heat decomposes this substance into water and carbon monoxide.
For 10 points, name this simple carboxylic acid with formula HCOOH, which is notably found in bee stings
and crushed ant extracts.
ANSWER: formate or formic acid
Garrison discovered that this compound could be created though helium ion bombardment of a solution of
water, iron, and carbon dioxide. This is the smaller of the two products when reacting a monosaccharide
with excess periodic acid. This compound and ammonia are used in a reduction of imines named for
Leuckart. Pyruvate lyase converts pyruvate into acetyl-coA and this compound. Ozonolysis of a terminal
alkene under oxidative conditions yields this compound as one of the products. Glycerol can catalyze the
breakdown of oxalic acid into this compound.This compound is found in bee stings. For 10 points, name
this simplest carboxylic acid.
ANSWER: formic acid [or methanoic acid; or formate]
A molecule with this many atoms can undergo umbrella-like nitrogen inversion corresponding to a 1.26 cm
microwave resonance. This many protons can be donated by a hexadentate chelating agent often found as a
disodium salt, which is known as EDTA. Substitution at the 1 position and this position is described as para.
This is the first period whose elements have occupied d orbitals. This many atoms are found in substances
like formaldehyde with trigonal planar geometry. This many valence electrons are found in carbon-group
elements. For 10 points, give this number, the atomic number of beryllium and the number of atoms in
hydrogen peroxide.
ANSWER: four [accept anything that refers to four of something, such as four protons or fourth period]
The Tanabe-Sugano diagram for this many d electrons is the first with a vertical line
discontinuity. The "oxo wall" states this is the maximum number of valence d-electrons in oxo
complexes. A linear triatomic molecule has this many vibrational degrees of freedom. The
cycloalkane with this many carbon atoms has two butterfly conformers. Four of the five 3d orbitals,
but not the 3d sub z-squared orbital, have this many (*) lobes. This is the lowest principal quantum
number for f-orbitals. The first binary compound of a noble gas consists of xenon bonded to this many
fluorine atoms. This is the number of ligands in molecules with the see-saw and square planar geometries.
For 10 points, give this number, which also gives the atomic number of beryllium.
ANSWER: four
This process can be modeled using a diagram that includes operating lines for stripping and
rectification sections; the latter line has slope of R over R plus one, where R is the reflux ratio. That
modeling method is named after McCabe and Thiele and gives the theoretical number of stages
required to achieve the desired result. This process requires that a namesake type of (*) column,
which is packed with a nonreactive substance such as glass beads, be placed before the Y-adapter. This
allows for the formation of a vapor-liquid equilibrium so that only the most volatile vapors rise to the top
and are allowed into the condensing tube. For 10 points, name this type of distillation used to separate
liquids with similar boiling points.
ANSWER: fractional distillation [prompt on distillation]
The Fenske equation is used to describe the minimum number of theoretical plates required in this process,
while the McCabe-Thiele method can be used to model it. Raschig rings and Perkin triangles are used to
increase its efficiency, and it needs a condenser to allow revaporization, which in turn causes different
substances to separate due to Raoult's law. For 10 points, name this process often seen in petroleum
processing plants, which makes use of a Vigreux column and the different boiling points of substances to
separate a mixture into its component parts.
ANSWER: fractional distillation [prompt on distillation]
One person from this country built a 67-meter pendulum to demonstrate the rotation of the Earth. The
international prototype kilogram is kept in a museum in this country. One chemist from this country
proposed the law of conservation of mass and wrote the Elementary Treatise on Chemistry. A Polish-born
resident of this country became the first woman to win a Nobel Prize after her discovery of radium. For 10
points, name this country, the home of Marie Curie and Antoine Lavoisier (lah-vwah-see-AIR).
ANSWER: France
The Flory-Huggins model can be used to derive this quantity. Differentiating this quantity with
respect to volume yields pressure, while differentiating with respect to number of particles yields
chemical potential, and differentiating with respect to temperature yields entropy. The two main types
of this are defined as either the internal energy or enthalpy minus the product of temperature and
entropy. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity that denotes the amount of work available in
a system and comes in Helmholtz and Gibbs varieties.
ANSWER: free energy [or Gibbs free energy; or Helmholtz free energy]
The area under the reversible magnetization curve of a superconductor is equal to the difference
in one type of this quantity between the normal and superconducting states. The change in another
type of this quantity is equal to negative R T times the natural log of the equilibrium constant by the
(*) Nernst equation. Both types equal the change in either internal energy or enthalpy minus the
product of temperature and the change in entropy. For 10 points, name this kind of energy that comes
in Helmholtz and Gibbs types, the energy available to do work.
ANSWER: free energy [accept condensation energy until "difference"; accept Helmholtz free energy before "another type"]
Minimizing this quantity for a superconductor gives the Landau-Ginzburg equations. In statistical
mechanics, it can be defined as the negative log of the partition function divided by beta. One of its
forms is analogous to the internal energy of a system with variable entropy, and another form can be
expressed as the difference between enthalpy and entropy times temperature. For 10 points, name
these energy-like state functions for a system in thermodynamic equilibrium, which have forms named
after Helmholtz and Gibbs.
ANSWER: free energy [accept Helmholtz free energy before "another form"]
The log of the partition function times Boltzmann's constant times temperature yields one form of this
quantity. The type of this calculated by subtracting the product of temperature and entropy from internal
energy also gives that quantity and is named for Helmholtz. Enthalpy minus the product of temperature and
entropy is equal to the Gibbs variety of this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of useful
work that can be extracted from a system.
ANSWER: free energy
During the catalytic cycle of ribonucleotide reductase, cysteine-439 forms one of these, which is then
transferred to the substrate and to a tyrosine residue. Potassium nitrosodisulfonate is a persistent example of
one. N-bromosuccinimide is used in substitutions that have one of these as an intermediate, while a
technique used to image them commonly uses TEMPO to trap them. Besides EPR, they are commonly
created by hemolytic bond cleavage in species like peroxides. Reactive oxygen species are a subset of, for
10 points, these chemical species that contain an unpaired electron.
ANSWER: free radicals
Polymerization techniques using these compounds include ATRP and RAFT. These compounds can
be detected by NMR using a CIDNP or by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy. Persistent
examples of these compounds include Fremy's salt and the triphenylmethyl one which was discovered
by Moses Gomberg. During polymerization, these compounds are created by the hemolytic cleavage
of (*) bonds. The electron transport chain creates the superoxide one, and these compounds are neutralized
by antioxidants. For 10 points, name these compounds that contain an unpaired electron.
ANSWER: Free Radicals
The Q-e scheme regards the reaction rate of monomeric examples of these substances. AIBN is used to
create these substances for synthesis reactions and another example of these is TEMPO. The effectiveness
of starting a reaction using these can be decreased by solvent cage effects. Heat or an initiator is used to
create these through homolysis of precursors like diatomic chlorine. Specific applications of these species
include both polymerization and cracking. They aren't carbocations, but they can be stabilized by
hyperconjugation and mechanisms involving them use fishhook curly arrows. For 10 points, name usually
reactive these species with an unpaired electron, whose damage to cells can be prevented by antioxidants.
ANSWER: free radical
In mass spectrometry ["speck"-TRAH-mih-tree], impact ionization results in the formation of cations
with this property, which tend to fragment. In reactions involving these entities, their movement is
depicted with fishhook arrows, such as in the diagram for the homolytic [hoh-moh-LIT-ik] cleavage
of a bond. Molecular oxygen's paramagnetism demonstrates that it exists as one of these entities.
Reactive oxygen species tend to be this type of compound, whose damaging effects on the body are
stopped by antioxidants. Name these typically unstable compounds that are characterized by having
unpaired valence electrons.
ANSWER: free radicals [prompt on unpaired electrons before the end]
One method of detecting the distance between a pair of these species is the PELDOR experiment.
Introducing species like PNO, DMPO and TEMPO to short-lived versions of these species creates
nitroxide-based persistent ones, which can then be imaged by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy. Halogenation reactions with these species as intermediates tend to lack
stereospecificity. These species are created by homolysis when a halogen-halogen or halogen-carbon
bond is cleaved by (*) UV light, which explains why CFCs are damaging. Mitochondria generate the
superoxide one, which damages DNA. They are reactive because they violate the octet rule, often having
only 7 valence electrons. For 10 points, name these compounds with an unpaired electron.
ANSWER: free radical [prompt on "spins" before "superoxide"; prompt on "electrons" before mention]
Spin trapping reagents stabilize these molecules so that they may be studied properly in ESR spectroscopy.
One molecule that interacts with these types of molecules is a tripeptide that includes a reactive sulfhydryl
group and is oxidized during the reaction. The namesake dismutase of one of these molecules disassociates
it into hydrogen peroxide and oxygen, and other molecules that degrade these mitogenic molecules in cells
include vitamins E and C. Notable examples of these include the superoxide anion, and antioxidants prevent
the formation of these molecules. For 10 points, name these molecules that are characterized by having an
unpaired electron.
ANSWER: free radicals [prompt on oxidizing molecules at any point]
Type Ia ribonucleotide reductases use a tyrosine based example of this form in their R2 subunits to reduce
NDPs. B12-utilizing enzymes such as diol dehydrogenase that make use of these in their mechanism
coordinate 5 prime deoxyadenosine to cobalt. Two of these substances, Fremy's Salt and TEMPO, are
oxidizing agents. Zinc triphenylmethyl chloride was reacted with benzene by Moses Gomberg to produce
one of these. EPR spectroscopy is used to study these molecules. Heat and light can induce the formation of
these which can drive the polymerization of alkenes. They are produced by the homolytic cleavage of
bonds. Antioxidants stop the production of these molecules. For 10 points, name these molecules that have
an unpaired electron.
ANSWER: free radicals
The first "persistent" one of these compounds, the triphenylmethyl one, was discovered by Moses Gomberg.
One technique used to image these compounds uses TEMPO as a trap and is known as ESR. These
compounds are usually created in the first step of a polymerization chain reaction by the homolytic cleavage
of bonds. The electron transport chain forms the superoxide one. The body uses antioxidants such as
Vitamins A, C, and E to neutralize them. For 10 points, name these highly reactive compounds with an
unpaired electron.
ANSWER: free radicals
In CIDNP ("kidnap"), these structures are assumed to occupy various spin states in a non-Boltzmann
distribution, and the standard enthalpy associated with a compound breaking up into two of these structures
is defined as the bond disassociation energy. These structures are studied in EPR spectroscopy, and
compounds like AIBN are used to generate these. These structures are generally formed in reactions that are
shown as fish-hooked arrows, and these molecules are often generated by chain transfer in reactions that is
used to make polymers. Catalase and antioxidants prevent the formation of these structures. For 10 points,
name these molecules which have unpaired electrons.
ANSWER: free radicals
A halogen in this form may be produced homolytically by applying ultraviolet light to a halogen gas, and
can then be used to halogenate alkanes in a chain reaction. In reaction mechanisms involving them, singleheaded arrows are likely to be necessary. In the atmosphere, ozone is broken down by reacting with them. A
hydroxyl one would be written "O H dot". Superoxide dismutase scavenges one of these chemicals, and
vitamins A and E scavenge precursors to them, as do many other antioxidants. One theory proposes that the
buildup of these substances over time is the main cause of aging. For 10 points, name these reactive neutral
chemicals that have unpaired electrons.
ANSWER: free radicals
Barton-McCombie deoxygenation converts tributyltin hydride into one of these compounds in order
to remove a hydroxyl group. They can be reacted with nitrones or nitroso compounds to form a
stable spin adduct, allowing for the measurement of hyperfine splitting due to spin coupling with the
nucleus; that is the spin trapping technique. AIBN is used to create these compounds with a net
release of nitrogen gas. They are (*) often created by treating reagents with peroxide and light, since the
oxygen-oxygen bond in peroxide easily undergoes homolytic cleavage, and they can be analyzed by
electron spin resonance. Reactions involving them, such as anti-Markovnikov additions and chain
polymerizations, consist of initiation, propagation, and termination steps. For 10 points, name these
compounds removed by antioxidants that have unpaired electrons.
ANSWER: free radicals
A well-known example of an effect involving a persistent and transient one of these molecules is the Barton
reaction; that effect was elucidated by Ingold and Fischer. NBS is used in electrophilic additions and
reactions involving these molecules, which can abstract hydrogen. Binding these molecules to the
compound DMPO or nitro, nitroso or nitrone functional groups allows them to be analyzed by ESR in a
technique known as spin trapping. When drawing reactions involving these molecules, which usually
proceed under high temperatures or UV light, one must use fish hook arrows. Reactions using them have
three stages: initiation, propagation, and termination. A theory proposed by Denham Harman implicates
them in the aging process. These highly reactive chemical species are neutralized by antioxidants. For 10
points, identify this term for atoms or molecules with unpaired electrons.
ANSWER: free radicals
Dynemicin A works by creating one of these substances, known as a warhead, which kills cancerous cells
by abstracting two hydrogen atoms from DNA. Bargon and Fischer discovered that CIDNP ("kidnap") can
be used to detect them. The reaction between triphenylmethyl bromide with silver kicked off the study of
these substances. EPR is used instead of NMR to study these substances, whose study was pioneered by
Moses Gomberg. The first step of the anti-Markovnikov addition of hydrogen bromide to an alkene
produces these substances via homolytic cleavage of the hydrogen-bromine bond. One of these is converted
into hydrogen peroxide and oxygen by the enzyme superoxide dismutase. Catalase also rids the body of, for
10 points, what chemical species with unpaired electrons?
ANSWER: free radicals [accept biradicals for the first sentence]
These types of molecules can be formed from Fenton's reagent. Peresters form acyl ones when heated,
which lose carbon dioxide to form carbon ones. The first of these compounds to be discovered was formed
in a reaction of triphenylchloride with zinc, a result found by Moses Gomberg. AIBN is often used to form
them for use in chain polymerization, and these molecules can be destroyed by disproportionation and
combination reactions. They can also be destroyed be vitamins A, C, and E, which are antioxidants. They
form symmetrically from the homolytic cleavage of bonds. For 10 points, name this type of molecule
exemplified by nitric oxide which contains an unpaired electron.
ANSWER: Free radicals
Alkoxy examples of these are produced by thermal decomposition of dialkyl peroxides. Nbromosuccinimide serves as a donor of these compounds, which are also intermediates in the
degradation of nitrites to nitrosoalcohols in the Barton reaction. Gomberg's reagent was the first
persistent one prepared, and was relatively unreactive due to steric hindrance from three phenyl
groups. All the intermediates, but none of the products of the Birch reduction are this type of
compound. Hyperfine interactions in these substances can be measured by means of ESR, in which they
resonate when radiated with gigahertz-frequency photons. Photodissociation of CFCs yields substances of
this type which are believed to be primarily responsible for the depletion of the ozone layer. For 10 points,
name these typically-reactive substances which contain unpaired electrons.
ANSWER: free radicals
A eutectic system consists of a mixture that performs this process at a lower temperature than each of its
substituents. Clarence Birdseye developed a technology that induces this process in certain substances.
Most substances perform this transition through crystallization of their molecules, and amorphous
substances do so without forming regular structures. Supercooled substances have not undergone this
transition but are under the appropriate conditions to do so. Water notably expands when it undergoes this
process. For 10 points, name this phase transition from a liquid to a solid, which for water occurs at zero
degrees Celsius.
ANSWER: freezing [or solidification; prompt on "crystallization" or equivalents before mentioned]
This quantity tends to decrease with increasing pressure for water, because water has a negative
slope for its namesake "line" on a PT diagram. After carbon, tungsten has the second-highest value
for this quantity on the Periodic Table, which is why it's used in light bulbs. High concentrations of
solutes cause this property to (*) "depress". The process which occurs at this point is also called fusion. It
equals 273 Kelvin for water. For 10 points, name this temperature at which a liquid turns into a solid.
ANSWER: freezing point [or melting point]
Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation returns substances to this value after they have
exceeded it. The depression of this value is dependent on the van't Hoff factor and the molality of the
solution, making it a colligative property. The removal of energy from a material equal to the latent heat
of fusion typically occurs at this value. For 10 points, name this temperature at which liquids undergo a
phase change to solids, which typically occurs for water at zero degrees on the Celsius temperature
scale.
ANSWER: freezing point [or melting point; prompt on freezing]
The phenomenon of the location of this value changing from a normally equivalent other value is called
thermal hysteresis. A eutectic point becomes the lowest value at which this point can be reached for
systems that undergo a depression of this value. That depression can be caused by the addition of another
compound to a pure solvent, such as adding salt to water or ice. For 10 points, name this measure of the
point at which the liquid and solid phases are in equilibrium, which for water occurs at 32 degrees
Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: freezing point [or crystallization point; or melting point]
The activity caused by this property is not undergone by sodium acetate trihydrate molecules in hand
warmers, and the energy required to carry out the process described by this property is the heat of fusion. A
solution of ethylene glycol and water is used by the automotive industry to achieve a * lower value for this
property, and a phase diagram shows that the value of this property increases with pressure. The value for
this property is equal to the melting point. For 10 points, name this point at which a liquid turns into a solid,
which for water is zero degrees Celsius.
ANSWER: freezing point [accept melting point until *]
The Ghyben-Herzberg ratio gives the depth at which this kind of substance becomes polluted. This
kind of substance provides the environment of limnicoid animals. Catadromous species come to this
kind of environment to reproduce, in contrast to their anadromous counterparts. This substance's
namesake lens can be found over atolls, which is why it is (*) potable. Excess phosphorous in
environments composed of this kind of substance is the most common cause of eutrophication. This
substance is mixed with another substance containing more dissolved solids to create a brackish substance,
which is found in estuaries. For 10 points, name this type of substance that can be found in lakes and rivers,
as opposed to the oceans or seas.
ANSWER: fresh water [Prompting on "water" seems dubious to me, but let's do so. Prompt on "lake water" or "river water" or "ground water"]
The Vilsmeier reaction achieves the same effect as this reaction by proceeding through an iminium
intermediate. It is replaced by the Gatterman-Koch reaction with carbon monoxide, and a two-step process
beginning with it replaces a related reaction that, unless the starting material is tertiary, will lead to
rearrangement. Moreover, that related reaction generates a more reactive product, leading to polyalkylation,
so instead this reaction is followed by Clemmensen or Wolff-Kishner reduction. FTP, identify this reaction,
catalyzed by Lewis acids like aluminum trichloride, a substitution reaction that links a terminal carbonyl
compound to a benzene ring.
ANSWER: Friedel-Crafts acylation
A reaction related to it occurs with copper iodide as a catalyst and uses carbon monoxide to produce
benzaldehyde, while another can couple two arenes. Those reactions are dubbed Gatterman-Koch and
Scholl. Another reaction of this type can occur between oxalyl chloride and indole, whose product can be
hydrolyzed to a carboxylic acid. In the more common variety, a Clemmensen reduction can be used to
reduce the carbonylated product. For 10 points, give this class of reactions that uses a Lewis acid such as
aluminum chloride to either arylate or alkylate an aromatic system such as benzene.
ANSWER: Friedel-Crafts reaction [prompt on "electrophilic aromatic substitution"]
In a March 2012 paper, Shu-Li You and coworkers used a chiral N-triflyl phosphoramide catalyst with this
reaction to enantioselectively synthesize fluorene (with an e) derivatives. A book on the chemistry of this
reaction was written by George Olah. This name reaction is part of a class of reactions that creates a
Wheland intermediate. Due to it's slow rate, it almost always fails when one of its reactants has a strong
electron-withdrawing group, like a sulfonyl or nitro group. One modification of this reaction formylates an
arene by passing a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrochloric acid gases over it, is used to produce
benzaldehydes, and is the Gatterman-Koch reaction. This electrophilic aromatic substitution adds moieties
to aromatic rings using a Lewis acid catalyst like aluminum chloride. For 10 points, identify this doublyeponymous reaction that includes an acylation and alkylation.
ANSWER: Friedel-Crafts reaction [or Friedel-Crafts acylation before "acylation" is read; or FriedelCrafts alkylation before "alkylation" is read]
Succinic anhydride can be used to produce naphthalene when this reaction is followed by reduction
of a ketoacid, and then a second repetition of this reaction. Two rings couple in a variation of this
reaction used in the Haworth synthesis. The Scholl reaction is a variant of this reaction, and in the
prelude to another of its variants, carbon monoxide and hydrochloric acid react in the presence of
copper (I) chloride, before they then react with an arene. It is used in the (*) Gatterman-Koch
Reaction. Carbocations form after a catalyst such as iron(III) chloride or aluminum(III) chloride causes the
double bond of an unhindered aromatic ring to grab an electrophile. Commonly performed on benzene, it
requires a Lewis acid and is an electrophilic aromatic substitution. For ten points, name this doubly
eponymous reaction, which comes in alkylation and acylation varieties.
ANSWER: Friedel-Crafts Acylation or Alkylation
Solid oxide devices of this type utilize materials such as zirconia treated with yttria and nickel
ceramics. Solid polymer ones employ ion-conducting membranes such as Nafion. In another of type
of this device, molten potassium lithium carbonate reacts with (*) hydrogen and carbon monoxide.
Those contain alkali solution of sodium or potassium hydroxide, they can convert hydrogen and oxygen to
water. For 10 points, name these devices that use electrochemical reactions in electrolytes to convert the
chemical energy into electricity.
ANSWER: fuel cell
Hemond and Hechner-Levy use a value called this "capacity" which, multiplied by this quantity, gives the
concentration of a chemical in a medium. This quantity for a mixture depends linearly on its components by
the Lewis-Randall rule. The activity of a species is equal to this quantity over a reference value. The
differential of the log of this quantity over a reference value is equal to one over RT times the differential of
Gibbs free energy.This quantity's log times Boltzmann's constant times temperature equals mu. For 10
points, name this expression of chemical potential, an adjusted pressure that describes a substance's
tendency to leave a phase.
ANSWER: fugacity
In environmental chemistry, Multimedia Models of this quantity can be useful for calculations of
equilibria in air, water, and soil. For non-ideal gases, the the derivative of the natural log of this
quantity with respect to mole fraction of two components of a liquid is equal according to the
Duhem-Margules equation The total value for this quantity in a mixture is given as the sum of the
values of each (*) constituent of the mixture by the the Lewis-Randall rule. For a real gas, this quantity is
defined as the pressure an ideal gas would have if it had the same chemical potential as the real gas, and for
ideal gases it is equal to the pressure. For ten points, name this quantity that quantifies the tendency of a gas
tendency to flee a certain phase.
ANSWER: fugacity
It's not pH, but a mineral redox buffer is used to constrain this quantity for oxygen in a rock system,
and in such an analysis the log of this quantity is plotted against temperature for each component of
the rock. It's not heat, but in the McKay et al approach this quantity times its namesake capacity is
equal to the concentration. In a high-pressure VLE, the equation for this quantity is modified with
the Poynting correction factor. It doesn't appear in Raoult's law, but this quantity for a component is
equal to its (*) mole fraction times its total by the Lewis-Randall rule. This quantity is equal to its standard
form times the exponential of the difference of the current and standard chemical potential over RT. At a
given chemical potential, this quantity is equal to the pressure for an ideal gas. For 10 points, name this
quantity which gives the tendency of a molecule to escape a particular phase.
ANSWER: fugacity
For a dense fluid at high pressure, pressure affects this quantity, necessitating an exponential integral called
the Poynting factor to correct it. At the same phase, temperature, and pressure, this quantity is equal in pure
solutions and ideal solutions according to the Lewis-Randall rule. It also simplifies the calculation of
chemical potential of a non-ideal gas to an ideal potential plus the natural log of the ratio between this and
standard pressure times RT. In non-ideal gases, this quantity is equal to a coefficient, symbolized phi,
multiplied by pressure, but in ideal gases it equals pressure. For 10 points, name this quantity with units of
pressure that is defined as the tendency of a substance to escape from its current phase, symbolized by f.
ANSWER: fugacity [prompt on ''f'' before it is mentioned]
Environmental media with high capacities for this quantity can keep greater amounts of a particular
chemical while maintaining low values for this quantity. Mayer's series expansion for pressure uses
powers of this quantity. At constant temperature, the change in the logarithm of this quantity is
proportional to the change in the chemical potential. In a (*) mixture, it measures the difference
between the actual partial molar Gibbs and the ideal partial molar Gibbs. Raoult's law can be derived by
setting this quantity equal for two different phases at equilibrium from the Lewis-Randall rule. It is used in
non-ideal gases and has units of pascals. For 10 points, name this measure of adjusted pressure, the
tendency of a substance to escape a phase, symbolized f.
ANSWER: fugacity
This molecule has a 5-fold-degenerate HOMO band at h sub u and a 3-fold-degenerate t sub one u
LUMO band. A solution of sarcosine and paraformaldehyde in toluene is heated to create an Nmethyl-pyrrolidine derivative of this molecule. Brominated diethyl malonate and DBU are used to
add cyclopropane to this molecule. Those reactions are named for (*) Prato and Bingel. This molecule
is in the I sub h symmetry group, which has order 120. Solutions of it are deep purple because it has a dip in
absorbance at 450 and 700 nanometres, meaning individual molecules emit either blue or red. This
molecule was originally discovered by Kroto, Smalley, and Curl by using a laser on graphite. For 10 points,
name this molecule which consists of 60 carbon atoms and has a soccer-ball shape.
ANSWER: buckminsterfullerene [or buckyballs; do NOT accept "nanotubes" or "carbon nanotubes"]
Treating a solid variant of this class of molecules with six equivalents of alkali metal results in the A6
phase which has a filled t1u ("T sub 1U") pi-molecular orbital. These molecules were first produced
through the laser vaporization and then cooling via helium gas of their component atoms in an experiment
named after Smiley and Krato. One variant of this class of molecules often produced via the
Kratschmer-Huffman method draws its strength from its sp2 bonds, has single and double walled varieties,
and is known as the nanotube. For 10 points, name this class of molecules, the most famous example of
which has formula C60.
ANSWER: Fullerene [Do not accept "Buckminsterfullerene"]
1-chloronaphthalene is the most effective solvent of these compounds, which can spawn side chains
in the Bingel reaction. They have been found with helium in meteorites, and pure substances of them
are a dark purple color. Discovered by Kroto, Smalley, and Curl, these molecules always have structures
containing twelve pentagons, regardless of whether there are seventy or over two hundred atoms in
them. For 10 points, name these allotropes containing sixty or more carbon atoms, examples of which
include carbon nanotubes and "buckyballs."
ANSWER: buckminsterfullerenes [prompt on "buckyballs" before read; prompt on buckytubes; prompt on "C60"]
Using Danishefsky's dienes with these compounds in thermal Diels-Alder reactions results in the
predominant trans product and a non-concerted mechanism. Nagata came up with a method to purify
mixtures of these substances by adding DBU to 1,2,3 - trimethylbenzene. An impractical way to make these
compounds is by pyrolytic dehydration or dehalogenation. Sarcosine forms a bridge over them in one
reaction. Usually produced by the Hufmann-Kratschmer method, these participants in the Prato reaction can
follow isolated pentagon rules and can have a few of their bonds broken to introduce small molecules via
the open cage method. Consisting of tube, ellipsoid, and sphere shaped compounds, for 10 points, name
these carbon molecules, including C60, which is called the buckyball.
ANSWER: fullerenes [prompt on "buckyballs" or stuff like that]
The most common examples of these compounds can be purified on the laboratory scale by complexation
with DBU which eliminates more complex forms from mixtures containing them. Azomethine ylides add
functional groups onto them in a 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction named for Prato. The 6:6 ring bonds of
these structures are shorter than the 6:5 bonds, and they are only allowed to have adjacent pentagon
structures. Cylindrical variants of these structures are called carbon nanotubes, and they are caged
molecules made of hexagonal carbon rings. For 10 points, identify these chemical structures which are
named for the architect who proposed the geodesic dome.
ANSWER: fullerenes [accept buckministerfullerenes; prompt on buckyballs]
In the presence of a strong base, diethyl malonate can react with molecules of this family in the Bingel
reaction. These molecules were recently synthesized by a process that ends with flash vacuum pyrolysis and
lots of radicals being formed, in very low yield. Generally, the presence of double bonds makes them
electrophilic, although the electron density surprisingly cannot delocalize over the whole molecule. These
molecules were first synthesized, however, by shining laser radiation at over 10,000 degrees Kelvin at
graphite sheets. The resulting molecules belonged to, for 10 points, what molecular family of closed fused
aromatic rings, which includes C78 and C60.
ANSWER: fullerenes [do not accept "buckminsterfullerene"]
The reversible derivatization of these compounds and separation of their functionalized
intermediates is the Bingel-retro strategy. Their crystals can undergo exohedral (*) alkali-metal
doping and when they enclose metal atoms they are endohedral. They can form from laser vaporization of
graphite rods and often consist of pentagons and hexagons forming cages and planar sheets such as
graphene. For 10 points, name this family of carbon allotropes that include nanotubes and buckyballs.
ANSWER: fullerene
Methano-examples of these molecules are synthesized in the Bingel reaction, and this class of molecules
was first discovered in experiments simulating the atmosphere of red giants. The electrodes of paper
batteries are built from another molecule in this class, which can also be used to construct cables with one
hundred times the tensile strength of steel. When joined with alkali metals, molecules in this class formed
the first superconductors to function above nineteen kelvins, and this class is considered the third allotrope
of carbon along with diamond and graphite. Named for the designer of the geodesic dome, identify this
class of large carbon molecules that includes the buckyball and nanotube.
ANSWER: fullerene [accept buckminsterfullerenes; prompt on buckyball, nanotube, or buckytube before mentioned]
These compounds can be synthesized by the Huffman-Kratschmer process. They were isolated when highdensity helium was passed over rotating graphite disk, and the resulting ionized material passed through an
integration cup; that experiment was performed by Kroto, Smalley, and Kurl. They can be used to form
endohedral inclusion compounds, and a flat version is called graphene, while the cylindrical ones are
termed nanotubes. For 10 points, identify this class of carbon allotropes, whose most common example is a
ball composed of 60 carbons.
ANSWER: buckministerfullerenes or fullerene
Adding DBU to a solution of 1,2,3-trimethylbenzene is a popular method of purifying these compounds,
and Ottero and Biddau have recently described a direct synthesis of them via cyclohydrogenation. One type
of these molecules has optical properties described by the Kataura plot and has zigzag, chiral, and armchair
configurations. Azomethane ylides are utilized in the Prato 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of these molecules
while the Bingel reaction is a widely used method for the cyclopropanation of this class of molecules.
Synthesized using the Humann-Kratschmer method of arc-discharge, laboratory purification of these
compounds often involves columns of Elorit carbon. While aromatic in nature, their spherical variety's
inability to delocalize over the entire molecule leads to slight anionic character. Found as rings, clusters,
and nanotubes, this is, for ten points, what class of molecule named for an architect and includes its most
famous member, C60.
ANSWER: Buckministerfullerenes or buckyballs or carbon nanotube
Fully substituted derivatives of this compound can be synthesized by dehydrating the product of the
pyradine-catalyzed reaction of an alpha-halogen carbonyl with a beta-dicarbonyl. An unexpected
property of this molecule results from the delocalization of one of the lone pairs on its electronegative
component. The most useful derivative of this compound is formed by catalytic reduction over
palladium; use of that derivative often allows organo-metallic reactions to take place with lowervalency metals, for example a Reformatsky reaction on copper-two salts. This five-membered organic
heterocycle has one oxygen, four carbons, and eight pairs of bonding electrons and is therefore (*)
aromatic. This chemical is synthesized in the oxygen Paal-Knorr synthesis and the Feist-Benary synthesis.
For 10 points, name this chemical that has a derivative with four added hydrogens that is a widely used mild
organic solvent.
ANSWER: furan [accept on tetrahydrofuran or other furan derivatives until "eight pairs"; prompt on permutations of H4C4O or the forumlae of other furan derivatives]
For the case of 1,3-dienes, homogenous palladium can be used in conjunction with the primary catalyst in
this reaction to produce N-substituted imides. An alternative workup for this procedure involves IngManske hydrolysis instead of base catalyzed cleavage and the final step includes a nucleophilic acyl
substitution. It begins when potassium hydroxide deprotonates the imide proton of a phthalimide to produce
a nucleophile that undergoes an SN2 reaction with an alkyl halide. The resulting N-alkyl phthalimide can be
cleaved using hydrazine to produce a dicarboxylic acid. For 10 points, what is this organic reaction used to
synthesis primary amines from alkyl halides?
ANSWER: Gabriel synthesis
Medical uses for this element depend on the body treating it like the ferric ion, and though it is not iodine, it
has been used to correct the hypercalcemia associated with malignant bone cancer. This element was the
first to be crystallized by molecular-beam epitaxy in order to produce thin wafers of its widely used arsenide
semiconductor. The transformation of this element into germanium is the basis for neutrino-detecting
telescopes, and it is the metal most often used to construct light-emitting diodes. Its discovery by
Boisbaudran in 1875 confirmed the existence of Mendeleyev's eka-aluminum, and it has the largest liquid
temperature range of any element. Famous for melting when held in the hand, name this element with
atomic number 31 and symbol Ga.
ANSWER: gallium [accept Ga before the end]
The first step towards their discovery was the finding that two different metals touched to different parts of
a frog nerve make the frog's muscles contract. Because their reduction potentials cannot be determined on
an absolute scale, they are calculated by using the species in question in one of these along with a hydrogen
half-cell, which is taken as the zero baseline of the reduction potential scale. Their function is characterized
by the Nernst equation, which takes into account the concentration of the reacting species, and they generate
an electrical potential by separating a favorable reduction from a favorable oxidation in a process
underlying the function of batteries. FTP, name this setup consisting of two metal electrodes each dipped in
a solution of a salt of the metal, with each half-cell connected by a salt bridge to maintain electrical
neutrality.
ANSWER: galvanic or voltaic cell
This device's namesake discovered the property that drives it in an experiment using frog legs. A
specific kind of this device is named for John Frederic Daniell. The emf for one of these devices can
be calculated using the (*) Nernst equation. This device consists of a salt bridge connecting two half-cells,
each of which contains a redox reaction, and its most common electrodes are copper and zinc. For 10
points, name this type of electrochemical cell named for an Italian.
ANSWER: Galvanic cell [or Voltaic cell; prompt on cell]
The notation for these devices uses a double bar to separate the two main components and single bar to
separate different phases. For these devices, the change in Gibbs free energy equals the product of
Faraday's constant, the electron transfer number, and its associated potential. These devices use a salt
bridge to connect two solutions. These devices employ two half-reactions on two different electrodes to
generate a current between them. For 10 points, name these devices which use an electromotive force to
drive a chemical reaction.
ANSWER: galvanic cell [or voltaic cell; or electrochemical cell]
One of these devices invented by John Daniell uses zinc, copper, and their solutions. The voltage of this
device times the number of moles of transferred electrons times the Faraday constant gives the energy yield
of these devices, which consist of two different metals connected by a salt bridge. These devices are
contrasted with a type of cell in which an external current drives a reaction that would not occur
spontaneously, electrolytic cells. For 10 points, name this type of electrochemical cell capable of generating
current and named for an Italian.
ANSWER: galvanic cell [accept electrovoltaic cell; prompt on electrochemical cell until mentioned]
A decrease in the ability of this device to operate due to the accumulation of a product is known as
polarization. Primary ones are not reversible, while one reversible secondary example uses lead and lead
sulfate. The reduction of a proton to hydrogen gas is a standard used to measure the favorability of reactions
in this device, and one that reacts copper with copper(II) sulfate [copper two sulfate] is named for Daniell.
In order to compensate for the charge imbalance within these objects, a soluble salt such as potassium
nitrate is used in a salt bridge. For 10 points, name this kind of cell in which a chemical reaction produces
electricity, contrasted with an electrolytic cell.
ANSWER: voltaic cell [or galvanic cell; prompt on "battery" before "proton"; prompt on "electrochemical cell" or "cell"]
A variation of this device that uses zinc and copper is named after the British chemist Daniell and does not
suffer from rapid power loss during continuous operation. Unlike a related device, these use spontaneous
chemical reactions. The presence of an electric conductor and a salt bridge creates a closed circuit for
electrons to travel between redox couples in these devices, which often consist of metallic electrodes in an
electrolyte. For 10 points, name this type of non-rechargeable electrochemical cell that generates electricity
and is present in most batteries.
ANSWER: galvanic cell [or voltaic cell; or primary cell; prompt on electrochemical cell; do not accept "electrolytic cell"]
Two dissimilar metals placed in contact with each other in the presence of an electrolyte can corrode
if they form one of these objects. Platinum is often used in the electrodes of these devices due to its
chemical inertness. The amount of energy they produce is equal to their potential times the number
of moles of transferred electrons times the (*) Faraday constant. The Nernst equation can be used to
calculate the potential of one of these objects when the reactants are not in their standard states. A salt
bridge or porous membrane between the two half cells is necessary to balance the charges they produce. For
10 points, identify these electrochemical cells that produce electrical energy from spontaneous redox
reactions.
ANSWER: Voltaic cell [accept galvanic cell; prompt on electrochemical cell]
The Sendzimir process is used to perform this action by using a small amount of aluminum to cut
back on side production of alloys, and lead is used to imrpove the fluidity of the mixture and cutting
back on excess dross production. It is commonly performed using the hip-dip, batch, or electroplating
methods, and this process commonly reacts carbon dioxide with zinc oxide to create zinc carbonate, which
is then deposited on the substrate in a crystalline geometry. For 10 points, name this process that commonly
uses zinc oxide in order to create rust-resistant steel, named for an Italian chemist.
ANSWER: Galvanization
The rate at which the properties of one of these substances change can be defined in terms of a lapse rate.
The derivation of one law that approximately describes them takes the net impulse due to a collision with a
wall to be exactly twice a particle's normal momentum; that assumption is part of kinetic molecular theory.
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution describes the speeds of individual particles in these substances. A
constant named for these substances is a macroscopic version of Boltzmann's constant, and takes on a value
of 8.31 in standard SI units. Ideal ones are described by the law "P V equals n R T". For 10 points, name
this least-dense state of matter.
ANSWER: gases [accept ideal gases]
One quantity important in this technique is calculated in a linear fashion by the Van del Dool and
Kratz equation. An inverse version of this technique is commonly used to measure the surface energy
of solids. In a standardization method used alongside this technique, a series of n-alkanes is given an
index equal to 100 times the number of carbons they have. In this technique, an inert carrier flows
into a column oven attached to an autoinjector; the sample then passes into a (*) flame ionization
detector. This technique, which uses a retention index named for Kovats, is commonly used before mass
spectrometry of simple molecules in intro organic chemistry classes. For 10 points, name this form of
chromatography in which the analyte is in a vapor phase.
ANSWER: gas chromatography [prompt on "chromatography"]
The work Peri Lithon (PEAR-ee LEE-thon) by Theophrastus (THEE-oh-FRAS-tuss) was an
authoritative text in this field for nearly a millennium. Nicholas Steno's law of superposition was important
to this field's development. James Hutton is considered the father of this field, and Hutton's disciples were
called Plutonists because they believed that volcanic activity was the cause of many rock formations.
Charles Lyell wrote a book on the principles of it. For 10 points, name this branch of science that studies
the materials that comprise the Earth.
ANSWER: geology [prompt on stratigraphy]
The Crystal one of these features in Utah is an example of one powered by carbon dioxide. The "Great
Basin" of them is home to the extremophile T. aquaticus, whose DNA polymerase operates at unusually
high temperatures and allows PCR to function. These features form along fault lines near volcanic activity.
Their mechanism typically requires stored water to be heated and released, often on a regular timetable. For
10 points, name these geological formations that periodically discharge water, exemplified by Yellowstone's
Old Faithful.
ANSWER: geysers
These geologic entities come in fountain and cone varieties. Two of these named "Vent" and
"Turban" help predict the activity of one of these named "Grand." They are caused near fissures
and cavities in the rock when magma near the Earth's surface (*) heats a source of water. Mostly found
in the Western United States and Iceland, for 10 points, name this type of violently erupting hot spring, such
as Yellowstone's Old Faithful.
ANSWER: geyser (prompt on "(hot) spring")
One algorithm named for him was developed by Stuart and Donald Geman and generates a sequence of
samples from a joint probability distribution. The large oscillations in partial sums of Fourier series near
jump discontinuities are known as his effect. One early paper by him described "Graphical Methods in the
Thermodynamics of Fluids." He is the first namesake of an equation which describes changes in chemical
potential along with Duhem, and another expression relates the degrees of freedom of a system to the
number of components and phases present, his phase rule. For ten points, identify this American chemist
who also names a quantity equal to delta H minus T delta S, his free energy.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
With Pierre Duhem, this man names an equation describing the change in chemical potential. He also
stated that the number of degrees of freedom is equal to the number of components minus the number of
phases plus two. The change in one quantity named for this man defines reactions as endergonic or
exergonic. That quantity, whose change is less than zero for a spontaneous reaction , is equal to the
enthalpy minus the entropy times the temperature. For 10 points, name this American scientist who names
a form of free energy symbolized G.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
The paradox named after this man states that a semi-classical derivation of entropy which does not take into
account the indistinguishability of particles inevitably results in an entropy that is not extensive, and hence a
violation of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. A law named for this man gives the degrees of freedom of
a multi-component system as a function of the number of phases in equilibrium. This man's most notable
namesake is a thermodynamic quantity, defined as the difference between change in enthalpy and
temperature multiplied by the change in entropy. For ten points, name this chemist who names a phase rule
and a type of free energy.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
With Donnan, this man names an effect in which charged particles fail to distribute evenly across the
sides of a semi-permeable membrane. The change in the chemical potential of a system can be
calculated using an equation named for him and Duhem. A derivation for entropy which states it's
not an extensive variable is this man's paradox. A statement relating the (*) degrees of freedom to the
number of components of a system is known as his phase rule. A quantity named for this man is equal to R
T times the natural log of the equilibrium constant and determines spontaneity. For ten points name this
scientist with an eponymous free energy.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
The derivative with respect to particle number of a quantity named for this scientist gives the
chemical potential. A law named for this scientist states that the number of constituents minus the
number of phases plus two equals the degrees of freedom. For spontaneous reactions, the change in
his namesake quantity is (*) negative; that namesake quantity is calculated as enthalpy minus quantity
temperature times entropy. For 10 points, identify this American chemist who lends his name to a type of
free energy.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
This man's lecture notes were the source of the del notation in vector calculus. Along with Pierre
Duhem, this man developed a formula involving chemical potential. This scientist posited that the number
of degrees of freedom equaled two plus the number of components minus the number of phases, his
namesake phase rule. A quantity named for him is equal to enthalpy minus the product of temperature and
entropy. For ten points, identify this American chemist with a namesake free energy.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
This person derived the relationship between surface tension and surface excess amount, which appears in
his namesake adsorption equation. Along with a Frenchman, he names an equation that provides a relation
between the chemical potentials of each of the species in a given phase. The number of degrees of freedom
equals the number of components minus the number of phases plus two in this man's namesake phase rule.
A quantity named for this man equals enthalpy minus the product of temperature and entropy. That quantity
is less than zero if a reaction is spontaneous. For 10 points, identify this chemist who names a free energy
symbolized by a capital G.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
Solutes that lower the surface tension have a positive surface concentration according to an equation named
for this man. Along with a Frenchman, he is the namesake of an equation that shows the intensive variables
temperature, pressure, and chemical potential cannot be varied independently. The number of components
minus phases plus two equals the number of degrees of freedom according to this man's namesake phase
rule. The change in enthalpy minus the quantity temperature times change in entropy is a way to calculate a
quantity named for this scientist; a negative value for the change in that state function's value indicates a
reaction is spontaneous. FTP name this American chemist, the namesake of a free energy.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
This scientist introduced the idea of a statistical ensemble to create a system that considers all
possible microstates. This man names an equation that relates changes in chemical potential for a
thermodynamical system with Duhem, while he also proposed that the number of degrees of freedom
is equal to the number of components minus the number of phases plus two in his namesake (*) phase
rule. Enthalpy minus the product of entropy and temperature is the formula for one of this man's quantities,
the change in which is negative for spontaneous reactions. For ten points, name this American scientist who
names a type of free energy symbolized G.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
Independently with Oliver Heaviside, this man used concepts from quaternion analysis to develop
modern vector analysis and his namesake phenomenon can produce 'ringing' effects in signal
processing. With a Frenchman, this man names an equation relating the change in the chemical
potential of a system with changes in temperature and pressure. He also developed a formula relating
the number of (*) degrees of freedom to the number of components in a mixture, his namesake phase
rule.This man names a quantity equal to the enthalpy minus the product of temperature and entropy which
indicates reaction spontaneity. FTP, identify this American physical chemist who is probably best known
for a namesake type of free energy symbolized 'G'.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
This man received the first U.S. engineering Ph.D. He wrote On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous
Substances. This American helped create modern vector analysis and statistical mechanics. At equillibrium
his namesake quantity is zero. For 10 points, name this scientist whose names a free energy.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
This man's namesake elasticity describes surface tension resistance when a surface is stretched, and can be
applied to surface-tension-related mass transfer in an effect named for this man and Marangoni. For a
mixture at constant temperature and pressure, the change in the chemical potential of the system can be
obtained using an equation named for this man and Duhem. Another equation named for this man is used to
calculate the degrees of freedom of a system depending in part on its number of components. For 10 points,
name this man with a namesake phase rule and a thermodynamic quantity useful in predicting the
spontaneity of a chemical reaction, his free energy.
ANSWER: Josiah Willard Gibbs
The change in this quantity is equal to negative RT times the natural log of the equilibrium constant. The
partial derivative of this value with respect to particle number is equal to a system's chemical potential.
This quantity is similar to one named for Helmholtz, but is measured at a constant pressure and
temperature. When this quantity is negative, then a reaction is spontaneous. For 10 points, name this
quantity that represents the amount of work that can be drawn from a system.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [or free enthalpy; or Gibbs function]
The Hammond-Leffler postulate states that two reaction coordinates with similar values in this
property will have similar structures. Unlike a similar measure, this quantity is always calculated at
constant pressure, in which it is given by "U plus PV minus TS." Chemical potential equals it over
particle number. Its change is zero at equilibrium, and, in general, equals "negative RT times the
natural log of K." When the change in it is (*) negative, a reaction is exergonic, and will occur
spontaneously. For ten points, name this measurement of the amount of usable work extractable from a
system, a form of free energy named for an American chemist.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
Isothermal compressibility is a second derivative of this quantity and surface tension is equal to the
change in this with respect to the change in surface area. This is equal to the sum over all the components
of a systems of the product of moles and chemical potential. Unlike a similar quantity, it does account for
pressure and volume. E raised to the ratio of this to the negative product of RT gives the equilibrium
constant. It is equal to the enthalpy minus the product of temperature and pressure. For 10 points, name this
type of energy that is decreased in a spontaneous process.
ANSWER: Gibbs Free Energy
This quantity can be computed as the sum over all particles of chemical potential times particle number.
This quantity can be derived from the internal energy by adding a term corresponding to PV work and
subtracting a term corresponding to energy obtained from the environment. It is related to the electrode
potential by a factor equal to negative one times the amount of charge transferred. It is equal to enthalpy
minus the product of temperature and entropy, and when the change in it is negative for a reaction, the
reaction is spontaneous. For 10 points, name this quantity named for a Yale physicist, a measure of energy
available to do work in a reaction at constant pressure.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [or Gibbs function; accept standard Gibbs free energy; prompt on "G"; prompt on "delta G"; prompt on "free energy"; prompt on "free enthalpy"]
The change in this quantity can be found by multiplying the negative moles of charge, Faraday's
constant, and voltage. If the change in this quantity is negative, a reaction is said to be spontaneous. This
quantity is defined as the amount of energy that can be used for work by a closed system. For 10 points,
name this thermodynamic quantity named after an American scientist, symbolized with a capital G.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
If temperature and pressure are held constant, the partial derivative of this quantity with respect to particle
number is the chemical potential. Holding the same state variables constant, a homogenous substance will
exist in its phase with the lowest fugacity, minimizing this quantity. For an electrochemical cell, the change
in this quantity is proportional to the standard electrode potential, while its change can be found for a more
general reaction by multiplying the universal gas constant by the temperature and the natural logarithm of
the equilibrium constant K. If the change in this quantity is negative, the reaction is spontaneous. FTP, name
this thermodynamic quantity symbolized G.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy or available energy
The change in this value for a polymer mixed in a solvent is given by Flory-Huggins theory. The partial
molar type of this value equals the chemical potential under isobaric conditions. This value per surface area
is equal to the surface tension, and for a voltaic cell it equals negative n times Faraday's constant and the
standard cell potential. The change in this quantity equals maximum non-expansive work at constant
pressure and temperature, and it is defined as the difference between enthalpy and the product of
temperature and entropy. For ten points, identify this thermodynamic quantity that determines spontaneity
of a reaction, named after an American scientist.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
The Margules activity model gives an expression for an excess in this quantity. The use of enthalpy instead
of internal energy in the definition of this quantity differentiates it from a related quantity central to the
canonical ensemble. For an electrochemical cell, this quantity is equal to the negative number of electrons
times Faraday's constant times the electrode potential. The sign of this quantity determines whether a
reaction is exergonic or endergonic. It equals zero at equilibrium, and it equals enthalpy minus entropy
times temperature. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity which is negative for a spontaneous
reaction, symbolized by the letter G.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [prompt on "free energy" or "G" before mention]
The residual of this quantity equals RT times the log of the fugacity coefficient. This quantity is
used as a generating function since its canonical variables are temperature and pressure. The change
in this quantity at non-standard state equals its change at the standard state, plus RT times the log of
the reaction quotient, which can be used to derive the Nernst equation. This extensive quantity can
be calculated by summing (*) chemical potential over particle number. The change in this quantity at
standard state equals negative RT times the log of the equilibrium constant. In general, it equals enthalpy
minus temperature times entropy. For 10 points, name this quantity which determines if a process is
spontaneous, named for an American chemist.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [or G; prompt on free energy]
The derivative of this quantity with respect to temperature is the negative of the entropy. This quantity,
whose natural variables are temperature and pressure, is proportional to the logarithm of the equilibrium
constant. Chemical equilibrium is attained when this quantity is minimized and it is constant along a
coexistence curve. A reaction will occur spontaneously if the change in this quantity is negative. Enthalpy
minus temperature times entropy is equal to this quantity. For 10 points, name this measure of the amount of
energy in a system available for useful work, named for an American scientist.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [accept Gibbs energy, Gibbs function or free enthalpy; prompt on partial answer]
The change in this quantity for mixing is equal to the sum of the products of the component's mole fraction
and the natural log of the mole fraction times RT. When temperature is constant, the partial derivative of
this quantity with respect to pressure is volume. The chemical potential is equal to the partial derivative of
this quantity with respect to the number of particles. The equilibrium constant is equal to the exponential of
negative RT dividing the change in this quantity. It is equal to enthalpy minus the product of temperature
and entropy. For 10 points, name this quantity that when the change in it is negative indicates a reaction is
spontaneous, and which is symbolized G.
ANSWER: Gibbs Free Energy
In an electrochemical cell, the natural log of K is equal to this quantity over negative RT. At standard
temperature and pressure, this quantity divided by surface area is equal to surface tension. A reaction is
endergonic if it has a positive value for this quantity, which tends towards zero as a reaction reaches
equilibrium and is classically defined as the enthalpy plus the product of temperature and entropy. For 10
points, an American chemist names what quantity that, when negative, indicates a reaction is spontaneous?
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [or Gibbs energy; or Gibbs function; or free enthalpy; prompt on Gibbs or free energy]
This quantity can be written as the sum of the chemical potential of each component of the system times
number of particles. Its change is equal to the negative product of Faraday's constant, the electric potential,
and number of moles of electrons, which is useful in deriving the Nernst equation. It can also be measured
by subtracting the product of temperature and entropy from the enthalpy, and when this quantity is less than
zero, a reaction proceeds spontaneously. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of useful work that
can be obtained from a system.
ANSWER: Gibbs Free Energy
The partial derivative of this quantity over temperature with respect to temperature equals minus
enthalpy divided by temperature squared. For ideal mixing, the change in this quantity is equal to the
total moles of substance times the gas constant times temperature times the sum over all components
of the mole fraction times the natural log of the mole fraction. This quantity's natural variables are
temperature and pressure. This quantity equals minus the (*) ideal gas constant times temperature
times the natural log of the equilibrium constant. Equal to enthalpy minus the product of temperature and
entropy, for 10 points, name this quantity which determines whether or not a reaction is spontaneous, named
for an American chemist.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [accept answers indicating the change in Gibbs free energy; prompt on just "free energy," "G," or "delta G"]
For a system with only one type of particle, this quantity is equal to the chemical potential multiplied by the
particle number, and in general, it is equal to the maximum amount of non-expansion work that can be
extracted from a system via a completely reversible process. This quantity is minimized when a system
reaches equilibrium at constant temperature and pressure. The second law of thermodynamics means that
chemical reactions occur spontaneously if and only if this is negative. FTP, name this thermodynamic
quantity that is equal to the enthalpy minus the product of the temperature and entropy.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
The change in this quantity is equal to the negative number of electrons times Faraday's constant times a
cell's potential in the maximum work equation. The equation for this quantity is equal to the internal energy
of a system minus the product of its absolute temperature and entropy plus the product of its absolute
pressure and final volume. When this quantity is negative then the reaction is spontaneous, and the system is
at equilibrium when this quantity is equal to zero. This quantity is equal to enthalpy minus the product of
entropy and temperature. Used to tell whether a reaction will take place or not, this is FTP what free energy
quantity symbolized.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
This quantity was introduced in the 1882 work entitled On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances.
The change in this quantity classifies reactions as exergonic and endergonic, and at isobaric and isothermic
conditions, the partial derivative of this quantity with respect to number of particles equals chemical
potential. The change in this quantity is negative for spontaneous reactions and can be found by subtracting
the product of temperature and change in entropy from the change in enthalpy. For 10 points, name this type
of energy that measures the useful work of a system, named for a Yale chemist named Josiah Willard.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
The Wulff construction is a theory designed to show the shape of crystals by minimizing this
quantity. Surface tension is defined as this quantity divided by surface area. At melting points, this
quantity that is directly proportional to fugacity is zero. Whenever this value is negative, then reactions
associated with this quantity are spontaneous. For ten points, name this quantity, enthalpy minus the product
of entropy and temperature, named for an American Scientist.
ANSWER: Gibbs Free Energy
The temperature dependence of this quantity is calculated by an equation partially attributed to Helmholtz,
and the partial derivative of this quantity with respect to number of particles is chemical potential. Surface
tension is this quantity per unit area, and for a galvanic cell it can be calculated as negative n times the
Faraday constant times cell potential. The change in this quantity is equal to the negative gas constant times
temperature times the natural logarithm of the equilibrium constant, or alternatively as enthalpy minus the
product of temperature and entropy. For 10 points, name this quantity decreased in spontaneous reactions,
symbolized G.
ANSWER: Gibbs Free Energy [accept Gibbs Function; prompt on Free Energy]
This quantity can be expressed as the Legendre transform of internal energy, and the partial
derivative of this with respect to number of particles is chemical potential. Surface tension can be
defined as this quantity per unit area. Used for isothermal and isobaric processes, unlike a similar
quantity named for [*] Helmholtz, it is equal to the enthalpy minus the product of temperature and
entropy. For 10 points, name this quantity which is negative for spontaneous reactions, whose change is
symbolized delta-G.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
Taking the derivative of this quantity with respect to particle number yields chemical potential. It
can be found by multiplying the natural log of the equilibrium constant by negative one, the ideal gas
law, and temperature, while it can also be found through subtracting the product of temperature and
entropy from (*) enthalpy. When this quantity is negative for a given reaction, that reaction is spontaneous.
For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity, which is the amount of usable energy in a system and
which is symbolized capital G.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
This quantity divided by surface area is equal to surface tension. For a redox reaction, this quantity is
defined as the Faraday constant times the number of moles of electrons times the electric potential, and
negative values of this quantity indicate that a reaction is spontaneous. Defined as the change in enthalpy
minus the product of temperature and change in entropy, for 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity
symbolized G, a measure of available useful work in a system.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy
The molar version of this quantity is also known as the chemical potential. This quantity is
proportional to the natural log of the equilibrium constant. It differs from a similarly named concept
in that it is equal to (*) enthalpy, not internal energy, minus the product of temperature and entropy.
Reactions are spontaneous if the change in this quantity is negative. For 10 points, give this type of free
energy named after an American scientist, which is denoted G.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [prompt on G]
This value of the different transition states determines the composition of the product of a given reaction
according to the Curtin-Hammett principle. For voltaic cells, this quantity equals the negative product of the
moles of electrons transferred, Faraday's constant, and the electric potential. The negative product of the
universal gas constant, temperature, and natural log of the equilibrium constant gives this quantity. Fugacity
is defined as the pressure dependence of this quantity. This quantity is equal to the enthalpy minus the
product of temperature and entropy. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity used to predict the
spontaneity of reactions, and is symbolized G.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [prompt on Gibbs; prompt on free energy]
The departure function of this quantity is divided by the quantity ideal gas constant times temperature,
and then placed in a power that is multiplied by pressure to find fugacity. The partial molar
measurement of this quantity is equivalent to chemical potential. This quantity is applied to systems
that are both isothermal and isobaric, and a basic formula for this quantity includes a pressure times
volume term if that formula uses internal energy rather than enthalpy. Identify this quantity used
to determine whether reactions will occur simultaneously, often contrasted with a similar quantity
named for Helmholtz.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [or Gibbs function or free enthalpy; prompt on free energy; do not accept "energy" or "enthalpy"]
One form of this quantity can be derived to be discontinuous when mixing two dissimiliar liquids, known as
its namesake's paradox. The derivative of volume with respect to temperature at constant pressure is equal
to the pressure partial of the temperature partial of this quantity by a Maxwell relation, and it can be defined
as the sum over the product of chemical potental and particle number. For a galvanic cell, the change in it is
n times Faraday's constant time E. It is applicable to isothermal and isobaric processes, unlike its
counterpart. For 10 points, name this state fucntion, the change in which is equal to delta H minus T delta S,
which is negative for spontaneous reactions.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [or Gibbs energy; or Gibbs function]
The change in this quantity with an increase in surface area is given by Stefan's formula and is equal
to surface tension for isotropic materials. Because this quantity is defined for isobaric systems,
systems with varying pressure but constant volume use a quantity named after (*) Helmholtz instead.
The standard change in this quantity over the course of a reaction is equal to negative RT times the natural
log of the equilibrium constant, and is also equal to enthalpy change minus temperature times entropy
change or delta H minus T delta S. Minimized at chemical equilibrium, for 10 points, this is what
thermodynamic state function which determines the spontaneity of a reaction, symbolized G?
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [accept Gibbs function; accept free energy before "isobaric" and prompt afterwards; prompt on G before read]
The partial derivative of this quantity with respect to mass gives the chemical potential of a system.
Dividing it by the product of the Universal Gas Constant and Temperature gives the logarithm of the
equilibrium constant for a reaction. This quantity is equal to the negative product of temperature and the
change entropy plus the change in enthalpy, and a reaction is spontaneous if the change in this quantity is
negative. For 10 points, identify this quantity represented as G.
ANSWER: Gibbs Free Energy
The Clausius-Clapeyron equation assumes the change in this to be zero. Because this quantity is most useful
when the substance in question is both isothermal and isobaric, a different quantity is used for explosive
substances. An equation partially due to the namesake of this quantity gives the temperature dependence of
this quantity for an ideal gas. A zero change in this quantity for a system implies that the system is in
equilibrium, but a negative value for this quantity implies that a reaction is spontaneous. One may derive
this by utilizing the Legendre transform on the internal energy of a system. For ten points, name this state
function named for its American inventor, which measures the maximum amount of work attainable from a
system, defined as enthalpy minus the product of temperature and entropy.
ANSWER: Gibbs Free Energy
Chemical potential is the partial derivative of this quantity with respect to the mole fraction, and an equation
partially named for Helmholtz relates this quantity to the inverse square of temperature. Surface tension is
the change in this quantity per unit surface area. This quantity is the negative of the ideal gas constant times
the absolute temperature times the natural logarithm of the equilibrium constant. This quantity is also
calculated as the enthalpy minus the product of temperature and entropy, and it is defined as the maximum
amount of work that can be used by a system. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity that is
negative for spontaneous processes.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [or Gibbs function; prompt on "free energy"]
Dividing this quantity by the number of moles in question gives the chemical potential. This quantity's
natural variables are temperature and pressure. This quantity is equal to minus the log of the equilibrium
constant times the ideal gas constant and temperature. This quantity is negative for spontaneous reactions
that occur at constant pressure, while a complementary quantity meaningful for systems at constant volume
and temperature is named for Helmholtz. For 10 points, name this quantity, whose change for a process is
equal to the change in enthalpy minus the product of temperature and change in entropy.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [prompt on free energy; do not accept "Helmholtz free energy"]
This quantity and its partial molar equivalent, chemical potential, are constant between two equimolar
phases in equilibrium. In a voltaic cell, the change in this quantity equals the cell potential times Faraday's
constant times the number of electrons transferred. Its change will be negative if the equilibrium constant is
greater than one, which happens if a reaction occurs spontaneously. It is the enthalpy minus temperature
times entropy. For 10 points, name this free energy named for an American chemist.
ANSWER: Gibbs free energy [or G]
At constant temperature and pressure, this quantity divided by surface area equals surface tension. The
partial derivative of this quantity with respect to the number of particles is the chemical potential. One can
calculate equilibrium constant by taking e to the negative power of this quantity over RT. This quantity is
calculated for isothermal and isobaric processes, unlike a similar quantity named for Helmholtz. The change
in this quantity equals "delta H minus T times delta S." If the change in this quantity is negative, a reaction
occurs spontaneously. Name this quantity named for an American scientist and symbolized as delta G.
ANSWER: change in Gibbs free energy
The Nernst equation can be derived from an equation relating this value to the product of the
reaction potential, Faraday's constant, and number of electrons. It is also to the negative product of
the gas constant, temperature and the natural logarithm of K. A reaction reaches its equilibrium
point when the change in this value is (*) zero. A reaction is spontaneous when the change in this
quantity is less than zero. For 10 points, name this measure of spontaneity developed by an American
scientist.
ANSWER: change in Gibbs free energy [prompt on delta G or G or free energy]
Baugh has suggested disproving this statement using Bose-Einstein statistics, deriving an uncertainty
principle which suggests quantum factors are at play. Von Neumann tried to solve it mathematically
by removing graphical discontinuities to yield only a negative sloping curve. In reality, one must
divide the partition function by the factorial of the (*) separation number to avoid the consequences of
this statement. This statement results in trying to derive entropy from the ideal gas law, though it can
generally be resolved by utilizing the Sackur-Tetrode equation and considering all particles to be
indistinguishable. For 10 points, give this statement about the discontinuous nature of the entropy of mixing,
a certain paradox named for a Yale scientist.
ANSWER: Gibbs paradox
William Jensen has suggested it must be modified when dealing with optical enantiomers although it holds
for complex systems wherein equilibrium effects arise from such factors as surface tension, and magnetic
fields. Syntactically transformable into Euler's polyhedral formula, it states the number of intensive
variables, F is equal to the number of chemical constituents, C minus the number of states of matter in a
system, P plus the number of non-compositional variables. Used for determining the possible number of
degrees of freedom, for 10 points, name this thermodynamic rule deduced by its namesake Yale scientist.
ANSWER: Gibbs' Phase Rule
Kofke used this equation to couple simulation data to thermodynamic equations, which is called this
equation's namesake integration. It is derived by calculating the total differential of G and
substituting in a pair of Maxwell relations. This equation shows that the intensive properties of a
system are not all independent of one another. This equation says that the sum over the product of
the number of moles times d mu equals negative S dT plus V dp, though it is more commonly expressed
as the sum of N sub I times d mu sub I equals zero at constant temperature and pressure. This equation is
used to derive one of its namesake's result that components minus phases plus 2 is equal to the degrees of
freedom. For 10 points, name this equation which relates the chemical potentials of a mixture.
ANSWER: Gibbs-Duhem equation [prompt on Gibbs phase rule]
One corollary to this equation gives the ratio of activity to mole fraction for the constituents of a binary
system as the ratio of derivatives of activities with respect to mole fractions at constant pressure and
temperature. It can be derived by substituting the temperature and pressure Maxwell relations into the usual
differential of the Gibbs function, then equating the differential of the definition of the Gibbs function as a
sum over species only. It sets differential pressure time volume equal to entropy times differential
temperature plus sum over species of particle number times differential chemical potential. For 10 points,
name this equation used in the usual derivation of the rule that the number of species plus the number of
degrees of freedom minus the number of phases equals two.
ANSWER: Gibbs-Duhem equation [prompt on Gibbs' phase rule]
The rate of internal flow for these objects can be modeled by the Glen-Nye law, and randklufts and
bergschrunds are both types of irregularities that occur in them. Ogives are bands that can be
formed on the surfaces of these features, and the movement of these masses is responsible for
landforms such as kames, (*) eskers, and drumlins. These objects can be divided into the accumulation
and ablation zones, while they can also help create U-shaped valleys and fjords. These entities create
deposits of sediment called moraines and come in tidewater, continental, and alpine forms. For ten points,
name these large masses of slow-moving ice.
ANSWER: glaciers (do not accept violins)
One type of feature produced by these bodies comes in washboard, medial, and ground varieties.
Depressions on these bodies give rise to features called kames, and they can form round valley heads called
cirques. Elongated hills called moraines are formed by these bodies, which deposit sediment called till
when they move. These bodies are divided into ablation zones and accumulation zones. For 10 points,
name these massive bodies of perennial ice.
ANSWER: glaciers
Seracs are features of these bodies, and truncated spurs and escarpments are generally caused when the land
interacts with these. Rocks that are picked up and carried by these objects leave depressions in which
paternoster lakes form. Aretes and horns, narrow crests on the tops of mountains, are formed by erosion in
the wake of these large bodies, which carve out U-shaped valleys and accumulate debris that can form piles
in lateral and terminal forms, called morraines. For ten points, name these large bodies of ice, which can
come in continental and alpine forms and are smaller than ice sheets.
ANSWER: glaciers
The movement of one type of these objects at high altitudes can create cracks called bergschrunds
(BEARG-schrundts). These objects are split by the firn limit into two zones, called the zones of
accumulation and ablation. When two of these objects are near each other on a mountain, they can cause the
formation of an arete (ar-RET). The movement of these objects caused the formation of such geographic
features as moraines. Types of them include cirque, alpine, valley, and continental. For 10 points, name
these large moving masses of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers [accept alpine glacier or cirque glacier or valley glacier until "moraines;" do not accept or prompt on specific types of glaciers after "moraines"]
Alternating light and dark bands in these objects are called ogives. They can form U-shaped valleys with
knife-like rock ridges called aretes between them. They lose mass in their zones of ablation, and they create
teardrop-shaped hills called drumlins. Temperate ones are so called because they are at melting point yearround, and they form sediments characterized as "terminal" and "lateral." For 10 points, name these entities
that form moraines lakes when their debris dams a stream and that form icebergs when they break apart.
ANSWER: glaciers
Water can enter these objects via moulins, and water underneath them can cause basal sliding.
Erosion of these objects creates corries or cirques, which, when filled with water, become tarns.
When these objects move, they pick up till, which settles into hills called (*) moraines. Calving of these
objects can create icebergs. Most of the Earth's freshwater is frozen in, for 10 points, what large land-based
bodies of ice?
ANSWER: glaciers
The absence of these features can cause isostatic rebound. These features create paternoster lakes and
parallel ones are responsible for aretes. These features also create kames, which often form with kettle
lakes. These features often form from firn in cirques and their retreat creates eskers and drumlins and leaves
moraine. For 10 points, name these features that can be tidewater, alpine, or continental, slow-moving rivers
of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers (accept ice caps or ice sheets or equivalents before paternoster)
In 1986, the bursting of one of these features caused a jokulhlaup (YOH-kul-loop) that ruined the town of
Yakutat, and rotational movement of these features can create cracks known as bergschrunds. These
features form where there is accumulation of firn, and they generate a related marine feature by a process
called calving. The parallel movement of two of these features can form a sharp ridge called an arete (uhRAYT), and Louis Agassiz (aa-gas-see) first suggested long geologic periods dominated by these features
after studying their remnants like eskers, drumlins, and moraines. Classified into continental and alpine
types, name these large, slow-moving masses of ice that once covered much of the northern hemisphere.
ANSWER: glaciers
Features on the surface of these objects include light and dark bands known as ogives (OH-jives), and
one type of volcano associated with these objects is called a tuya. Water enters these objects through
moulins (MOO-lawns), and the accumulation zone is above the firn (FEERN) line on these objects. The
movement of these objects causes moraines (muh-RAINS) and drumlins to form. Cracks in them are
known as crevasses. For 10 points, identify these large masses of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers
These entities can contain a loess, while large cracks called bergshrunds are created by these objects.
Ridges referred to as aretas are created between these entities. They have two regions called the (*)
ablation and accumulation zones. Evidence for ones in the past is observable through kettle lakes, and these
objects use abrasion to create drumlins. Their movement can leave behind a conglomerate of debris called
moraine. For 10 points, name these geographical features that come in continental and alpine types which
are large sheets of ice that break into icebergs.
ANSWER: glaciers
Bulb-like lobes are evident in this entity's Malaspina example, which is one of the Piedmont types of this
body. The absence of these bodies leads to isostatic rebound after initial crust subsidence. Holes known as
moulins may occur in these bodies, and elongated hills called (*) drumlins can be formed by these bodies.
Ablation zones are regions where these bodies lose mass, and the tracks of debris they leave behind are
called moraines. The majority of the world's fresh water is contained in these bodies, examples of which
include ice sheets. Icebergs break off of, for 10 points, what large moving masses of ice?
ANSWER: glaciers (prompt on "ice sheet" before it is read)
The relationship between stress and strain in these entities is modeled by the Glen-Nye flow law. The
equilibrium line altitude is the long term balance point along one of these, and a tower on one of these is
known as a serac.A type of particles created by these entities, when blown by the wind, are known as loess.
The Malaspina one of these is an example of the Piedmont variety of these objects. Sharp ridges formed by
these are called aretes, and material deposited directly from these structures is known as a till, while
material removed from these objects by mass wasting can form a cirque. Two main types of these are
contintental and alpine, and whale shaped hills formed by these are known as drumlins. Leaving behind
debris accumulations calle moraines, for 10 points, name these large masses of ice.
ANSWER: Glaciers
Tuyas are volcanoes that erupt under these entities. The firn line separates the ablation and
accumulation zones in these structures. Isostatic rebound occurs after these entites are gone.
Landforms these objects leave behind include eskers and drumlin hills, and valleys created
by them are known as cirques (SIRKS). They deposit soil and rock in formations known as
moraines. Most of the Earth's freshwater is frozen in these masses. For 10 points, name these
large masses of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers [prompt on "ice"]
Fluctuations in these landmasses have been caused in part by periodic changes in heat received by the Sun.
During the Pleistocene Epoch, these covered 30 percent of the world's land area. They primarily erode the
terrain through abrasion and plucking, and fields of drumlins and eskers are formed by these entities. Apart
from the oceans, they are the largest reservoir of total water and store about three-fourths of all fresh water
in the world. Aretes, horns, cirques, and moraines are also shaped by these landmasses. FTP, name these
perennial masses of ice which move over land.
ANSWER: glaciers
Aretes (ah-RETS) can be formed on the backwall where two of these objects meet. These objects can be
found in bowl-shaped valleys called cirques. Unconsolidated debris found at the snout of these objects are
called terminal moraines and mark their furthest advance. They can also deposite sediment in a tear-drop
shape, which are known as drumlins. These objects can calve to form icebergs and they are the largest
reservoir of freshwater on Earth. For 10 points, identify these large, persistent bodies of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers
These objects can develop large cracks called bergschrunds (BERG-shrunds), which can further lead to
the formation of cirques (SIRKS). The firn line separates the ablation and accumulation zones of these
objects. The movement of these masses is responsible for the creation of moraines and drumlins, which are
accumulations of till carried by these objects. These objects hold the majority of the world's fresh water.
For 10 points, name these large, flowing masses of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers
The portion of these things where the rate of deposition is greater than ablation is the accumulation
zone. Erosion due to these things is divided into abrasion and plucking. The action of these things
turns stream-formed V-shaped valleys into U-shaped valleys. A characteristic deposit of these things
is a mixture of (*) boulders and clay, also called till, which is deposited in moraines. When these things
calve (KAHV), they form icebergs. For 10 points, name these dense accumulations of ice that flow like
very, very slow rivers.
ANSWER: glaciers [or ice sheets]
These objects contain alternating dark/light bands called ogives, which can form as basal sliding
moves these objects over land. Ablation refers to the receding of these objects, which can form (*)
drumlins and eskers as they leave behind debris, called moraine. Crevasses are deep cracks in, and tarns are
lakes formed by the melting of, for 10 points, what large, land-based bodies of ice?
ANSWER: glaciers
Alternating light and dark bands found at the base of these geological formations are known as ogives
(OH-jives). These formations erode the surrounding terrain through processes known as plucking and
abrasion. Such erosion can lead to the development of indentations known as cirques (SEERKS), which
often have small lakes referred to as tarns. They form crevasses on their surface. For 10 points, name these
large flows of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers
The surfaces of these objects often feature bands known as ogives, and they are also responsible
for crafting roche moutonnees, or sheep-backs. These bodies are formed via the compactification of
neve into firn. They are also responsible for the creation of (*) rock flour, and deposit erratics as well as
till in landforms such as eskers and drumlins. Many of them begin at a cirque and end at a morraine,
located at opposite ends of a u-shaped valley. Coming in continental and alpine varieties, for 10 points,
identify these large masses of slow-moving ice.
ANSWER: glaciers [accept alpine or mountain glaciers before "roche;" accept continental glaciers before "cirque"]
The Glen-Nye law models the relationship between stress and strain in these entities, and alternating
dark and light bands found near the base of them are called ogives. The firn limit divides these
features into the zone of accumulation and the zone of ablation, and areas with them can be affected
by (*) isostatic rebound when they disappear. These geologic entities can form ridges called arretes and
carve U-shaped valleys, and they erode surrounding terrain through plucking and abrasion. They often leave
behind deposits of sediment called drumlins and moraines. Roughly 70% of the Earth's freshwater is frozen
in, for ten points, what large, slow-moving masses of ice which form icebergs when they break apart?
ANSWER: glaciers (prompt on anything related to ice before mention)
These geologic structures can exhibit alternating light and dark bands called ogives. Isostatic rebound is
caused by an absence of these objects. A kettle lake is the remnant of these structures, which also leave
behind drumlins. These objects can turn mountain valleys into U-shaped valleys. Much of the geology of
the Canadian shield is due to these structures, which also create fjords. For 10 points, name this large mass
of ice that can calve to form icebergs.
ANSWER: glaciers
These objects undergo cyclic surges that could be explained by the deformable bed hypothesis. Plastic flow
and basal sliding can cause these objects to move, and they have cavities known as moulins [moo-LANS].
Firn can be found on these objects, and a bergschrund [BERK-shroont] is a deep crack at their upper end.
These objects form hills known as drumlins, and they deposit till that forms moraines. In the process of
calving, an iceberg breaks off from one of these objects. For 10 points, name these very slow moving
masses of ice formed from accumulated snow.
ANSWER: glaciers
The absence of these geological features can cause isostatic rebound, while the presence of these features
can cause crust subsidence. These features make rock flour that can create milky-colored bodies of water,
and the retreat of these features can form sharp ridges called aretes. The lower parts of these features are
known as ablation zones, and these features use plucking and abrasion to create drumlin fields and eskers.
For 10 points, name these features that can leave a terminal moraine, large bodies of moving ice.
ANSWER: Glaciers
These entities create paternoster lakes, which occur in chains that end at a corrie. Corries can contain a
bowl-shaped feature formed by these entities known as a cirque. They also form kettle lakes and undergo a
process known as plucking, which is one way they create the debris known as a moraine. Their retreat is
said to be caused by global warming and these entities are the largest source of freshwater. For 10 points,
name these large masses of ice found on land.
ANSWER: glaciers
The seasonal movements of these bodies produce alternating dark and light bands called ogives. Two
erosive processes that these bodies facilitate are abrasion and plucking. Tarns are pools or lakes produced in
a cirque by the action of these bodies. Aretes form when two of these bodies erode parallel U-shaped
valleys. Drumlins, kettles, and moraines are also formed by natural processes involving these bodies. For 10
points, name these large bodies of slow-moving frozen freshwater.
ANSWER: glaciers [accept alpine glaciers; or mountain glaciers; do not accept "continental glaciers"]
The Glenn-Nye law governs these objects' movement, which can be facilitated by basal sliding. Areas
affected by them are subject to isostatic rebound. They produce chatter marks through plucking, and
affected areas are marked by kames and kettles. Sometimes featuring moulins and ogives, these features can
form eskers and paternosters. They carve out U- or V-shaped valleys, as well as inlets called fjords, and
leave behind drumlins and moraines. Calving on the edges of these objects produces icebergs. For 10
points, name these large frozen rivers of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers [prompt on ice sheets, ice shelves, or ice caps]
These objects leave chatter marks when they pluck. These grow at accumulation zones, and they shrink at
ablation zones, with sudden shrinkage caused by calving. The debris left behind by these objects
accumulates to form moraines. These can leave behind depressions called cirques [sirks], which are
sometimes filled with tarn lakes. To be classified as one of these, an object has to persist over a long period
of time, and these are generally found on mountains or in polar regions. Name these large bodies of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers
The break-off events of these objects are exemplified by an event affecting Altels in 1895, which was
thought to have been triggered by infiltrated water. A tunnel under one of these objects in Kluane National
Park collapsed and formed a canyon 20 years after a surge that almost recreated a lake. The islands
Santonen and Hanhinen merged into Hailuoto, a process called rebound, after one of these objects receded.
They are divided into zones of ablation and accumulation, and they leave behind moraines at their furthest
extent. Sometimes forming aretes between their 'u'-shaped valleys, for 10 points, name these moving sheets
of ice which cover Greenland and Antarctica.
ANSWER: glaciers
A type of volcano associated with these objects is called a tuya (TOO-yuh). When a nonvolcanic
mountain peak pokes through one of these objects it is called a nunatak (NOON-uh-TACK). Their
disappearance can cause isostatic rebound. They move via basal slip and plastic flow but when
ablation exceeds accumulation, they (*) retreat, often leaving behind recessional moraines. For 10 points,
name these large masses of ice which occupy Greenland and Antarctica.
ANSWER: glaciers [or continental glaciers]
Projections known as nunataks can emerge from these entities, and the outcroppings known as roches
moutonnees [RAWSH moot-un-ahyz] are formed because of these entities. Their surfaces include
light and dark bands called ogives, and they are formed partially due to the compression of firn.
Crevasses form across these entities when they come in (*) contact with a steep slope, and moraines
form from the deposit of their till. Calving is the process by which icebergs break off these features. For 10
points, identify these large masses of compacted snow and ice which account for roughly 75% of Earth's
fresh water.
ANSWER: glaciers [prompt on things like ice caps, ice sheets, or ice shelves]
Alternating dark and light bands that occur as small wave crests in these objects are called ogives.
Streams that originate from these objects often have multiple small channels separated by temporary
islands and are called braided streams. Till deposited by these objects can create moraines. For 20 points,
name these objects which form when their ablation is less than the accumulation of snow, which is why
global warming is causing many of them to shrink.
ANSWER: glaciers
Alternating bands of dark and light on these structures are formed from the cyclic changes in temperatures
and are called ogives, and the steep sides of drumlins indicate the direction in which these structures
advanced. Kettle lakes are formed when these structures recede, and the debris these structures leave behind
result in moraines. These structures were responsible for the formation of the Great Lakes, and the ice sheet
on Antarctica is an example of these structures. For 10 points, name these slow moving large slabs of ice.
ANSWER: Glaciers
One circular device made from this material is described by the word "watch". Modern processes for
manufacturing it float a layer of it atop molten metal. The most prevalent type of this material is rich in lime
and soda. This material must be formed by rapid quenching, so that no crystal structure forms; one example
of this in nature is the volcanic rock obsidian. Boron oxides are a major component of most laboratory
equipment made from this material, as is silica; that particular variety is called Pyrex. This amorphous
substance is manufactured by "blowing" and is transparent. For 10 points, name this material that is used to
make flasks and beakers.
ANSWER: glass [accept borosilicate glass; accept Pyrex glass; prompt "Pyrex"]
Boron oxide is used to lower the thermal expansion rate of this material. Usually sodium carbonate
and calcium carbonate are added in production of this material, making the soda-lime type. Like
metals, it can tempered in order to increase its thermal shock resistance and change its (*) break
pattern. This amorphous substance is non-crystalline, and it does have the characteristics of a solid despite
misconceptions that it is a liquid. It is primarily composed of silica. For 10 points, name this transparent
material found in windows.
ANSWER: glass
W. H. Zachariasen published a paper discussing the "Atomic Arrangement" of this material. The
Alamogordo type of this substance was formed by the Trinity nuclear bomb test, and its soda-lime type is its
most prevalent. Tektites are types of this material formed by meteorites, while fulgurites are tubes of it
created by lightning. Electrolytes can be supercooled into this material. Volcanic forms of this material,
such as obsidian, is formed when lava cools too quickly for a crystal lattice to form. For 10 points, name
this amorphous material often found in windows.
ANSWER: glass [prompt on amorphous material before mention]
The most potent cause of this phenomenon on a per-mole basis is sulfur hexafluoride. Due to sulfur
aerosol emissions, the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo temporarily halted this phenomenon. Coral growth
rates, tree ring width, and isotopic composition of glacial cores are proxy evidence for this phenomenon.
Because the oceans are a carbon sink, this phenomenon causes their acidification. For 10 points, name this
geological phenomenon caused largely by an increase in greenhouse gas concentration.
ANSWER: anthropogenic global warming [or obvious equivalents such as increase in global temperature caused by humans; accept greenhouse effect before "Pinatubo" is read and prompt afterwards; prompt on climate change or obvious equivalents]
Because this substance decreases vitreous volume, it is often combined with lemon juice and given
to patients with open-angle glaucoma. When this chemical is heated, it decomposes into water
and the simplest unsaturated aldehyde, which is acrolein. This molecule combines with three fatty
acids to form a common lipid, and it is a sugar alcohol with three carbon atoms in each molecule.
This substance is a common byproduct from the production of biodiesel and soap, and is used as
a moisturizer and sweetener. Name this compound that is combined with nitric acid to form a
compound that is useful as a vasodilator in treating heart conditions, and as an explosive.
ANSWER: glycerol [or glycerine; accept nitroglycerin after "nitric"; do not accept "glyceride"]
This compound can be created by adding water to epichlorohydrin, which is also known as ECH, and it is
also a byproduct of saponification. One of the benefits from a plan to create biodiesel from alligator fat is
that it would also produce this chemical. Its chemical formula is C3H8O3, and it provides the molecular
structure for animal and vegetable fats. Name this compound whose nitrate can be used as a vasodilator in
medicine and as an explosive.
ANSWER: Glycerol (accept Glycerin or Glycerine, prompt C3H8O3, do not accept answers beginning with nitro-)
This element bears a +7 oxidation state in a compound used in photography to tone silver images. A
compound with three chlorine atoms forms when this relatively unreactive metal is exposed to chlorine gas.
Its +3 ion will also form when reacted to one part nitric acid and three parts hydrochloric acid, a mixture
known as aqua regia (ACK-wah REJ-ia) that also dissolves platinum. The purity of this group 11 element
in alloys is measured in carats. The most malleable and ductile metal is, for 10 points, what precious metal
with chemical symbol Au.
ANSWER: gold
Cinellu was one of the first researches to characterize intermediates containing this element in reactions.
Hutchings showed how to use catalysts of this element to activate alkynes. One structure composed of this
element is created using a sodium citrate reduction. Plus one ions of this element can stick together with
about the strength of a hydrogen bond despite having charge and not any valence electrons to share. The
color of this element can be explained by it having the strongest relativistic effects of any element less than
number 100. One experimental approach to treating cancer is to use nanoparticles of this element to target
particular tumor cells. It is mined using cyanide leaching. This element is found in Electrum with silver. It
can be dissolved by aqua regia. For 10 points, name this element with symbol Au.
ANSWER: gold
The Wohlwill process is used to refine the purest form of this element, which is used in small
concentrations to produce the color of ruby red glass. This metal combines with silver to form the alloy
electrum, and along with platinum, it can be dissolved by aqua regia. This most malleable metal is
sometimes confused with the mineral pyrite. Ernest Rutherford discovered the atomic nucleus after firing
alpha particles at a thin sheet of this metal. For 10 points, name this precious metal with atomic number 79
and symbol Au ("A" - "U").
ANSWER: gold
This element complexed with epigallocatechin-gallate has been shown to kill prostate cancer cells.
Double immuno-[this element]-staining can be used to determine the presence of two antigens on a
single tissue section. This element's ore can be extracted using alkali cyanides through the
Macarthur-Forrest method, and refined using the Miller or Wohlwill processes. Nanobeacons of this
element can be used to simulate siRNA and RNAi while this element's nanoparticles can be used as drug
carriers. Iron Pyrite can be mistaken for, for ten points, this precious soft yellow metal with symbol Au is
often used in currency and shares a column with platinum and silver.
ANSWER: Gold
In the Elsner reaction, this element forms a coordination complex with cyanides. Relativistic
contraction of this metal's outermost s orbital allows it to dimerize, leading to the strongest form of
metallophilicity. Among metals, this element has the highest electronegativity and electron affinity,
and it has the uncharacteristic oxidation states of +1 and +3. A mixture of nitric and (*) hydrochloric
acid dissolves both platinum and this element. A ring of zinc sulfide surrounded a sheet of this element
which deflected alpha particles, in the experiment where Rutherford proved the existence of the nucleus.
For 10 points, name this noble metal located below silver on the Periodic Table, which has symbol Au.
ANSWER: gold [or Au before it is read]
The MacArthur-Forrest process produces this element's cyanide complex. It can have a -1 oxidation state,
as it is the most electronegative metal. A sample of this element was surrounded by a ring of zinc sulfide by
Marsden and Geiger. Although it is usually quite unreactive in elemental form, it dissolves in a solution of
nitric acid and hydrochloric acid called aqua regia. This element was bombarded with alpha particles an
experiment that discovered the atomic nucleus, performed by Rutherford using a thin foil made of this
element. For 10 points, name this yellow metal with symbol Au.
ANSWER: gold
The Turkevich method can be used to make nanoparticles of this metal which have applications in drug
delivery. It is refined by the Wohlwill (VOLE-vill) process, and it can be mined by cyanide leaching. Its
only stable isotope is 197. It is sometimes found in telluride ores, and it is the most ductile and malleable
element. It reacts with chlorine, explaining why it is susceptible to aqua regia. This metal was used to detect
the atomic nucleus in a namesake "foil" experiment. For 10 points, name this metallic element with symbol
Au.
ANSWER: gold
The Elsner Reaction makes use of sodium cyanide to extract forms of this substance, which is
commonly purified via the Miller or Wohlwill processes. Along with Telerium, this substance forms
the mineral sylvanite, and when combined with silver this substance forms an alloy called electrum.
Besides (*) Platinum, it is the only other metal that can be dissolved by aqua regia, and a substance that is
often mistaken for this metal is known as pyrite. The practice of alchemy originated in order to generate
this element, whose purest form is 24 carats. For 10 points, identify this valuable metallic element with
atomic number 79 and symbol Au (A-U).
ANSWER: gold [prompt on "Au"]
An effort to extract this element from seawater was made by Fritz Haber, who was disappointed by the
results. Mylar coated with this is used to protect artificial satellites from solar heat, and because it can be
beaten into sheets about a tenth of a micron thick, this is the most malleable element. That property made
this element useful as a foil to Ernest Rutherford in his discovery of atomic nuclei. It does not react with
nitric acid but does react when nitric acid is combined with hydrochloric acid to make aqua regia. Name this
metal with a yellowish color that was known in Latin as aurum.
ANSWER: gold
In 1920 Fritz Haber began a secret project to extract this element from seawater, after learning of
Arrhenius's calculation that there must be eight million tons of it in the oceans. The pure form of this
element is the most ductile and most malleable metal. Like platinum, it is most commonly dissolved using
aqua regia. The amount of this metal in an alloy is expressed using units of karats. For 10 points, name this
metal, which alchemists attempted to convert lead into.
ANSWER: gold [or Au]
Low-coordinate complexes of the monovalent type of this metal aggregate into polymers through an
unusual form of bonding explained by relativistic effects. In an electron microscopy staining
technique, secondary antibodies attach to colloidal particles of this element. The most common
process for extracting this metal adds an excess of cyanide ion is to form a coordination complex.
Salts of this element are commonly used to treat rheumatoid arthritis. This neutral element has an
electronic configuration oddly ending in (*) 5d10 6s1. This is the heaviest element that can be dissolved
by a mixture of concentrated nitric and hydrochloric acid known as aqua regia. For 10 points, name this
valuable transition metal whose purest alloys clock in at 24 carats.
ANSWER: gold [or Au]
In industry, the Elsner equation governs the MacArthur-Forrest process producing a cyanide of this
substance, which has one 6s valence electron and filled 4f and 5d orbitals. In one experiment, this material
was surrounded by a circular ring of zinc sulfide by Marsden and Geiger. Its 3-plus ion bonds to chlorine
when it dissolves in aqua regia, and with mercury it forms amalgams. A sheet of this element had alpha
particles shot at it in the Rutherford experiment. The most ductile and malleable of all metals, it is often
mistaken for pyrite. For 10 points, name this elemental metal with atomic number 79, symbol Au, and a
distinctive color.
ANSWER: gold [accept Au or aurum until mentioned; do not accept "platinum" at any point since the 3+ ion clue is specific to gold]
He wrote an article entitled Report on the Mode of Detecting Vegetable Substances mixed with coffee
for the Purpose of Adulteration in 1857, and his work in the field of absorption of hydrogen gas by
palladium has been recently made significant by the cold fusion controversy. While a 14-year-old
student at Glasgow, he angered his professor by accurately suggesting that when (*) gases are
absorbed by liquids they become liquids. FTP, name this man, best known for his equation that states that
the rate at which gases diffuse is inversely proportional to the square root of their densities.
ANSWER: Thomas Graham
It can be viewed as a relation between the temperature and average kinetic energy of gas molecule because
the latter is equal at the same temperature due to the ideal gas law. The mathematical expression of
Knudsen's law is similar to this law, and the separation of Uranium isotopes through Uranium hexafluoride
is often incorrectly explained as an application of it. Explaining a process that can also be described by
Fick's law, For 10 points, identify this law named after its Scottish discoverer which states that the rate of
diffusion for a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molar mass.
ANSWER: Graham's Law of diffusion or Graham's Law of effusion
This law was created by its namesake because he read about an observation of Johann Dobereiner's. This
principle was utilized to develop a way to enrich uranium, removing the uranium-238 so only uranium-235
remains. To derive it, its namesake used plaster plugs, very fine tubes, and small orifices, thus slowing the
process down so it could be studied. When that namesake applied this law to solutions, he found that some
apparent solutions were actually particle suspensions which could not pass through a filter. From this
observation he coined the term colloid.FTP, name the law that states that the rate of effusion of a substance
is inversely proportional to the square root of the molar mass of its particles.
ANSWER: Graham's Law
This rock is similar in composition to pegmatite and aplite, and it can be classified as I or S type. This
rock is a common component of batholiths. It has relatively high sodium and potassium levels compared to
magnesium and calcium. A finer-grained form is rhyolite. It is rich in alkali feldspars and quartz. It is less
dense than basalt, which causes oceanic plates to subduct below tectonic plates made of this type of rock.
For 10 points, name this light-colored felsic igneous rock which makes up a major portion of the continental
crust.
ANSWER: granite
The "obicular" type of this rock has concentrically layered, spheroidal structures and is mostly found
in Finland. The I-type and S-type of these rocks are much more common than their M-type, which
form through fractional crystallization, and Chappell and White developed a notable classification
system for them. This rock is found in the upper left of the plutonic QAPF diagram, and like
pegmatite, this rock can metamorphose into (*) greisen. This coarse-grained rock is mainly composed of
feldspars and quartz, and the extrusive variant of this rock is rhyolite. It is less dense than basalt, which
explains why oceanic plates sink beneath continental plates at subduction zones. For ten points, name this
intrusive igneous rock that is often used in countertops.
ANSWER: granite
This rock is classified into I-type and S-type based on its amount of aluminum oxide and sodium
oxide in the Chappell-White classification system. Yosemite's Half Dome is formed of this rock. The
extrusive equivalent of this rock is rhyolite. While (*) basalt is the primary constituent of oceanic crust,
while this rock is the primary constituent of continental crust. For 10 points, name this coarse-grained rock
composed mainly of feldspar and quartz that is the most common intrusive rock in the Earth's crust.
ANSWER: granite
Chappell and White created a lettered classification system for this type of rock. This rock occupies most of
the upper-left side of the plutonic QAPF diagram. Pressure release is a form of weathering that causes
exfoliation of layers of domes of this rock. Rhyolite has an equivalent composition to this rock, but unlike
rhyolite, this rock is intrusive. For 10 points, name this type of igneous rock found in the domes of
Yosemite.
ANSWER: granite
This material is divided into I-type and S-type by the White-Chappell system. The QAPF ("Q-A-P-F")
diagram depicts the different types of this material that form when its constituent parts combine in different
amounts. Oceanic tectonic plates subduct beneath continental ones because basalt is denser than this type of
rock. The volcanic analogue of this type of plutonic rock is rhyolite. For 10 points, name this rock
comprised
of quartz and feldspar, which takes its name from the Latin word for its coarse grains.
ANSWER: granite
One theory for the origin of this rock involves anatexis and revolves around migmatites. This rock comes in
S-types and rarer M-types, while its A-types are now thought to be a form of its I-type, large quantities of
which are entirely unique to Earth. Geologists consider it a subclass of a similarly named family of rock
which contains an alkali mineral rather than plagioclase, and when used in building, it is often confused
with gabbro and gneiss. Rhyolite is compositionally similar to this rock, but is formed extrusively. For 10
points, name this common felsic, intrusive igneous rock containing quartz and feldspar, identifiable by its
distinct salt and pepper look.
ANSWER: Granite
Research in the Lachlan Fold Belt led to this rock's classification system, which was developed by Chappell
and White. That system divides this rock into high-sodium I types and low-sodium S types. This rock is
located in the upper left of the plutonic QAPF diagram. This rock is the intrusive equivalent of rhyolite, and
some are formed by the slow cooling of magma underneath the Earth's surface. Composed mainly of
feldspars and quartz, this rock is light-colored and coarse-grained. For 10 points, name this rock featured in
some countertops and the state nickname of New Hampshire.
ANSWER: granites
This rock was quarried on the Scottish island of Ailsa Craig for use in curling stones. Sodium content
distinguishes the S and I types of this rock, which forms batholiths like Half-Dome. Unlike the similar
(*) rhyolite, this rock is found under the Earth's surface, making up most of the Earth's continental plates.
For 10 points, name this light-colored igneous rock, whose large quartz crystals make it a durable building
alternative to marble.
ANSWER: granite
This material is used to make xGnP nanoparticles, and heat and stress will transform lonsdaleite into this
material. Raman spectroscopy of single particles of it reveals a single line at 1575 inverse centimeters, and
Atomic Force Microscopy uses the Highly Oriented Pyrolytic form as a calibration tool. Two surfaces of
this material were found to show superlubricity in 2004, and unlike diamond, it is an electrical conductor.
Used to absorb neutrons in nuclear reactors, for 10 points, name this material, often used as a lubricant
alternative to oil or grease, an allotrope of carbon that contains a series of flat sheets commonly used in
pencils.
ANSWER: graphite
The Bouguer anomaly is a correction for measuring this quantity which takes height and local
terrain into account. The hypothetical surface for which this force is constant is called the geoid.
Helmert's equation gives a tiny correction for the effect of (*) latitude on this force. This force feels
lower near the equator where it is partially negated by centrifugal force, and the acceleration due to this
force is equal to about 9.8 meters per second squared. For 10 points, name this force on the earth which
causes things to fall.
ANSWER: gravity of the earth
It's not gold, but this color names a commonly used alternative DNA stain in the SYBR ["cyber"] family of
dyes. Fireworks of this color often use barium salts, which also give this color in a flame test. Among
Fraunhofer lines, iron is responsible for a line in this part of the color spectrum designated by a capital E.
The presence of chromium in beryl imparts this color to it. Maximizing effective mass yield and atom
economy are among the goals of a chemistry philosophy named after this color. Elemental copper will react
with air to form a patina of this color composed of copper carbonate. For 10 points, identify this color
which is reflected by chlorophyll.
ANSWER: green
The time-integrated radiative forcing from the instantaneous release of one of these substances is
known as GWP and measures their impact normalized to a common one of these substances. Sulfur
hexaflouride is sometimes said to be the most potent of these substances, likely because it is inert.
Because its dipole moment is unaffected by radiation from 4 to 30 microns, (*) N2 is not among these
substances on Earth, but N2 does play this role on Titan alongside CH4 and H2, which parallel the two most
common of these gases on Earth. The decreasing carbon-13 to carbon-12 ratio is evidence for the
anthropogenic contribution to these substances. For 10 points, what atmospheric gases absorb longwave
infrared radiation in their namesake effect?
ANSWER: greenhouse gases [prompt on "GHG"]
Vinyl ones are used to create 7-substituted indoles in the Bartoli synthesis, while its reacted with triethyl
orthoformate in an aldehyde synthesis. Aryl ones undergo nucleophilic aromatic substitutions in the
synthesis of Naproxen, and they eliminate in the Boord olefin synthesis. They form imines when reacted
with nitriles, and two equivalents of them add to esters to form tertiary alcohols. Alkylithium reagents are
more nucleophilic than these reagents, which are usually synthesized in either diethyl ether or THF from
alkyl halides. They most often add to aldehydes and ketones to create primary or secondary alcohols,
respectively. For 10 points, name these organometallic reagents that contain magnesium.
ANSWER: Grignard reagents
A method of measuring the concentration of these compounds is titrating with 1,10-phenanthroline.
Reacting one of these compounds with triethyl orthoformate is the first step of the BodrouxChichibabin synthesis. Adding these compounds to a nitrile forms an imine, which then can be
hydrolyzed into a ketone. These compounds give both 1,4- and 1,2-addition to alpha-beta
unsaturated carbonyls, necessitating the use of (*) Gilman reagents or alkyllithium reagents. Two
equivalents of these compounds are required to add to an ester, and depending on the application they can
be stored in either THF or diethyl ether. More commonly one equivalent are used to form a new carboncarbon bond with a carbonyl carbon and leave an alcohol. For 10 points, name these magnesium halide
containing reagents named for a French chemist.
ANSWER: Grignard reagents
An orthoester will produce an aldehyde one carbon longer from one of these in the Bodroux-Chichibabin
aldehyde synthesis. Some of them have limited utility due to a side elimination of beta haloethers named for
Boord. One can force their dimerization by adding dioxane, which forces a salt to precipitate and thereby
manipulates an equilibrium named for Schlenk. The presence of copper salts can control their
regioselectivity in the opposite way, favoring 1,4 conjugate addition. They react with peroxyesters to give
ethers and with isocyanates to give the amide. Since they decompose in the presence of protons, they are
typically formed in THF, or else diethyl ether, by the reaction of an alkyl halide with magnesium. For 10
points, identify these compounds, which reduce and alkylate carbonyl to give an alcohol.
ANSWER: Grignard reagents [do not accept "alkyllithiums"]
Concentrations of these compounds are measured using either bipyradyl or phenanthroline in a
titration. When using these substances, adding 1,2-dibromoethane as an activator creates bubbles of
ethylene as the reaction progresses. Their central atom has a tetrahedral geometry with two solvent
molecules filling the unbonded sites. These compounds are stored in either diethyl (*) ether or THF
depending on which side of the Schlenk equilibrium you want them on. Two equivalents of these
compounds are required to react with an ester, and they are most commonly used as carbon nucleophiles to
attack carbonyl groups in order to create alcohols. For 10 points, name these organomagnesium halides used
to form carbon-carbon bonds, named for a French chemist.
ANSWER: Grignard reagents
The Schlenk equilibrium, which can be affected by the presence of dioxane, describes the stability of these
compounds, whose synthesis can be improved by the addition of mercuric chloride amalgamates. They react
with nitriles to form intermediate imine anions, and dry carbon dioxide can be bubbled through them to
create carboxylic acids, which themselves do not form an addition product with these. In what is sometimes
called their namesake's reaction, they act as strong nucleophiles to form tertiary or secondary alcohols from
ketones or aldehydes. For 10 points, name these compounds formed by reacting an alkyl halide with
magnesium, named for a French guy.
ANSWER: Grignard reagents
The Bartoli synthesis uses three equivalents of them to produce indoles, and another reaction that uses them
results in the production of enol lactones, the Fujimoto-Belleau reaction. Their utility is limited by the
Boord reaction, and they are instrumental in the production of the drugs Taximofen and Naproxen. Because
they dimerize by the Schenk equilibrium, they must be coordinated to solvents like THF or diethyl ether.
Also used in the ring opening of epoxides, they act as strong nucleophiles to produce alcohols from
aldehydes or ketones, and as bases, they produce the corresponding alkane when dissolved in water. FTP,
identify these magnesium halide organometallic reagents, named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Grignard reagents
The efficacy of the Boord olefin synthesis prevents ones with vicinal alkoxy groups from being synthesized.
Particularly hindered ones react by single-electron transfer, but normally their namesake reaction uses two
equivalents of them to generate a six-membered ring for a transition state. Reactions involving them must be
carried out in aprotic solvents, and the only way to produce ones incorporating fluorine requires a metal
powder named for Rieke. For 10 points, name these organometallic reagents, most commonly used as
nucleophiles for reducing carbonyl groups to alcohols, which could be known as alkyl or aryl magnesium
halides.
ANSWER: Grignard reagents [prompt on alkyl magnesium halides or aryl magnesium halides]
Methadone and Tamoxifen are among the pharmaceuticals produced using these substances, which must be
prepared in aprotic solvents. These compounds are often synthesized in a nitrogen atmosphere to avoid
water and oxygen, and ethers are some of the few organic molecules these substances will not react with. It
took more than fifty years to successfully make one of these substances with fluorine, and their chemical
mechanism is based on the reversed polarity of a carbon bond. Consisting of an alkyl or aryl group, a
magnesium atom, and a halide, these are commonly used to reduce ketones or aldehydes to alcohols. Added
to carbonyl groups to create carbon-carbon bonds, name this class of reagents.
ANSWER: Grignard (GRIN-yard) reagent
An idealized distribution of this substance is modeled using a potentiometric surface. The Dupuit-
Forchheimer approximation accurately models its movement in two dimensions. A solid form of this
material is converted into its liquid form below the so-called "active layer." It is responsible for the creation
of travertine structures and produces structures called speleothems. This material's fluctuations in shape
leads to a characteristic cone of depression. This substance feeds into gaining streams, and it percolates
from the zone of saturation. It moves against gravity to rise above its initial level in artesian set-ups. The
amount of movement of this material is typically expressed by the hydraulic head and formally described by
Darcy's law. For 10 points, identify this substance that can be found in aquifers.
ANSWER: groundwater [prompt on "water"]
The overuse of this substance is known as overdraft, which may cause widespread collapses of land
known as subsidence. Salt intrusion is a major problem facing use of this substance in coastal
regions. A large area where this substance is found is centered on the plains states and is named for
Ogallala. This substance completely saturates available space at a namesake (*) "table," and it comes
to the surface at artesian wells. For 10 points, name this substance found in aquifers.
ANSWER: groundwater [prompt on water or equivalents]
This system interacts with the Worthington and North Recirculating Gyres. An example of a western
boundary current, it is responsible for the western isolation of the Sargasso Sea. Its namesake rings can be
either warm- or cold-core, depending on the direction of the eddy. For 10 points, name this ocean current
that starts in the Gulf of Mexico, proceeds past Cape Hatteras and warms western Europe.
ANSWER: Gulf Stream
This mineral can form Balatino type laminations and both this mineral and a related mineral with one fewer
component can be found in chicken wire structures. When subjected to high heat, this mineral can convert
to bassanite. The discovery of a vein of this mineral called Homestake has been used to argue for the past
presence of water on Mars. The Naica mine in Mexico is known for its megacrystals of this mineral.
Nodules of this mineral can be found in Sabkhas. Selenite is particular crystal configuration of this mineral.
When this mineral has its water removed, it become anhydrite. Dunes of this mineral can be found in White
Sands, New Mexico. This evaporite is the mineral component of plaster of paris. It is composed of calcium
sulfate. For 10 points, name this mineral that is two on the Mohs hardness scale.
ANSWER: gypsum [accept anhydrite before "water removed", prompt on calcium sulfate]
Granules of this mineral are often found in the vacuoles of the Closterium genus of algae. This mineral
can form from tiny crystals of bassanite. An extremely pure form of this mineral is mined at Fort Dodge,
Iowa. The largest crystals in the world are made of a clear variant of this mineral and are found in the
Mexican Naica mine. When it has a fibrous appearance, it is known as satin spar. This mineral can be
formed from the hydration of anhydrite. Its variants include selenite and alabaster and it is the most
common sulfate mineral. For 10 points, name this mineral with a Mohs hardness of 2, also known as
hydrous calcium sulfate and used in drywall.
ANSWER: gypsum [or calcium sulfate dehydrate before mentioned]
During the Silurian, this mineral and halite were deposited in large beds in the Michigan Basin. The
discovery of this mineral by the rover Opportunity is proof that water once flowed on Mars' surface.
The water of crystallization present in this mineral keeps its temperature fixed at 100 degrees C until it has
all been evaporated. This fire protecting property has led to its widespread use in (*) construction.
One "silky" form of this mineral, selenite, is often nicknamed "satin spar," and it also occurs as crystals
with barite in formations known as "desert roses." This mineral has many practical applications such as
fertilizer, plaster of Paris, and alabaster, but it may be best known for the aforementioned construction
usage in drywall. For 10 points, name this mineral made of dihydrated calcium sulfate whose Mohs'
hardness is 2.
ANSWER: gypsum [accept anhydrite before "Opportunity"]
The origin of a phenomenon that affects one part of these constructs was solved using the beta plane
approximation by Henry Stommel. One part of these constructs is faster, deeper and narrower due to the
Coriolis effect being stronger at the poles, which gives rise to an off-center hill of water. Charles Moore
brought attention to an area caused by one of these constructs known as the Great Pacific Garbage Patch.
That phenomenon is westward intensification, which affects western boundary currents such as the
Kuroshio current and the Gulf Stream. For 10 points, identify these constructs which consist of flow around
the periphery of an ocean basin.
ANSWER: geostrophic subtropical ocean gyres [prompt on ocean currents]
This scientist's last paper, written with one of his students, used Fenton chemistry to explain the generation
of hydroxyl [hie-DROK-sil] radicals from hydrogen peroxide and superoxide. In addition to that work with
Joseph Weiss, this scientist worked with Max Born on a method to calculate lattice energies, which is
known as their cycle. In 1909, this person used osmium as a catalyst in a very high pressure reaction that
combines hydrogen and nitrogen. Name this scientist whose process for creating ammonia was improved
by Carl Bosch.
ANSWER: Fritz Haber
This scientist spent years working on a method to retrieve gold dissolved in seawater. This man's wife,
Clara, killed herself when this man personally oversaw the deployment of chlorine gas at the Battle of
Ypres. His most famous invention freed his country from reliance on Chilean guano and is still heavily
used to produce fertilizer. For 10 points, name this German chemist who, with Carl Bosch, names a process
that converts nitrogen gas into liquid ammonia.
ANSWER: Fritz Haber
Gerhard Ertl showed that the first steps of this reaction followed the Langmuir-Hinshelwood scheme
and elucidated that potassium donates electrons to neighboring atoms to promote this reaction. Ertl
also determined that this reaction's rate-determining step was the cleavage of the (*) nitrogen
molecule and showed how iron acts as a catalyst in this reaction, serving as a substrate for three separate
additions of hydrogen. The second of this reaction's namesakes developed it into an industrial process while
working for BASF. For 10 points, name this reaction that makes ammonia from hydrogen and nitrogen.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process
Gerhard Ertl won the 2007 Nobel in chemistry partially for his work on this reaction, and one of the
reactants is obtained by heating methane with steam to produce a syngas mixture. It is facilitated by the
introduction of an iron oxide catalyst at low temperatures, and the product is continually removed,
which forces the reaction to move towards completion according to the Le Chatelier principle. For 10
points, name this industrial process which uses three hydrogen molecules and one nitrogen molecule to
produce two molecules of ammonia.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process
This process employs a submonolayer of potassium covering the catalyst as an electronic promoter, a
configuration protected against sintering by a framework of alumina and calcium oxide, which work
as structural promoters. Alwin Mittasch developed the modern, cheaper catalyst for this process. The
elucidation of this process's mechanism won the 2007 Nobel Prize for Gerhard (*) Ertl. The occasional
second namesake of this process received that credit for his design of an industrial-scale cast iron reactor
that could withstand the two hundred atmospheres and five hundred degrees Celsius necessary to break the
triple bond concerned. For 10 points, name this reaction, an artificial route to fix nitrogen gas into
ammonia.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process
Gerhard Ertl won his Nobel Prize in 2007 in part due to his work on the mechanism of this process.
Potassium hydroxide acts as a catalytic promoter of this process. The biological version of this process is
facilitated by molybdenum-based enzymes. The product of this reaction is usually removed to drive the
reaction to the right in a famous application of Le Chatlier's Principle. An iron oxide catalyst is used in this
industrial process, the product of which is also synthesized by rhizobia. The Ostwald process converts this
process's product into nitric acid. For 10 points, identify this industrial process that combines hydrogen and
nitrogen to make ammonia.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process [or Haber-Bosch reaction]
It can be promoted with the use of potassium hydroxide, and Gerhard Ertl provided a detailed description of
its mechanism. One of the raw materials for it is uses methane to produce a mixture called "synthesis gas"
although the methane is recovered at the end, while the other reactant is obtained from the atmosphere. An
iron oxide catalyst allows it to be used at lower temperatures, and the removal of the end product allows the
reaction to run continually due to Le Chatelier's principle. For 10 points, identify this process used to
produce ammonia from hydrogen and nitrogen.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch Process
This process is usually preceded by the reaction of methane over a bed of nickel oxide, and Gerhard Ertl's
won the 2007 Nobel Prize partly for discovering the catalytic mechanism of it. Usually carried out at 200
atmospheres and 600 degrees Celsius over iron, this reaction consumes about 1% of the world's energy
supply and 5% of natural gas produced. Yielding several million tons of fertilize in the form of its
anhydrous product, for 10 points, name this reaction which synthesizes ammonia from nitrogen and
hydrogen gas, named for a German.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process
This process was first carried out at a BASF plant in Oppau. A temperature and pressure of 800 kelvin and
250 atm are necessary for this reaction, which formerly used a uranium catalyst but today much more
commonly uses enriched magnetite. This process also commonly involves a raw product called synthesis
gas, and it is used to create products like fertilizer. For 10 points, identify this chemical procedure, that fixes
nitrogen and hydrogen gases to produce ammonia.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process
To catalyze this process, Alwin Mittasch found that iron oxide is a cheaper option than osmium and
ruthenium. The product of this process is used in a two-step process, which oxidizes this process's product
and re-oxidizes the result, after which water absorbs the nitrogen dioxide to produce nitric acid in the
Ostwald process. About one-half of the protein consumed in the world is synthesized using fertilizer that
results from this process, which uses hydrogen and nitrogen. For 10 points, name this process that
synthesizes ammonia, named for two Germans.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process
Originally employing expensive uranium or osmium compounds, its product is frequently used to produce
soda ash for glass making, or else it may be passed through a heated platinum screen. To make up for the
high temperatures necessary to run it at a reasonable rate, pressures approaching two hundred atmospheres
are sometimes used; the product is usually cooled from those high temperatures to liquefy it. Its catalyst is
commonly generated through the reduction of lodestone, and its product may be used for the Solvay and
Ostwald processes. Employing a catalyst composed of iron and potassium hydroxide, for 10 points, identify
this industrial procedure that fixes nitrogen gas into ammonia.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process
The KAAP version of this reaction uses a ruthenium catalyst to allow for lower pressure, and Gerhard Ertl
received the 2007 Nobel Prize in part for determining its molecular mechanism. An early stage of this
reaction needs a methanator to prevent the build up of carbon monoxide, and its namesake first investigated
this process because of the scarcity of Chilean saltpeter. This generally requires an iron catalyst and
pressures above 200 atmospheres. Syngas provides one of the reactants for this process, which in turn
provides the synthetic fertilizer that grows food for about half of the world's population. Name this
chemical process in which nitrogen and hydrogen gases are combined to make ammonia.
ANSWER: Haber-Bosch process
On radar, a three body scatter spike is seen as evidence of the formation sites of these objects.
Graupels are the small form of this substance. Updrafts cause these objects to collect droplets; the
super cooled water then touches the condensation nuclei and (*) freezes, producing these entities. Often
compared in size to golf balls and peas, for 10 points, name this solid type of precipitation that falls as
irregular balls of ice.
ANSWER: hail
This phenomenon is less likely to occur near sea level because the atmosphere's zero Celsius isotherm is
lower in the continental interior. Graupel can be distinguished from this phenomenon because it is made of
accreted rime. Opaque layers of this phenomenon occur when it is formed from water vapor.
Megacryometeors are not officially recognized as this phenomenon; therefore the heaviest verified example
had a mass of around 1 kilogram. For 10 points, name this meteorological phenomenon, frozen stones of ice
at least 5 millimeters in diameter.
ANSWER: hailstones
When n processes occur simultaneously, this value for the system as a whole is equal to n times the
harmonic mean of this value for each individual process. A version of this concept applicable to toxicology
may be decreased by the administration of Prussian blue, which may be used to remove cesium from the
blood. This value is five thousand, seven hundred and thirty years for the isotope carbon-14. For 10 points,
name this central quantity in nuclear chemistry, the period over which a certain fraction of a substance
undergoes a radioactive event.
ANSWER: half-life
One variety of this quantity is proportional to the volume of distribution divided by clearance and is used
when computing the "effective" variety of this quantity for drug concentration. For a second order reaction,
it is one over the initial concentration times the rate constant, while this quantity is independent of
concentration in first order reactions. Isotopes in the island of stability are expected to have comparatively
large values for this quantity for decay, with values on the order of minutes to days. For 10 points, name this
term denoting the amount of time it takes a quantity to drop to a certain fraction of its initial value, which
for Carbon-14 is 5,730 years.
ANSWER: Half Life
In biological systems, this quantity's effective kind equals the reciprocal of the sums of the reciprocals of
the biological and physical values for it. This quantity is related to the energy of an alpha particle in a law
named for Geiger and Nuttall. This quantity equals initial concentration over twice k for a zeroth order
reaction, while it is concentration-independent for a first-order reaction and equals the natural log of 2 over
the rate constant. Radiocarbon dating makes use of this value's quantity for carbon-14 decay of 5730 years.
For 10 points, name this quantity used frequently when describing radioactive decay, the length of time for
fifty percent of a compound to be consumed.
ANSWER: half-life
Polyacrylate elastomers can be produced by copolymerizing acrylic esters with monomers containing these
compounds, and a cyanogen compound of this type is used to hydrolyze peptide bonds of methionine at the
C terminus. Although these groups deactivate the benzene ring, they are ortho, para directing and they are
replaced in nucleophilic substitution reactions of benzene. Compounds with this functional group can be
used to form Grignard reagents, and alkyl compounds with this functional group undergo SN2 reactions
with alkoxides in the Williamson ether synthesis. For 10 points, what is this functional group that is
composed of an group 17 element, such as fluorine or chlorine?
ANSWER: halide [prompt on halogen]
The bath employed by this process is stirred by magnetohydrodynamic flow and generally uses a mixture of
sodium, calcium, and fluorides of the desired element. The more efficient method of this process uses solid
carbon anodes and is called pre-baked. This process is often preceded by the Bayer process and originally
used a cryolite bath in which alumina, now replaced by bauxite, was dissolved. For 10 points, name this
doubly-eponymous industrial process that was discovered independently by an American and a Frenchman
and is used in the production of aluminum.
ANSWER: Hall-Heroult process [prompt on partial answer]
The chief reactant in this technique used to be produced by the Deville process, and it is typically
performed at 850 degrees Celsius. The use of Soderberg cells in this process involves addition of pitch to
the anode, while the prebake method involves intense heating of the anode prior to use. Its chief reactant
can also be refined in the Bayer process by dissolving bauxite in sodium hydroxide and heating the fluffy
white precipitate. Working by dissolving alumina in molten cryolite, for 10 points, identify this industrial
process for producing aluminum, named for two American and French chemists.
ANSWER: Hall-Heroult process
Superatoms are considered to be "pseudo" varieties of them, and one compound consisting of two
of them notably cleaves carbon-silicon bonds in organic reactions. The Tyrian purple dye features two of
them at the ends of benzene rings, and a radioactive one was synthesized by barraging bismuth with
alpha particles. Hypocalcaemia results from a spill of an acid of one, which is in both Freon and Teflon.
Consisting of astatine, bromine, and the most electronegative element, for 10 points, name this
chemical group also containing iodine and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens
The UV light initiated reaction of hydrocarbons with this group is commonly used to functionalize
hydrocarbons, and the Finkelstein reaction exchanges these elements. All elements in this group, except the
radioactive one, are found diatomically in their pure state and are found in all three states of matter in
standard conditions. One member of this group, found in Lugol's solution, is used to detect starches.
Elements in this group react with metals to form salts, giving their name. For 10 points, name this group of
highly reactive elements which includes astatine, iodine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: Halogens
One member of this group of element is used to test for the presence of starch. Two atoms of one
element in this group are bonded to the central carbonyl (car-BAH-nill) group in phosgene (FAHS-jean).
Astatine is the heaviest member of this group that have the highest electron affinities on the periodic table.
This is the only group on the period table to have members that are solid, liquid, and gas at room
temperature. For 10 points, name these elements found in group 17 that include iodine and chlorine.
ANSWER: halogens [accept group 17 elements before mentioned]
One element in this group can be detected by its ability to turn a starch solution blue. Ions of the four
lightest members of this family can be distinguished by the color of the precipitate, if any, when reacted
with silver nitrate. This group includes the only liquid and solid diatomic elements. It contains the most
electronegative element on the Pauling scale. For 10 points, name this group whose lightest members are
iodine, bromine, chlorine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [or halides; or Group VIIA (Seven A); or Group 17]
They can sometimes be used to increase membrane permeability, while their "pseudo" variety
usually features bond formation with a cyanide ion. One element in this group is capable of forming
compounds with the relatively inert Xenon and Radon. The heaviest discovered member of this
group likely accumulates in the thyroid gland like another member of the group, and is named
Astatine. Because they lack an eighth electron, they tend to be highly reactive and cannot be found in their
pure form in nature. For 10 points, identify this group of elements containing iodine, fluorine and chlorine,
all of which produce salts.
ANSWER: Halogens (also accept Group VIIA or Group 17)
The 209 isotope of one member of this class of elements is produced by bombarding bismuth with alpha
particles, while another of these elements is used as a mordant in Gram stains. Elements in this group are
diatomic in their pure state, and this group has a name meaning salt-formers. Elements in this group can
exist in solid, liquid, and gas phases, and the first element in this group is the most electronegative of all
elements. For 10 points, identify this group of elements that lack one electron in their outer shell, examples
of which are fluorine, chlorine, and bromine.
ANSWER: halogens [accept group 7A or group 17]
The Finkelstein reaction exchanges elements from these entities while Grignard reagents contain a member
of these entities bonded to an aryl or alkyl magnesium group. One member of these entities is used in starch
indicators and is also added to table salt. At standard temperature and pressure, this group is the only
periodic group whose elements exist in all three common states of matter and this group contains the most
electronegative element. For 10 points name this group of the periodic table that includes elements such as
astatine, bromine, iodine, chlorine and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [or group 17]
In the Friedel-Crafts reaction, one member of this group bonded to an alkyl group can be used to
attach the alkyl group to an aromatic ring. One of these elements was bonded to xenon to form the
first noble gas compound. One member of this group is the rarest non-transuranium element. An acid
formed by bonding one of these elements to hydrogen can dissolve (*) glass, and is the only such acid of
this group that is weak. This group contains the only nonmetal that is liquid at standard temperature, and
each of its members contains seven valence electrons, making them extremely reactive. For 10 points, group
17 consists of which elements that include chlorine?
ANSWER: halogen (prompt on "group 17" or "group VII")
Organic compounds containing these materials include the horribly toxic PCBs and PFCAs. The heaviest
one, the rarest element in Earth's crust, is produced by decay of radium and polonium. A detector which
turns starches blue, Lugol's reagent, is a potassium salt of one of these elements; that element, when bonded
to silver, can be used in cloud seeding. The lightest member of this group was the first discovered to form
bonds with xenon, and it is the only group to include solid, liquid, and gas elements at standard temperature
and pressure. As free radicals, they deplete the ozone layer. For 10 points, name this group of elements
including astatine, iodine, and chlorine, the column to the left of noble gases on the periodic table.
ANSWER: halogens [accept group 17 or family 17; prompt "group 7A" or "family 7A"]
The molecules selenorhodane (seh-leh-nor-HOH-dane) and thiocyanate (thai-oh-SAI-uh-nate) are
sometimes called "pseudo-" members of this group, which exchanges one atom for another in the
Finkelstein reaction. In the era of leaded gasoline, a compound made from ethylene (e-thuh-LEEN) and an
element from this group was used to clean out engine cylinders. Another element from this group is in a
solution which turns blue-black in the presence of starch, Lugol's solution, and another element from this
group gives mustard gas and DDT their deadly potency. Freon contains two elements from this group, as do
several other ozone depleting refrigerants. Containing the most electronegative element, name this group
that includes astatine, iodine, chlorine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [accept Group 7A or Group 17]
Members of this group of elements act as electrophiles when interacting with a Lewis base in its namesake
bonding. Antoine-Jerome Ballard is often credited with extracting one of its members from seaweed, and
magnesium reacts with one element in this group to form a Grignard reagent. Another member of this group
is used to detect starch in a process named for Lugol. It is the only group to have solid, liquid, and gaseous
elements at standard temperature and pressure, and four members of this group are diatomic. For 10 points,
name this group of elements which includes astatine, bromine, iodine, chlorine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: Halogens [accept Group 17 or Group VIIA]
Two elements from this group are exchanged in an SN2 reaction named for Finklestein. The heaviest of
these elements is produced by bombarding bismuth with alpha particles. With a name meaning
"salt-formers," this group contains elements in solid, liquid, and gaseous phases at standard temperature
and pressure. One of these elements is commonly found in the thyroid, while another is the most
electronegative. For 10 points, name this group containing astatine, iodine, fluorine, and chlorine.
ANSWER: halogens [or Group 17A; or Group 7]
J. L. Lassaigne developed a test in which sodium is "fused" with nitrogen, sulfur, and elements from
this group. An isotope of the heaviest element in this group is created by bombarding bismuth with
alpha particles. Another element from this group is used to detect (*) starch and turns dark blue in its
presence. This group has elements of three states of matter at room temperature and houses the most
electronegative element. Its members are highly reactive because each element has seven valence electrons.
For 10 points, name this group whose members include Astatine, Iodine, and Fluorine.
ANSWER: Halogens [prompt on Group 17]
This group of elements commonly provides the leaving group in an SN2 reaction. These elements form
PTFE when they bond with an alkyl group. They bond with hydrogen to form compounds such as
hydrastatic acid and another acid that has the ability to dissolve glass. The most electronegative element is a
member of this group. With 7 valence electrons and ions known as halides, for 10 points, name these group
seventeen elements including astatine, chlorine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [or Group 17; or Group 7A]
The sensitization step of creating a daguerreotype employs a vapor of one of these elements. Along
with carbon and hydrogen, DDT and CFCs contain atoms of this group of elements. One of these elements
is the only nonmetal that is a liquid at room temperature. Most of these elements form diatomic molecules
in standard conditions, and one example is bonded to sodium in table salt. For 10 points, name these
non-metallic elements, which have a minus one oxidation state and include bromine, chlorine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [accept group 17 elements]
An SN2 reaction performed in acetone, the Finkelstein reaction, exchanges two of these. The heaviest is
made by bombarding bismuth with alpha particles. A silver salt of one of these substances is used in cloud
seeding and photography. The four lightest ones are diatomic, and form acids with hydrogen. The only
group to have solid, liquid, and gaseous elements at STP, they have seven valence electrons and comprise
Group 17 of the periodic table. For 10 points, name this group of elements which includes astatine,
bromine, iodine, chlorine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [prompt on Group 17 or Group VIIA before mentioned]
A 2001 J.C. Alvarez study investigated properties of aromatic polyamides containing this class of elements,
and they are reacted with carboxylic acids in the Hunsdiecker reaction. The Finkelstein reaction involves
the exchange of two atoms of these elements, and the enrichment of uranium via gaseous diffusion is
accomplished using a molecule containing the simplest of these elements, whose synthesis won Henri
Moissan the 1906 Nobel in Chemistry. Another member of this group is used as a mordant in Gram staining
and has an important role in the thyroid gland. For 10 points, identify these highly reactive Group 17
elements that include iodine and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [accept Group 17 elements before mentioned]
Cryolite contains 6 atoms of an element from this group, and one of them can be created by
bombarding bismuth with alpha particles. One element of this group will turn purple-black when it
comes into contact with starch, and they are all diatomic except for one which is the least reactive
one. The most (*) electronegative element is found in this group, and it is the only group of elements to
have solid, liquid, and gaseous elements at STP. All of the elements in this group, whose name means "saltformers", have seven valence electrons. For 10 points, name this group containing fluorine and chlorine,
located next to the noble gases on the periodic table.
ANSWER: halogens [accept Halides, prompt on group 17 or 7A elements]
In a namesake reaction, some of them can react with the bases of methyl ketones to create carboxylic acids.
The heaviest example is the rarest naturally occurring element on Earth, and the deficiency of another
member is often the cause of a goiter. Normally featuring odd-numbered oxidation states, these elements all
have an outer shell electron configuration of ns2np5 (N S 2 N P 5). For 10 points, name these elements that
lack one electron in their outer shell, examples of which include bromine, chlorine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [or Group 7A; or Group 17]
Deficiency in one member of this chemical group can lead to goiter. Another member of this group binds to
carbon in teflon. Along with carbon and hydrogen, members of this group comprise CFCs. One member of
this group is the only nonmetal that is liquid at room temperature. Most members of this chemical group
are will form an ion with a minus 1 charge. One member of this group is used in bleaching, while the
heaviest member is astatine. For 10 points, name this group of elements that includes iodine, chlorine, and
fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [accept group 17]
The addition reaction of these elements occurs when one of these elements is added to the carbon double
bond of an alkene functional group. These elements act as electrophilic species in their namesake bonds,
which are used in crystal engineering, and the pseudo form of these elements is often made of cyanides and
cyanate ions bonded to members of this group. With less electronegative elements they form halide
compounds, and this is the only group which has members existing in solid, liquid, and gaseous states at
room conditions. For 10 points, name this group of elements with seven valence electrons, which includes
bromine and iodine.
ANSWER: Halogens [accept Group 17 or Group 7A]
One element in this group forms Grignard (GRIN-yurd) reagents with magnesium. Another element in this
group is used in a test to detect starches in a solution; that test is named for Lugol (LOO-gul). That element
from this group is also used in a tincture to disinfect skin. Two of these elements combine with carbon to
form a series of compounds that are a major threat to the ozone layer. For 10 points, name this group of
elements that includes bromine, iodine, chlorine, and fluorine.
ANSWER: halogens [or Group 17; or Group VIIA]
Along with magnesium, a member of this group of elements is found in Grignard reagents. One of these
elements is frequently used to detect starch, in the presence of which that element turns dark blue. This
group also contains the last naturally occurring element to be discovered. That element is the only one of
the
group to not naturally occur in diatomic form. For 10 points, give the name for group seventeen elements,
which include astatine, iodine, and chlorine.
ANSWER: halogens [or Group 17 before mentioned; or Group 7a]
One member of this group bonds with carbon to form teflon and formed the first noble gas compound
with xenon. This group of elements is the only to feature, at standard temperature and pressure, members
that are solids, liquids, and gases. Three members of this group can bond with a single atom of hydrogen to
form a extremely strong acid. For 10 points, name this group of highly reactive elements that contains
fluorine and chlorine.
ANSWER: halogens [or Group 17 elements]
An element in this group is combined with its potassium salt in Lugol's solution. One of these
elements was the last naturally occurring element to be discovered, and two more of them are found in
a certain class of ozone-destroying chemicals. These elements, which contain five electrons in the p
subshell, often form negative one oxidation states. For 10 points, name this group that contains
astatine, iodine, bromine, chlorine, and fluorine and is found one group to the left of the noble gases.
ANSWER: halogens [accept halides; accept Group VIIA; accept Group 17]
This type of reaction can be used to test for the presence of a methyl ketone, with a positive result
giving a pale yellow substance. The Wohl-Ziegler reaction is an example of the radical allylic type of
this reaction. When this type of reaction is performed on alkanes, it is typically initiated by UV
radiation or heat and proceeds via a free-radical chain mechanism. A decarboxylation which is an
example of this type of reaction has a variation named for Simonini; that reaction operates on silver
salts of carboxylic acids and is named for (*) Hunsdiecker. This type of reaction is particularly easy to
perform when the element being added is the most electronegative element on the periodic table. For 10
points, name this process of reacting a compound with an element like fluorine or chlorine.
ANSWER: halogenation [accept haloform reaction or iodoform reaction before "Wohl-Ziegler," and prompt after; prompt on "free-radical reaction" before "free-radical"]
In Pearson's extension of Lewis acid-base theory, this word describes acids that have small radii and high
oxidation states. One compound that has a "super" version of a property with this name is cubic boron
nitride, which is used as an abrasive in grinding tools. Water that has a high concentration of minerals like
calcium is said to have a property with this name. One scale for measuring one property of this name gives a
value of 7 to quartz, and that scale is named for Mohs. For 10 points, identify this word, which describes
solid materials like corundum that are resistant to permanent deformation, such as by scratching.
ANSWER: hard [or word forms; or superhard]
This property can be tested in resins and other composite materials with the Barcol test. It increases as
particle size decreases, a relationship known as the Hall-Petch relationship. Cubic boron nitride, often
known by the brand name of Borazon, has one of the highest known values for this property. It can be tested
in metal via the Leeb test, and scales for measuring it include the Brinell scale and the Rockwell scale. The
Vickers pyramid number is another unit for this property of a material, and apatite has a moderate value for
this property according to the most common scale for measuring it. Sometimes defined in terms of the
ability to scratch other substances, FTP identify this property measured by the Mohs scale.
ANSWER: hardness
Meyer's Law relates the indentation form of this property with the force necessary for that indentation,
which is necessary for the Brinell Scale of this property of minerals. The Hall-Petch relationship states that
this property increases as particle size decreases. A Vickers test is another way to determine this property
for a mineral, and sclerometers are used to measure the scratch form of this property, for which talc has a
value of one. For 10 points, name this property of minerals, for which diamond has a value of ten on the
Mohs Scale.
ANSWER: Hardness
Extremely high values of this quality have been found for wurtzite boron nitride and
lonsdaleite [LAHNSS-day-"light"]. Meyer's law is used in some scales that measure this quality by
setting an exponential function equal to pressure as measured in megapascals. A measure of this
quality that uses round objects is the Brinell scale, and another measure of this quality is the Vickers
pyramid number. The Turner sclerometer [sklair-AH-meh-tur] test measures an absolute value for this
quality, which is equivalent to a resistance to abrasion. A common scale for this quality compares
objects to apatite ["appetite"], corundum, and diamond. Name this quality measured by the Mohs
scale.
ANSWER: mineral hardness [prompt on Mohs number before "Brinell"]
The "rebound" variety of this property is measured using a scleroscope, and can be ordered on a
scale named for Bennett. Impression area is an important measure in the Knoop method of testing for
this property. The "indentation" type is tested for by the Brinell and Rockwell methods, which produce
dimensionless numbers of this property. A number generally between two and four measures this
property on the Vickers scale. For 10 points, name this property, whose "scratch" variety can be
measured using the Mohs scale.
ANSWER: hardness
One method for determining this property uses a Durometer. Another method for calculating this
property uses the coefficient 1.854 and a material in the shape of a square pyramid. That method was
devised by engineers at Vickers, Ltd. This property can be measured using a sclerometer
(SCLER-ah-muh-ter). One scale for this property lists quartz at seven. For 10 points, name this property
measured by the Mohs scale to be the resistance of a smooth surface to abrasion or scratching.
ANSWER: hardness
The micro variety of this property can be measured via a Tukon Tester, and a brale or steel ball can be
used to place samples on the Rockwell scale. The indentation form of this property can be measured using
the Brinell and Vickers tests. The absolute form can be measured using a sclerometer, while the most
famous scale measures the scratch form and has a value of six for feldspar, nine for corundum, one for talc,
and ten for diamond. For 10 points, name this property measured on the Mohs scale that denotes a mineral's
resistance to force.
ANSWER: hardness
The Schmidt hammer is a tool used to measure the elastic properties of a rock and the surface variety of this
property. The Hall-Petch Relationship governs how this property increases with decreasing particle size.
Because this property is defined for not elastic materials but solids, it is not (*) stiffness. A sclerometer
measures the scratch variety of this property which is done by calculating the width of scratch made by a
diamond. Feldspar has a value of 6 and talc has a value of 1 on the Mohs scale for this property. For 10
points, name this measure of how resistant solid matter is to changing shape when force is applied.
ANSWER: Hardness
One extension to this method uses the Davidson correction to account for its size-inconsistency and
adds a series of terms corresponding to single, double, etc. excitations. Another extension to it uses
the cluster operator. Those methods are the full configuration interaction and coupled cluster
methods, which take correlation into account. One quantity important in this method has a term that
is equal to the sum over the differences of the Coulomb operator and the (*) exchange operator. This
non-relativistic method assumes that a many-particle wavefunction is the anti-symmetrized product of
several one-particle wavefunctions, and this method requires solving the energy equation until a selfconsistent field is achieved. For 10 points, name this variational mean-field method in quantum chemistry
used to calculate the wavefunction of a many-electron system.
ANSWER: Hartree-Fock method [accept coupled cluster or configuration interaction before mention]
Geologically speaking, Kure (rhymes with brewery) is the oldest part of this region, dating back to
about 30 million years ago. A dike of igneous rock fills an eroded cavity to create this region's
Pinnacle Peak. This region is also home to the hypersaline Lake Laysan. Its northwestern-most island
lies very near the Darwin Point, where ocean water temperatures perfectly balance upward coral
growth with subsidence of land. J. Tuzo Wilson proposed the process that formed this (*) archipelago
as well as the series of guyots and seamounts stretching from it to the Kuril-Kamchatka Trench in the
northwestern Pacific Ocean, known as the Emperor Seamounts. The hotspot that created this island chain
has
slowed down. For 10 points, name this volcanic archipelago home to Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea.
ANSWER: Hawai'ian islands [or Honolulu County, Hawai'i until "archipelago" is read; or Northwester Hawai'ian Islands until "Mauna Loa" is read]
Dewar flasks are often used to prevent this quantity's transmission. At constant pressure, this
value is equal to enthalpy. For a reversible process, the change in this quantity over temperature is
the change in entropy. Diathermic processes allow the exchange of it, but (*) adiabatic processes do
not. The internal energy is this quantity plus work. It can be found by multiplying mass and the change in
temperature by its namesake capacity. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized q, a form of energy
transferred during thermodynamic processes.
ANSWER: heat [prompt on q before mention; prompt on energy]
One form of this quantity is equal to n times R over gamma minus one. One scientist modeled solid particles
as phonons to find this value proportional to temperature cubed. Beside that Debye [duh-"BYE"] model, the
molar value of this quantity for crystals is 3 times R or the ideal gas constant by the (*) Dulong-Petit Law.
Its general value is Q divided by dT and can be found by using bomb and coffee cup versions of an
instrument. Its high value for water is 4.184 Joules, or one calorie, per gram, and can be found with
calorimeters. For 10 points, name this quantity representing the amount of heat needed to raise a substance's
temperature by a given amount.
ANSWER: heat capacity (accept specific heat)
The contribution to this quantity by spin waves in a ferromagnet arises from a k-squared dispersion
relation. An early model of this quantity fails to predict third power low temperature dependence
because it assumes every atom is an independent harmonic oscillator. One relation approximates this
quantity in the high (*) temperature limit as three times Boltzmann's constant times particle number; that
model, named for Debye, improved the Dulong-Petit law relating this quantity from crystal lattice
vibrations. The ideal gas constant is equal to the difference between this quantity calculated at constant
pressure and at constant volume. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of energy required to change
a body's temperature by a given amount.
ANSWER: heat capacity [or specific heat capacity]
Kopp's rule provides estimates of this quantity for pure ionic solids. For a given volume of solution, it
generally increases with concentration because of increased density. Less commonly termed "thermal
mass", this extensive property is important in the selection of building materials and in the operation of
bomb calorimeters. The intensive "specific" version is computed by dividing it by the system's mass. FTP,
name this ratio, measured in joules per Kelvin, which multiplies "delta T" in an equation for heat gained or
lost by a system and measures ability to store heat.
ANSWER: Heat Capacity (do not accept specific heat capacity)
One model of this quantity involves the integral of t cubed over e cubed minus 1 from zero, the third of that
model's namesake function. Another model assumes each atom is an independent quantum harmonic
oscillator and fails to predict this at low temperatures. For ideal gases, pressure times volume to the power
of a ratio of these quantities, the adiabatic index, is constant. At constant pressure, it is the partial derivative
of enthalpy with respect to temperature. Debye's model of this quantity improved the Dulong-Petit law. It is
equal to 4.18 joules per gram times kelvin for liquid water. For 10 points, name this amount of heat required
to increase the temperature of a substance by a given amount.
ANSWER: heat capacity
The quantity "thermal expansivity times temperature minus one" times volume divided by this
quantity gives the Joule-Thomson inversion temperature. A DSC apparatus produces a curve
showing the relation between this quantity and temperature. For an ideal gas undergoing an
adiabatic process, P times V raised to the ratio of two forms of this quantity is held constant. For a
monatomic ideal gas, this quantity equals (*) 3/2 times R at constant volume. This quantity can be
defined as the derivative of either internal energy or enthalpy with respect to temperature. For 10 points,
name this quantity which measures the heat that must be added to a substance to increase its temperature by
1 degree Celsius.
ANSWER: heat capacity [accept "specific heat," but that term is misleading. Accept more specific answers such as "specific heat capacity," "molar heat capacity," "heat capacity at constant pressure," etc.]
This quantity is classically three times Boltzmann's constant for any crystal, but that breaks down when the
temperature is less than the Debye temperature, when the law of Dulong and Petit for this fails. For an ideal
gas, the isochoric form is given by the number of molecular degrees of freedom times Boltzmann's constant
over two. It can be defined as the rate at which the temperature of a body changes when energy is added.
For 10 points, name this amount of energy required to raise a body's temperature by one degree.
ANSWER: the heat capacity [prompt on specific heat capacity or C or C-p or C-v]
This quantity for conductive electrons in a metal is equal to one third pi squared times the density of states
at the Fermi level times t times the square of k sub b. The Equipartition Principle predicts that each degree
of freedom contributes 1/2 R to the molar version of this quantity for an ideal gas, though this is only valid
at high temperatures. This is the change in internal energy over the change in temperature. At low
temperatures, the corresponding values are 3/2 R for a monoatomic gas and 5/2 R for a diatomic gas. When
performing an experiment in a bomb calorimeter, it is important to know this value for the calorimeter. For
10 points, name this constant that when multiplied by the amount of heat applied to a system at constant
volume gives the change in temperature.
ANSWER: Constant-volume heat capacity
In the Riedel equation, this quantity divided by RT makes up one half of the equation. A characteristic
exponent of 0.38 is used in Watson's equation for calculating this quantity given its value at another point.
This can be derived from a combination of the B and C Antoine constants along with the second virial
coefficient. It looses its meaning beyond the critical point. This energy is used to overcome the
intermolecular interactions between molecules. For 10 points, name this energy required to convert a unit
of liquid into a gas at the boiling point.
ANSWER: latent heat of vaporization [or enthalpy of vaporization]
When an alcohol is mixed with this substance, its hydroxyl proton signal disappears from its
NMR due to chemical exchange; unlike a related substance, this compound does not have an
NMR signal. The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory attempted to detect neutrinos from the Sun
interacting with this substance. In Operation Gunnerside during World War II, the Allies
destroyed a production facility of this compound in Oslo. Because CANDU nuclear reactors use
this substance as a coolant and as a source of neutrons, they do not require enriched uranium.
Harold Urey first synthesized this compound. Its atomic mass is 20 daltons, due to two extra
neutrons. For 10 points, name this compound known as deuterium oxide.
ANSWER: heavy water [or deuterium oxide until it is read]
This substance is the product of the Girdler sulfide process and was made at Savannah River. The
SOE-planned Operation Gunnerside destroyed a Norwegian production site of this substance in World War
II to prevent its use by the Nazi nuclear weapons program. This substance has the best neutron economy of
all substances used as nuclear moderators in reactors, and is safer than graphite. For ten points, name this
substance composed of deuterium atoms, which is denser than normal water.
ANSWER: heavy water [or deuterium oxide; do not accept or prompt on "water"]
This element is added to nitrogen and oxygen to form trimix. A dimer of this element has the weakest
known chemical bond, though that dimer shouldn't exist according to molecular orbital theory due to two
electrons in the sigma sub 1s star orbital. The nuclei of one isotope of this element can form Cooper pairs at
low temperatures in a mechanism described by Lee and Osherroff; this was an early example of
superfluidity. Because it is produced by the proton-proton chain, it is the second most abundant element in
the universe. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number two.
ANSWER: helium [or He]
One of this element's isotopes has a negative heat of solidification at .3 Kelvin, a property that can be
used in Pomeranchuk Cooling. This element's liquid form flows out of containers in the Fountain
effect, while at low temperatures, another isotope of this element forms Cooper pairs in a mechanism
named for Lee and Osherroff. Nuclei of this element were (*) shot at a thin gold sheet during
Rutherford's famous experiment, and this element's isotopes three and four exhibit superfluidity. For 10
points, name this lightest noble gas with atomic number 2 and symbol He.
ANSWER: Helium [prompt on He; do not accept alpha particles]
An atomcule of this element has an antiproton instead of one of its electrons, and this element is created by
the Carbon-Nitrogen-Oxygen cycle. The liquid form of this element is used to keep some superconducting
magnetic resonance imaging scanners cold, and it is the most common superfluid. This element is
commonly combined with neon in lasers, and it is the second most abundant element in the universe. This is
the lightest noble gas, and its nucleus is an alpha particle. Name this element with atomic number two.
ANSWER: helium or He
This element was first observed by Jules Janssen during the solar eclipse of 1868. It can be used to
detect small leaks in high pressure containers, but its most common application involves cooling
superconducting magnets in MRI scanners. As temperature approaches absolute zero, this substance
forms a Rollin film, enabling it to creep along surfaces as a (*) superfluid. It's also mixed with nitrogen
and oxygen as a breathing gas for deep-sea divers, and because sound propagates faster in gases with low
molecular weights, inhaling this gas can increase the pitch of one's voice. For ten points, name this noble
gas, the second most abundant element in the universe, which has an atomic number of 2 and chemical
symbol He.
ANSWER: helium (accept He before mention)
Because of its zero-point energy, this element cannot be solidified at one atmosphere of pressure. It has
the largest ionization energy of any element and occurs as a superfluid at very low temperatures. Alpha
particles consist of the nuclei of this element. It is the first element to fill a valence shell, with its electrons
in the 1s atomic orbital. It is created through the fusion of hydrogen atoms. For 10 points, name this
element, the lightest noble gas, which has atomic number two.
ANSWER: helium
This element is often used in mass spectrometers to detect leaks because it is a very minor constituent
of air, it is safe, and it is easy to separate from other gases. Though not part of natural gas, this
element is released during natural gas extraction, which is increasing the cost of cooling MRI scanners
due to a shortage of this element. The fusion of three of its nuclei creates a carbon nucleus. The
name of this element arose because it was first observed in the Sun's spectrum, and its nucleus is an
alpha particle. Name this lightest noble gas, the second element on the periodic table.
ANSWER: helium [prompt on He]
Nuclei of this element were fired at the target of an experiment conducted by Ernest Rutherford
disproving the "plum pudding" model of the atom. Pyotr Kapitsa discovered superfluidity as exhibited by
an isotope of this element. The nuclei of this element, which were used in the gold foil experiment, are
called alpha particles. The second least reactive element after neon, this element is the lightest noble gas.
For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 2.
ANSWER: helium [or He]
Divers use a "trimix" gas consisting of oxygen, nitrogen, and this element. Below the lambda point, it
has no viscosity and is called a superfluid. Alpha particles are the nuclei of the most common isotope
of this element, which is the (*) second most abundant in the universe. Because sound travels faster in this
element than in air, inhaling it results in a high-pitched voice. For 10 points, name this lightest noble gas,
whose symbol is He [H-E, not "he"].
ANSWER: helium (prompt on He)
G.C. Pimental has attempted to bond this element with two fluoride atoms. This element's yellow spectral
lines were first observed during a solar eclipse by Pierre Janssen. Two atoms of this element can be
combined to form Beryllium, and ultimately Carbon-12. This element's most common isotope does not
have a triple point where gas, liquid, and solid phases coexist in equilibrium. This element forms the basis
for the triple-alpha process, and it can be created by the fusion of hydrogen. For 10 points, name this
element with atomic number two, the lightest of the Noble gases.
ANSWER: Helium
When a tube with a porous plug and a heater is placed in a bath of this element's II fluid, the
fountain effect results in a spout of its I fluid. With hydrogen, this element's plasma form gives rise to
the Birkeland currents, and when it is bound to a proton, it is the strongest known Bronsted (*) Acid.
The lambda point separates this element's I and II liquid forms, and its nucleus is an alpha particle. The
second most abundant element in the universe, it is often studied due to the fact that it can become a
superfluid. For ten points, name this element, the first noble gas, which, when inhaled, can result in falsettolike voices.
ANSWER: helium (or He)
This element is used as a shield against atmospheric contamination in gas tungsten arc welding. Radioactive
decay in the lithosphere from minerals containing thorium and uranium create most of this element on
Earth. It was first observed as a yellow line in the solar spectrum. When it is cooled to below 4 Kelvin, the
most common isotope of this element can creep up the walls of a container as a superfluid. Alpha particles
are the nuclei of this element, the second most abundant in the universe. For 10 points, name this lightest
noble gas with atomic number 2 and chemical symbol He.
ANSWER: helium [accept He before mentioned]
An ion containing this element along with fluorine and oxygen has been predicted stable. In one experiment,
the nuclei of this element were fired at a thin layer of gold atoms. Superfluidity has been observed in both
its isotopes three and four. This element is the lightest with a full s subshell. Its nuclei are alpha particles.
For 10 points, name this gas with atomic number two.
ANSWER: helium [or He]
An alternative method to this reaction involves the use of chloro-sulfonic acid to make a ketene
intermediate. Formulated in the 1880s, this reaction usually involves an anhydride intermediate followed by
a keto-enol tautomerization step, although it competes with a free radical mechanism at low temperatures.
The product of it is often reacted with ammonia to make alpha amino acids, or undergoes hydrolysis to
create alpha hydroxy acids. This reaction, which is often catalyzed by a phosphorous trihalide, involves
alpha-halogenation of carboxylic acids. For 10 points, name this triply-eponymous reaction.
ANSWER: Hell-Volhard-Zelinsky reaction/halogenation
Along with Thomas Young, this man names a theory that primates see color using three different cone
sensitivities and his elliptical partial differential equation is the simplest eigenvalue equation in two
dimensions.This man has a set of three eponymous theorems that govern the motion of a fluid in the
presence of a vortex. Some of this man's lone contributions to psychology include publishing a Handbook
of Psychological Optics and determining that nerve impulses move at a finite speed - a discovery that
would lead to this man publishing a paper on the law of conservation of energy. For 10 points, identify this
German scientist with a namesake type of free energy that is often symbolized A.
ANSWER: Hermann von Helmholtz
Along with a British scientist, this scientist names a phenomenon which occurs when perturbations
are introduced due to velocity shear. One partial differential equation named for this man states that
the Laplacian is equal to the negative square of the wavenumber. The generation of a sound when air
is blown over an open bottle occurs due to a resonance named for this scientist. One quantity named
for this scientist can be calculated as (*) internal energy minus the product of temperature and energy and
is used when pressure is changing instead of a similar value named for Gibbs. For 10 points, name this
German chemist who names a type of free energy.
ANSWER: Hermann von Helmholtz
Calculations of the phase transitions for the Ising Model use this quantity because the magnetic field
is a natural variable. For a perturbed system, the variational principle gives the upper bound of this
as the expectation value of the unperturbed Hamiltonian. For an ideal gas, it features a natural
logarithm of concentration over quantum concentration. Entropy is equal to its temperature
derivative, while pressure is equal to its volume derivative. The Bogoliubov inequality gives a bound
to it and this quantity is very useful in the canonical ensemble because volume and temperature are
its natural variables. Thus, it is proportional to temperature times the (*) natural logarithm of the
partition function. This quantity equals the product of temperature and entropy subtracted from the internal
energy. Represented as A or F, for 10 points, is which type of free energy named for a German scientist?
ANSWER: Helmholtz Free Energy [accept Helmholtz only after mention of free energy; prompt on partial answer; prompt on A; prompt on F]
The Falicov-Kimball model gives upper and lower bounds for this quantity, while the Gibbs-Bogoliubov
inequality generates an upper bound to it in liquid alkali metals. Its electrical component can be calculated
from Debye's charging law, while it can be derived from the Clausius inequality under isochoric conditions.
Dividing this quantity by negative temperature squared relates it to the partial derivative of Gibbs free
energy, and taking its derivative with respect to particle number gives chemical potential. For 10 points,
name this quantity that describes the amount of useful work available from a closed system at constant
temperature, calculated as U minus TS.
ANSWER: Helmholtz free energy
It is replaced under certain conditions by a function calculated by combining the chemical activity with the
dissociation of another compound, originally anilines substituted with electron-withdrawing groups. While
the Hammett function is only applicable in extreme conditions, this equation also neglects the
disproportionation of water, being just the logarithm of the expression for the equilibrium constant.
Commonly applied to find the isoelectric point of a protein or of a buffer solution, FTP, identify this
equation, which gives the degree to which a compound will deprotonate given its pKa and the ambient pH.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
This equation derives from the mass action expression given in logarithmic form and arose from work
dealing with the conversion of carbon dioxide to bicarbonate in the body. For a weak acid or base, this
equation governs the titration mixture until the end point of a titration. When the ratio of acid to
conjugate base is unity, this equation states that the logarithm of the reciprocal of the acid dissociation
constant equals the pH. For 10 points, name this equation that governs acid-base equilibrium and gives
the pH of buffer systems.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
One quantity in this equation can be expressed as one minus theta over theta where theta is the Langmuir
adsorption isotherm. It can be applied to calculate the net charge on a protein at a given pH and is
considered an approximation of the law of mass action applied to one species. This equation is less useful in
extremely dilute solutions and when dealing with extremely strong acids or bases, and it ignores the minor
dissociation of water and also hydrolysis of bases. For 10 points, identify this equation which relates the log
of the ratio of conjugate base over acid and pKa to pH which is useful in characterizing buffer systems.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch Equation
This formula is useful when the Hammett function is inapplicable. One theoretical weakness of it is
that it relies heavily on approximation when electrolytic effects of hydrogen and hydroxyl ions are
taken into account, and it can be used to calculate the [*] isoelectric point of specific subtstances.
Derived from an equation determining the acid dissociation constant, for 10 points, name this equation
which states that the pH of a buffer is equal to pKa plus the logarithm of conjugate base or acid
concentration, named for two scientists.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
A ratio in this equation is sometimes equal to the molecules of salt form divided by the molecules of acid
form, which is often equivalent to the amount of base divided by the amount of acid. This equation is
usually expressed using addition, though it can use subtraction if the fraction is flipped depending on
whether the dissociation constant or the hydrogen ion concentration is solved for. Commonly used for
buffer solutions, name this equation that can be derived using the
definitions of the dissociation constant and pH.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
This equation is most often used to approximate a value found experimentally using a glass-electrode
voltmeter that measures activity. The inspiration behind this equation came in 1908 when its first namesake
wrote an equation for the behavior in aqueous solution of carbon dioxide. When carbon dioxide dissolves in
water, it produces a compound H2CO3 which is of the class of compounds described by this equation.
Rearranging that equation after taking the opposite of the base-10 logarithm of both sides produces this
formula. Models for the class of compounds described by this equation include ones by Arrhenius, Lewis,
and Bronsted and Lowry. FTP, name this doubly-eponymous logarithmic equation that adds the pKa to the
relative concentrations of conjugate base and acid of a buffer solution to yield the pH.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
One modification of this equation adds C sub a and delta terms to correct for autoionization and is
named for Charlot, while another version to this equation was derived using nitroanilines and uses a
ratio of activity coefficients. That equation was modified by Tsuno, Cox, and Yates and is known as
the Hammett function. This equation can be used to find protein isoelectric points and was originally
derived to study metabolic acidosis. Its derived by taking the logarithm of the acid dissociation constant and
rearranging. For 10 points, name this equation used to determine the pH of buffer solutions, named for two
chemists.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
In medicine, this equation is used alongside the constants 0.03 and 6.1 and can take partial pressure
as an input. The Hammett function has a form similar to this equation, which is often used to select a
solvent for use in ion-exchange chromatography. The Charlot equation is more accurate than this
equation if the autoionization of water must be taken into account, and this equation can be used to
find percentage of an amino acid that is ionized in solution. This equation is derived by taking the log of
the dissociation constant and rearranging, and it states that the pKa plus the log of base over acid is equal to
pH. For 10 points, name this equation which is used to find the pH of a buffer solution, named for two
chemists.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
It can be used to determine the net charge of a protein at a given pH, however, its usefulness is limited in
cases where dilute solutions are being used or if the reagents are far from neutral pH. The equation, which
assumes no acid dissociation or base hydrolysis, sets the logarithm of the quotient of a base and its
conjugate acid plus its acid dissociation constant (pKa) equal to pH. FTP, name this equation often used in
the analysis of buffer solutions.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbach equation
This equation was initially conceived as a chemical alternative to the law of mass action, but S.P.L.
Sorenson's experiments on ionic interactions among amino acids led him to conclude that the
concentration of hydrogen ions at any particular time could be mathematically derived. This led one
of this equation's formulators to conclude that the negative logarithm of the acid dissociation constant,
when added to the ratio of dissociated acid to the non-dissociated acid, would yield the pH. For 10 points,
name this doubly-eponymous equation in which the pKa is used to find the isoelectric point of a chemical
solution.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation [prompt on Henderson equation]
One limitation to this equation is that it is assumed that the concentration of the components will remain at
their formal charges thereby neglecting the dissociation and hydrolysis of acids and bases. This equation
was originally invented in 1908 by one person to describe the use of carbonic acid as a solution and then by
a second person, who used it to study acidosis of the blood. This equation states that states that pH is equal
to the pKa plus the logarithm of the quotient of conjugate base concentration to acid concentration. FTP
name this equation used to find the equilibrium pH in the acid/base reactions and used to estimate the pH of
a buffer solution.
ANSWER: Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
The Lewis-Randall rule is related to this law by the Gibbs-Duhem equation, and it can be derived
from the Duhem-Margules equation. The relation between the chemical potential of solute atoms and
infinite dilution is given by the proportionality constant in this law. That constant in this law is found
experimentally by measurements taken at a liquid-vapor equilibrium. It explains how divers get "the
(*) bends" and why a bottle of soda fizzes when it's opened. For 10 points, name this law that relations the
dissolved concentration of a gas to the gas's partial pressure above the solvent.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
This law predicts the effectiveness of separating components using air stripping. The
temperature dependence of a parameter in this equation follows a van't Hoff-like expression
using the heat of solvation. The Gibbs-Duhem equation is used when the Lewis-Randall rule and
this law are both invalid. It is used when the critical temperature is below the system
temperature. This law's namesake constant is the ratio between fugacity and mole fraction as
mole fraction goes to zero, and has units of pressure. This law applies best for ideal-dilute
solutions, such as oxygen dissolving in water, and sets partial pressure proportional to the
concentration in the liquid. For 10 points, name this equation, the low-concentration analog of
Raoult's Law.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
This law becomes inapplicable when excess chemical potential of solute is relatively constant, and
effects such as H-bond percolation are negligible. The temperature variance of its namesake constant
can be found using the Van't Hoff-Arrhenius relation. This law's namesake "region" is located at the
bottom left of an activity-composition diagram, and it works best with low solute concentration and low
partial pressures. For 10 points, name this law relating the amount of gas dissolved in a liquid to the
partial pressure of the gas above that liquid.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
The coefficient in this law is affected by temperature, even though it is a constant. One way to phrase
it involves its fugacity, assuming it the solute involved is non-dissociative and diluted to a large
extent. It is commonly used in geophysics, and the dimensionless form of it is calculated by the ratio
of the concentration of the solvent and solute. For ten points, name this law that explains the fizz given
off in soda by relating partial pressure to concentration of a dissolved gas.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
In oceanography, the proportionality coefficient in this law is denoted alpha and equals 22,400 times
this law's namesake constant, while in medicine, the proportionality constant is denoted beta and is
equal to one over the law's namesake constant. That constant is the limit as the mole fraction goes to
zero of the (*) fugacity divided by the mole fraction. The van't Hoff extrapolation predicts that constant's
value at a different temperature using the enthalpy of solution. This law does not apply to liquid-liquid
extraction, in which Raoult's law is more accurate. For 10 points, name this law stating that the
concentration of gas dissolved in a liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas above the liquid.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
This law's namesake coefficient can change according to the van't Hoff equation with temperature. In one
form, it is similar to Raoult's Law, substituting a coefficient based on the ratio of pressure to concentration
for the vapor pressure. Like Raoult's Law, it is based on a limit, and only applies for sufficiently dilute
solutions. This law also diverges when the gas chemically reacts with the solvent it is dissolved in. Name
this law that explains why pop eventually goes flat when exposed to the atmosphere, which states that for a
constant temperature, the amount of gas dissolved in a particular liquid is proportional to the partial
pressure of the gas over the liquid.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
The Duhem-Margules equation can be used to derive it and a similar relation, and this law can be related to
the Lewis-Randall rule by the Gibbs-Duhem equation. Its proportionality constant gives a relation between
the chemical potential of solute atoms and infinite dilution; that constant is determined experimentally by
measurements on a liquid-vapor equilibrium and the value depends on temperature as well as the solutesolvent pair involved. It explains decompression sickness in divers and the fizzing of soda when a bottle is
opened. For 10 points, name this law of chemistry that relates the dissolved concentration of a gas to its
partial pressure above the solvent.
ANSWER: Henry's law
Benson and Krause developed a 3-term power series for accurately finding the coefficients in this law.
The constants found in this law are often found using solid-phase microextraction, and the reciprocal of one
of those constants gives the partition coefficient of the reaction in question. This law, which can be applied
to silicate melts in geology, is only applicable in the limit of infinite dilution and only applies to ideal
solutions. Stated as p equals k c, this law explains why soda goes flat when left out too long and why divers
get decompression sickness. For 10 points, name this law from chemistry which states that the amount of
gas that will dissolve in a liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of that gas.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
The concentration-dependent activity coefficient is equal to this law's associated constant divided by
pressure, and a high value of that constant has applications for easy air-stripping of chemicals from water. It
is equivalent to Raoult's Law for ideal mixtures, but for non-ideals, it works best when dissolved mole
fraction approaches zero. This law is useful in explaining noble gas solubility in silicate melts and the
Bends experienced by deep-sea divers. For 10 points, name this law, which states that the solubility of a gas
in a liquid is proportional to the pressure of the gas above the liquid.
ANSWER: Henry's law
The central coefficient in this law has dimensions of pressure divided by concentration and one can
model the effects of temperature on this law's coefficient by integrating the van't Hoff equation. For ideal
mixtures this law can be understood as a special case of Raoult's Law. For 10 points, name this eponymous
law which relates the concentration and partial pressure of gas dissolved in a liquid, named after a British
chemist.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
The application of this principle to the disinfection of water often requires the use of Bunsen coefficients,
and another version of it can predict the vesicularity of silicate lava. The 1986 Lake Nyos tragedy is partly
explained by carbon dioxide's very low constant for this principle, which does not hold when electrolytes
dissociate. The decompression sickness experienced by divers is a consequence of this law, and the
tendency of an open bottle of soda to go flat is also an effect of it. Most accurate for dilute solutions at
constant temperature, name this law which states that the solubility of a gas is directly proportional to the
pressure of the gas above the solution.
ANSWER: Henry's law
This law uses Boltzmann's constant when it is employed to analyze melt inclusions in geophysics. It
improves on another law for non-ideal solutions at low concentrations by replacing p star with k, its
namesake constant that is affected by temperature in addition to the type of solvent and solute used.
One representation of this law is as e to the k p equals e to the c, but it is more commonly stated as c
equals p k. The mechanism by which deep sea divers experience the bends can be explained by, For 10
points, what chemical law named for an English chemist that states that "the amount of gas dissolved by a
liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas upon the liquid?"
ANSWER: Henry's Law
One value found in this equation can be determined using EPICS, static headspace, or multiple
injected interrupted flow. A version of this statement that takes electrolytes into account is called
Sechenov's equation and this law applies in the linear region of Type I isotherms. The temperature
variation of one value found in this equation is encoded by the constant C, which is equal to the
negative enthalpy of solvation divided by R. This equation can be derived by taking the chemical
potential in the limit of infinite dilution. This law explains why (*) surfacing too quickly causes
decompression sickness and why opening a can of soda causes a rush of carbon dioxide to escape. It is
usually stated as the p equals k times c. For 10 points, name this law which states that the partial pressure of
a gas is proportional to its dissolved concentration.
ANSWER: Henry's Law
The Bordwell cycle extends this principle to a related quantity. The quantity that this rule concerns is
the sum of internal energy and the product of pressure and volume, though that quantity, governed by
this law, is better known for a change in value that is equal to TdS plus Vdp. This law may be used to
calculate a compound's lattice energy via the Born-Haber cycle. For 10 points, identify this prediction,
which relies on the fact that a certain thermodynamic quantity is a state function, and suggests that the
change in enthalpy is independent of the path from reactants to products.
ANSWER: Hess's law
Its namesake stated that no heat effect is observed in exchange reactions of neutral salts in aqueous solution,
and silver telluride is also named for the man who came up with this idea. According to this law, the change
in enthalpy in a certain reaction can be calculated by performing arithmetic equations on chemical equations
with known enthalpy change values. Arising from the law of conservation of energy, its relevance comes
from the fact that energy changes are state functions. FTP, name this law of summation indicating that the
heat of a chemical reaction is independent of the path of the reaction, named for a Swiss-Russian chemist.
ANSWER: Hess' First Law
In a thermodynamic process named for Bordwell, a law analogous to this law can be used to determine
unknown and experimentally inaccessible values for Gibbs Free Energy changes in chemical reactions.
Lattice energies are commonly calculated using this law in a process that uses ionization energies,
vaporization enthalpies, and electron affinities; that is the Born-Haber cycle. A consequence of this law is
that the line integral around any path in the state space of enthalpy is zero. Another consequence is that the
enthalpy change of a reverse process is equal to the negative of the enthalpy change of a forward process.
For 10 points, name this law that states that enthalpy is a state function.
ANSWER: Hess's Law
This law is used to determine entropy and free energy in the Bordwell thermodynamic cycle. As a
consequence of this law, one can calculate lattice energy in the Born-Haber cycle. This law works because
the quantity it concerns is the sum of internal energy and quantity pressure times volume and is thus a state
function. As a result, this law allows for addition of the changes in that quantity for a series of stepwise
reactions to determine the overall change in that quantity. For 10 points, name this law which states that
adding the change in enthalpy of each step of a reaction yields the total change in enthalpy for the reaction.
ANSWER: Hess's law [accept law of heat summation or enthalpy summation until mentioned]
Its formulator discovered that oxidation of sugars results in saccharic acids, and this law explains
why a catalyst does not alter the equilibrium position of a reaction. This law is used to find entropy
and free energy in the Bordwell cycle and it can be used to find the lattice energy in the Born-Haber
cycle. It is equivalent to the fact that (*) enthalpy is a state function and it is also known as the law of
constant heat summation. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic law which states that the change in
enthalpy can be determined from a series of intermediate reactions, named for a Swiss-born Russian
chemist.
ANSWER: Hess's Law of constant heat summation
This law can be used to calculate the acidity of the hydrohelium ion. This law can be used to find
lattice energy in a process involving the formation of an ionic solid from a metal and a non-metal,
called the Born-Haber Cycle. Since the quantity it concerns is a state function, this law is also equal
to the differences in the [*] enthalpies of the products and the reactants. Also called the "law of constant
heat summation," this law states that the enthalpy of a reaction is equal to the sum of the enthalpies of the
individual steps of the reaction. For 10 points, name this law in thermochemistry named for a Swiss-born
Russian chemist.
ANSWER: Hess's Law
This law is used to calculate a solid's lattice energy in the Born-Haber cycle. Given the heat of formation
for hydrochloric acid and the bond energies of hydrogen gas and chlorine gas, it can be used to find the
bond energy of hydrochloric acid. The quantity central to this statement is the sum of internal energy and
pressure times volume. For 10 points, name this law of constant heat summation, which states that adding
the change in enthalpy for each
step of a given reaction gives the total change in enthalpy for the whole reaction, and is named for a Swiss
chemist.
ANSWER: Hess's law [or law of constant heat summation before read; or law of constant enthalpy summation before "enthalpy"]
This statement is invoked in the Born-Haber (BORN HAW-ber) cycle. This statement follows from the
fact that the quantity it concerns is a state function, and therefore its value is independent of the system's
trajectory. This statement is often framed in terms of the heats of formation of reactants and products. For
10 points, name this statement of thermodynamics that suggests that a reaction's enthalpy change is equal to
the sum of the enthalpy changes of each step.
ANSWER: Hess's Law
The scientist responsible for this statement provides an alternate name for disilver telluride and discovered
that oxidation of sugars results in saccharic acid. One consequence of this law unrelated to electricity is
Kirchoff's law, and it is what allows for the calculation of lattice energy in the Born-Haber cycle. This law
can be derived by considering a series of intermediates in a thermodynamic sequence and noting that the
quantity it concerns is a state function, so its change is equal to the difference in the bond enthalpies of final
products and initial reactants. For 10 points, identify this law of constant heat summation that states that the
enthalpy change of a reaction is path-independent.
ANSWER: Hess' law of constant heat summation [prompt on "law of enthalpy"]
This law is often illustrated using a diagram dubbed its namesake "triangle," which has three chemical
compounds at its vertices. The Born-Haber cycle is an application of this law to find lattice energy. It is
used to find the enthalpy change of a chemical reaction by breaking it down into a set of smaller reactions.
For 10 points, name this law, which is alternately called the law of constant heat summation, and which
states that the enthalpy change of a chemical reaction is independent of the reaction's pathway.
ANSWER: Hess's Law [accept law of constant heat summation before it is read]
This law is the underpinning of a process in which the lattice energy of an ionic compound is calculated
by forming it from its constituent ions, known as the Born-Haber cycle. This law is a consequence of the
fact that enthalpy is a state function, and is thus independent of the path of the reaction. For 10 points, name
this law which states the enthalpy change for a reaction is equal to the sum of the enthalpy changes for each
step.
ANSWER: Hess's Law
A 2008 paper saw improved accuracy on the Shafizadeh model when this law was applied to Sri Lankan
waste disposal in determining biomass yield, and its formulator notably showed that the oxidation of sugars
leads to saccharic acids. This law holds because the quantity it concerns equals the sum of internal energy
and pressure times volume, two state functions, meaning that quantity is path-independent, and when
applied, this law necessitates that reversal of reactions leads to a change in sign. For 10 points, identify this
law, which holds that the enthalpy change of a reaction may be calculated from the enthalpies of a series of
intermediate reactions.
ANSWER: Hess's law [prompt on conservation of energy]
This law explains why a catalyst does not alter the equilibrium position of a reaction. Given data such as
electron affinity, heat of vaporization, and heat of ionization, this law is used in Born-Haber cycles to
calculate the lattice energy of an ionic solid. This law can also be used to calculate heats of formation. It
states that enthalpy is a state function, which is why it is known as the law of constant heat summation. For
10 points, name this thermodynamic law which states that the enthalpy change of a reaction equals the
enthalpy of the products minus that of the reactants, named for a Swiss-born Russian chemist.
ANSWER: Hess's law [accept law of constant heat summation before it is mentioned]
This statement can be generalized to other extensive properties, such as in the Bordwell thermodynamic
cycle. When applying this law, one needs to know standard values for the property in question, which is 105 kilojoules per mole for propane. By comparing the standard enthalpy change of formation to the
enthalpy required to make gaseous ions, this statement can be used to calculate the lattice energy in the
Born-Haber cycle. It is also known as "the law of constant heat summation". For 10 points, name this law
stating that the total enthalpy change of a reaction is the same regardless of the steps taken in completing the
reaction, named for a Russian chemist.
ANSWER: Hess's law
The namesake of this law also proposed the thermoneutrality of exchange reactions in aqueous
solutions that Arrhenius would explain via electrolytic dissociation. This law is an expansion of its
creator's namesake cycle, an analog to the Bordwell cycle, and it was postulated following its
formulator's experiments with creating the hydrates of sulfuric acid. (*) The Born-Haber cycle is an
application of this law to find lattice energy, and it is sometimes called the law of constant heat summation.
For 10 points, name this law, which states that the enthalpy change of a chemical reaction is independent of
the reaction pathway.
ANSWER: Hess's law [accept law of constant heat summation early]
This statement is invoked in the Born-Haber (BORN HAW-ber) cycle. This statement follows from the
fact that the quantity it concerns is a state function, and therefore its value is independent of the system's
trajectory. This statement is often framed in terms of the heats of formation of reactants and products. For
10 points, name this statement of thermodynamics that suggests that a reaction's enthalpy change is equal to
the sum of the enthalpy changes of each step.
ANSWER: Hess's Law
The Bordwell Thermodynamic Circle is an extension of this law, and it can be applied to electron affinities
using a Born-Haber cycle with theoretical lattice energies to determine total heat. The heat content of slow
reactions can also be found using this law, and it can be used to measure entropy values, which must be
measured through alternative paths. For 10 points, name this law from thermochemistry stating that the total
enthalpy change of a reaction is equal to the sum of the enthalpy changes of each step.
ANSWER: Hess's Law
According to one hypothesis, these areas may have formed in pairs due to meteor impacts, and the
"Great Meteor," a guyot in the Atlantic Ocean, is believed to have been formed by the "New
England" one. The island of Reunion is thought to contain one of these features, and another may be
responsible for(*) Yellowstone. J. Tuzo Wilson theorized their existence when he observed a progression
in age from southeast to northwest in the Hawaiian Islands. For 10 points, identify these stationary locations
on the Earth's surface, where volcanic activity is fed by mantle plumes.
ANSWER: Hotspots [prompt on "Mantle plumes" before mentioned]
One model for the formation of these regions was proposed by John T. Wilson. One of these regions,
nicknamed the "Great Meteor," may be responsible for diamond-containing kimberlite deposits. Rhyolites
(RYE-oh-lites) are formed when basaltic magma from these regions bubbles under a continental crust. One
of them created the Galapagos island chain. A currently active one resulted in the formation of the Hawaiian
island chain. For 10 points, name these areas on the earth's crust where very hot plumes of magma result in
unusually high levels of volcanic activity.
ANSWER: hotspots [or mantle plumes]
Theories surrounding their formation include localized heating due to asteroid impacts. Although some
geologists claim their effects can be explained entirely through plate tectonics and localized interactions
between the upper mantle and the crust, they are generally believed to be the product of upwelling from the
lower mantle in the form of a mantle plume. When under continental crust, they tend to form powerful
rhyolite volcanos such as the Yellowstone Caldera, while those under oceanic crust form weaker basalt
volcanos such as Hawaii. For 10 points, name these fixed points on the Earth's surface with continuous
volcanism that leave trails on moving tectonic plates.
ANSWER: hotspots
A 2007 paper by Humbel et al applied this man's theories to the mesomery of Lewis structures,
appending his name to them. Compounds such as the Schlenck-Brauns hydrocarbons were
exemplified in his 1936 paper "Theory of the magnetism of so-called biradicals", in which he
developed a theory of (*) pi-conjugated biradicals. With a Dutch man, he names an equation relating the
activity of an ionic species to its concentration by the activity coefficient. That equation and the associated
theory of electrolytic solutions are named for Debye and this man. FTP, name this chemist, who stated that
a conjugated ring with 4n+2 electrons exhibits aromaticity, his namesake rule.
ANSWER: Erich Huckel
Experimental verification of one part of this statement came when a compound synthesized by Richard
Willstatter was found to decolorize solutions of potassium permanganatel, and important research on its
reversal was done by Baird. Systems that are contrasted with those that obey this statement are known as
Mobius systems, and systems that do obey it have an even number of sign inversions and can only
participate in thermal pericyclic reactions is a condition similar to this statement is satisfied. The namesake
of this statement also lends his name to a theory of activity coefficients with Debye. This statement explains
why cyclopentadiene is highly acidic, and 10-annulene compounds are not subject to it ebcause they are not
planar. For 10 points, name this rule that coplanar monocyclic rings are aromatic only if they contain 4n+2
delocalized pi electrons, named after a German chemist.
ANSWER: Huckel's Rule
One method of deriving this statement is solving Schrodinger's equation for the condition psi of theta
equals psi of 2 pi plus theta, giving a wavefunction proportional to e to the plus or minus i n pi. It can also
be derived by noting that the systems in question contain one low-lying bonding molecular orbital followed
by a series of paired MOs at higher energies. Hirsch, Chen, and Jiao developed a three-dimensional version
of this statement that applies to fullerenes, while another method that leads to it assumes zero-differential
overlap, a computational method named for Pariser, Parr, and Pople. It applies to planar systems with
conjugated double bonds. For 10 points, name this rule that states a molecule with 4n plus 2 pi electrons is
aromatic, named for a German.
ANSWER: Huckel's rule
An animal who shares a name with this place is the jumbo flying squid, Dosidicus gigas, and Elliot's
storm-petrel is found only in this oceanic system. Andrew Bakun hypothesized that the class this system
shares with three others would experience an increase in activity due to global warming, and the Guanay
cormorant feeds mainly on fish found in this system. One important feature of this current is due to trade
winds causing divergent Ekman transport. When that feature is weakened by El Nino, a regime shift from
anchovies to sardines occurs in this ecosystem. Southerly trade winds cause this current to upwell
year-round at its northern extent. For 10 points, name this large marine ecosystem, an eastern boundary
current lying off the west coast of South American that is the most productive in the world.
ANSWER: Humboldt Current [or Peru Current; prompt on "Eastern Boundary Currents"]
One way of measuring this is equivalent to the mass mixing ratio, while the volumetric measurement is
not usually used. One simplified device for measuring it is the psychrometer, which consists of two
thermometers and comparing the current conditions to those of saturated air at the same temperature yields
the relative measure of this. That saturation point is known as the dew point and using both temperature and
this measurement allows one to calculate the heat index. For 10 points, identify this measure of how much
moisture is in the air.
ANSWER: humidity [or relative humidity]
One method of measuring this quantity is with a psychrometer, a device that requires dry-bulb and wet-bulb
temperature readings. The dewpoint is the temperature at which this quantity reaches its maximum.
Temperature and this quantity are the two variables in computing the heat index. Name this weather
quantity, often expressed as a percentage, that is the ratio of the pressure of water vapor to that pressure in
saturated air, a measure of how much water vapor is in the atmosphere.
ANSWER: relative humidity
In 2004, researchers discovered that DMX was the first organic molecule to break this law. One
consequence of this law is that although ionization energies generally increase across a row, oxygen has a
slightly lower first ionization energy than nitrogen. This rule arises from the fact that more stable atoms with
lower energy have greater spin multiplicity, so adding a fourth electron to a p orbital causes an atom to gain
energy, while adding a third electron causes it to lower in energy. For 10 points, name this rule that state
that before you add a second electron to an electron subshell, every other subshell should already contain an
electron.
ANSWER: Hund's rule
One formulation of this law relies upon the Pauli-exclusion principle in that no two fermions with the
same spin quantum number may be allowed to occupy the same orbital. Another deduction concerns
the spontaneity of spin-orbit coupling, in which the highest value of coupling can only occur in
electrons with opposite spin; thus, electron orbital occupation can be explained by the Aufbau, or
"building-up" principle. Providing a theoretical explanation for the stability of ground state orbitals, for 10
points, identify this rule which states that every electron orbital in a subshell will gain at least one electron
before any orbital gains two.
ANSWER: Hund's rules (accept reasonable equivalents for "rule," prompt on "Aufbau principle")
The Dvorak method is used to gauge the intensity of these objects, and the "stadium effect" occurs in their
center. The Fujiwhara effect originates when two of these objects rotate around each other. Weak examples
have a Central Dense Overcast, and they commonly originate from easterly waves in the ITCZ. Good upperlevel outflow aids the intensification of these objects, and eyewall replacement cycles occur in strong ones.
The strongest of these objects may develop pinhole eyes, and their detrimental effects include tornadoes,
torrential rain, and storm surge. For ten points, name these strong rotating storms with high winds that have
names such as Lionrock and Katrina.
ANSWER: hurricanes or tropical storms or tropical cyclones or typhoons (prompt on "cyclone")
The CLIPER models use statistical equations to predict zonal and meridional movements in these
phenomena. The BAM model predicts their trajectory as a function of the vertically-averaged horizontal
wind at shallow, middle, and deep layers, and has a beta parameter corrects for the variation in Coriolis
forces with latitude changes. They don't occur near the equator because of weak Coriolis forces. Stages
leading up to them are called tropical depressions and tropical storms, and their intensities are measured on
the Saffir Simpson scale. For 10 points, identify these phenomena which have windspeeds greater than 74
MPH, recent examples of which include Andrew and Katrina.
ANSWER: Hurricanes [accept "tropical cyclones" for the first sentence and prompt thereafter; prompt on "typhoons"; do not accept: "tornadoes"]
The Dvorak (div-ORE-ack) technique is used to measure the strength of these systems. A score of
twelve or higher on the Beaufort wind scale is given to these systems. Rain bands extend out from the
center of these systems. These systems rotate counter-clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere due to the
Coriolis effect. For 10 points, identify these large storms that tend to batter the Gulf Coast and Eastern
seaboard.
ANSWER: hurricanes [or tropical cyclones; or tropical storms; or tropical depressions; or typhoons; prompt on thunderstorms]
The right front quadrant is the strongest part of these phenomena that gain strength from easterly waves.
These phenomena are energized by the release of latent heat during their formation. These storms do not
occur within five degrees of the equator because the Coriolis effect is necessary for their formation. The
center of these storms is surrounded by spiral bands and is called their "eye". The Saffir-Simpson scale
measures these storms that arise from tropical depressions. For 10 points, name these tropical storms with
winds in excess of 74 MPH, examples of which include Katrina and Irene.
ANSWER: Hurricane [accept Typhoon or Cyclone; prompt on "tropical storm" or "tropical depression before it is read" do not accept "tornado"]
The Fujiwhara effect describes how these phenomenon can orbit about each other and sometimes merge.
The center of these phenomenon usually exhibit the stadium effect, and these phenomena can also cause
water to pile up on coastlines to higher than sea level. The severity of these phenomena is measured on the
Saffir-Simpson Scale, and notable features of these occurrences include storm surges and eyes. For 10
points, name these low-pressure storm systems that include ones named Wilma and Katrina.
ANSWER: Tropical cyclone [or hurricane or typhoon]
Two of these entities can interact and merge in the Fujiwhara effect. Some of these entities with maximum
potential intensity above an upper bound, denoted v-sub-p, weaken because they lose more energy to
friction than they gain from evaporation. Mild forms of these phenomena are called tropical depressions.
These phenomena are categorized according to their wind speeds from 1 through 5 on the Saffir-Simpson
scale, and the "eye" of one of these is its calmest area. Possessing a low-pressure center and wind speeds of
at least 74 miles per hour, for 10 points, name these spiral arrangements of rainstorms, examples of which
were named Sandy, Andrew, and Katrina.
ANSWER: hurricanes [or typhoons; or cyclones; prompt on "tropical storms"]
Two of these entities interact in the Fujiwhara effect. One structure in these entities undergoes replacement
cycles, leading to the ineffectiveness of artificial dissipation techniques. The formation of these entities is
influenced by the Madden-Julian oscillation, and Rossby wave packets can increase the chance of their
formation. A namesake Intensity Index seeks to solve problems with the more common Saffir-Simpson
scale used to measure their strengths. For 10 points, names these storms that contain spiral-patterned cloud
systems around a central eye.
ANSWER: Hurricane [accept Cyclones]
The formation of these entities has been linked to the Madden-Julian oscillation and Rossby waves. Two of
these approach each other and eventually merge in the Fujiwara effect. Often re-curving around the
subtropical ridge, their activity peaks in late summer. Reaching a 12 on the Beaufort scale, they rarely form
near the equator because the Coriolis force there is too weak to make them spin. These systems are ranked
by the Saffir-Simpson scale, on a scale from category 1 to category 5. For 10 points, name these rotating
storm systems featuring a low-pressure central "eye," historical examples of which include Andrew, Rita,
Wilma, and Katrina.
ANSWER: tropical cyclone or hurricane [accept typhoon, tropical storm, cyclonic vortex, and equivalents; accept monsoon before second line]
Two of these entities in close proximity may experience the Fujiwara effect. Large examples of these can
experience the "stadium effect", and their size can be measured by the ROCI, or radius of the outermost
closed isobar. Reaching a 12 on the Beaufort scale, tropical depressions are a weaker type of these entities
whose intensity is measured by the Saffir-Simpson Scale, which uses a scale ranging from category 1 to
category 5. For 10 points, name this rotating oceanic weather system, examples of which include Andrew
and Katrina.
ANSWER: Hurricane [prompt on Cyclone]
Global warming is predicted to reduce the intensity of these occurrences due to an increase in vertical
wind shear. They are responsible for transporting a large amount of heat poleward. The intensity of these
phenomena is measured on the Saffir-Simpson scale. They are usually responsible for destructive storm
surges. They consist of numerous thunderstorms swirling around a center called an eye. For 10 points,
name these natural phenomena whose intensity is measured from Category 1 to 5.
ANSWER: hurricanes [or tropical cyclones or typhoons]
As developed by the LCAO procedure, this phenomenon arises because the Schrodinger equation is linear,
so linear combinations of solutions to it are also valid solutions. One model predicts that hydrogen sulfide
would exhibit this phenomenon, but it is not observed because the bonds lengths are high, decreasing
electron-electron repulsions. It applies to the central atoms of methane, ammonia, and water, and was
proposed by Linus Pauling. Name this phenomenon from VSEPR (ves-pur) theory in which two atomic
orbitals mix to create new ones, such as the sp orbital.
ANSWER: hybridization [accept word forms; accept hybridized orbitals, etc.]
This phenomenon is complicated by experimental evidence of a 12.7 eV and a 23 eV band both being
present in the photoelectron spectrum of methane. Inaccurate models invoke this phenomenon to
explain phosphorus pentachloride's apparent octet rule violation. The results of this phenomenon
have adequate (*) overlap and directionality to form linear combinations that give molecular orbitals. A
byproduct formed by orbitals that do not participate in this phenomenon is a pi bond. For 10 points, name
this phenomenon wherein atomic orbitals mix in order to form bonds and which may be, for example, "sp2"
or "sp3."
ANSWER: orbital hybridization
The angle between the entities that result from this process may be computed via Coulson's theorem. This
process tends to direct greater s character towards more electropositive substituents, according to Bent's
rule. This process explains how methane has a tetrahedral geometry even though the s orbital is spherical
and the p orbitals are mutually perpendicular. For 10 points, name this process in which multiple atomic
orbitals form linear combinations for the purpose of bonding, exemplified by sp3 orbitals.
ANSWER: atomic orbital hybridization
According to Bent's rule, the result of this phenomenon changes in the presence of an adjacent
electronegative group. This phenomenon does not accurately apply to phosphorus pentachloride
because crystal field theory predicts that splitting of energy levels will occur instead. In acetylene,
this phenomenon only occurs to two of its namesake objects, and pi electrons (*) remain in the other
two. Linus Pauling first proposed this phenomenon to explain how orbitals of different energy can form a
bond. For ten points, name this phenomenon in which orbitals mix, to create namesake "sp2" or "sp3"
results.
ANSWER: orbital hybridization (accept hybrid orbitals)
A tosylated version of this compound is used in the preparation step of the Shapiro reaction, while
derivatives of this compound are iodinated in the Barton vinyl iodide procedure. FCCP contains this
compound bridging a pair of nitrile groups attached to a methyl, and it can be produced from
hydrogen peroxide through an oxaziridine intermediate in the Atofina-PCUK cycle, but is more
commonly produced from sodium hypochlorite in the Olin Raschig process. This compound is
sometimes used to cleave pthalamides in the Gabriel synthesis, and as the reducing agent in a reaction
sometimes carried out in ethylene glycol, the Wolff-Kishner reduction. For 10 points, name this compound
used in rocket fuel with formula N2H4.
ANSWER: Hydrazine
In order to avoid producing HCN, a bulkier than usual compound of this type is used during aminations.
One of these compounds is usually used with a toluene solvent and can convert nitriles into aldehydes. One
of them is used to remove mercuric acetate groups in oxymercuration reactions. Simpler ones than the
interstitial variety and DIBAL can serve as desiccants by forming hydrogen gas and hydroxide salt when
reacted with water. Treatment with these compounds is followed with a wash by a mild or strong acid,
which releases the reduced compound after the central element in them attacks electrophilic carbons. For 10
points, name these compounds, such as LiAlH4 and NaBH4, which donate the namesake H- ions during
reductions.
ANSWER: hydrides [prompt on "reducing agents"]
In one reaction, after a stannane is decomposed by azobisisobutyronitrile, one of these groups
replaces a complex made of tin bound to sulfur, which is itself double bonded to a carbon. In another
reaction, one of these groups is kicked off a namesake dianionic intermediate by O minus, and then
proceeds to attack the carbonyl carbon of a non-enolizable aldehyde. Those are the Barton
McCombie and Cannizzaro Reactions, respectively. DIBAL, a metallic one of these, and its super
version, LiTEBH, are both great reducing agents. When an unsubstituted carbocation is alpha to a
more substituted carbon, one of this (*) ion's namesake shifts is likely to occur. Knowing that this ion's
neutral aspect's isotopes are protium, tritium and deuterium, for ten points, name this anion of hydrogen.
ANSWER: hydrides [accept H-]
Either pyridine complexes or potassium bifluoride can be used in this reaction to form the monoadduct
instead of a polysubstituted product. A common reagent for this reaction is a bicyclic nonane called 9-BBN.
To stop dimerizations, this reaction's solvent is usually THF. The formation of a pi complex in this reaction
explains its syn stereochemistry, and its regiochemistry is explained both by sterics and because a
nonbonding p orbital accepts electrons from a pi bonding orbital. In a reaction discovered by Herb Brown,
the intermediate from this reaction is treated with basic hydrogen peroxide to generate alcohols where the
hydroxyl group is on the less substituted carbon. For 10 points, name this anti-Markovnikov addition to
alkenes of the element with atomic number 5.
ANSWER: hydroboration [or hydroboration-oxidation]
A dioxane-chloro version of the reagent in this reaction was developed by Kanth to increase selectivity for
terminal substrates. Padra and Node developed the odorless reagents Dod-S-Me and MMS for this reaction.
A common reagent used in this reaction is synthesized by adding 1,5-cyclooctadiene and some dimethyl
sulfide to another compound. Its second stage involves addition of a hydroperoxide anion followed by a
rearrangement with retention of configuration, while skipping that step allows the reactant to undergo a
Suzuki coupling. The initial step of this reaction occurs with a particular stereochemistry due to steric
hindrance, resulting in an anti-Markovnikov product. For 10 points, name this method of adding hydroxyl
groups to alkenes, using boron.
ANSWER: hydroboration-oxidation
Rhodium is often used to generate catalytic asymmetric varieties of this reaction. The primary reagent in it
is sold commercially as a complex with THF or diethyl ether because its raw form is such a strong Lewis
acid. This reaction is commonly performed in laboratories preceding an oxidation using a peroxide, but the
hydroxyl group added may be replaced with an amine or a halogen. This reaction is a syn-addition, and may
also be used to make ketones and aldehydes from alkynes, considering the enol-carbonyl tautomerism. The
first part of this reaction is concerted, with the reagent adding across the alkene to form a square transition
state. For ten points, identify this key reaction, the anti-Markovnikov addition of water across a double bond
using a certain group three element.
ANSWER: hydroboration-oxidation
The relative importance of resonance structures for polycyclic aromatic examples of this general
class of compound is given by Clar's rule. Despite its name, petroleum ether is an example of these
compounds. The (*) Clemmensen reduction's products are in general this type of compound. Arbitrary
lengths of these compounds are created by the Fischer-Tropsch process. Exemplified by alkanes, alkenes,
and alkynes, for 10 points, name these compounds, whose name comes from their two constituent elements
of atomic numbers twelve and one.
ANSWER: hydrocarbons
This chemical is a byproduct in a process to extract magnesium from serpentine mine tailings
developed by the Magnola company. Caution must be employed when applying potassium
permanganate stains to TLC plates that might contain this compound to avoid releasing toxic gas.
This compound twice cleaves a carbon-zinc bond in the mechanism of the (*) Clemmensen reduction,
and it is regenerated using pyrohydrolysis from its industrial use as a pickling agent for steel. This
compound's limited propensity for redox chemistry leads it to be mixed with nitric acid to form aqua regia.
Notably comprising stomach acid, for 10 points, name this strong acid with chemical formula HCl.
ANSWER: hydrochloric acid [or aqueous hydrogen chloride; or muriatic acid; accept HCl before mention; prompt on spirits of salt]
This compound and carbon monoxide react with aromatic rings in a variant of the Friedel-Crafts reaction
named for Gatterman and Koch. This compound and sodium sulfate are generated by the Mannheim
process, and the production of soda ash, before the Solvay process was developed, generated this compound
as a major by-product in the Leblanc process. This compound, essential for pickling steel, is used with zincmercury amalgam in the Clemmensen reduction. The major component of stomach acid, it is paired with
nitric acid in aqua regia. For 10 points, name this monoprotic diatomic acid formed from the second-lightest
halogen.
ANSWER: hydrochloric acid [or HCl; or aqueous hydrogen chloride; or muriatic acid; or spirits of salt]
This chemical is used in high energy ionic exchange resin reactions, in which the final product is
demineralized water. It serves as a proton donor in elimination reactions which form alkenes, and it
is formed as a byproduct in SN2 reactions involving alkyl halides. It is more commonly used in the
steel industry as a rust-removing agent, where iron(III) oxide is formed as a byproduct, and it is a key
component of "aqua regia." For 10 points, identify this corrosive acid with formula HCl.
ANSWER: Hydrochloric Acid [accept HCl before it is read]
This compound is primarily used in modern pickling processes for steel. One method for producing
PVC plastic works by reacting acetylene with this compound. This compound is secreted by parietal cells
and G cells and was once known as muriatic acid. Aqua regia consists of a mixture of nitric acid and this
acid which is the active component in gastric acid secreted in the stomach. For 10 points, name this strong
monoprotic acid with formula HCl.
ANSWER: hydrochloric acid [accept HCl before it is read; prompt on muriatic acid before it is read]
This compound is a side-product of the first step of the Leblanc process. Its non-hydrated form is a
corrosive gas, and it reacts with calcium carbonate to give off carbon dioxide. It is also known as muriatic
acid. Along with nitric acid, it is part of aqua regia. This acid is a primary component of gastric acid, found
in the stomach. For 10 points, name this strong acid with formula HCl.
ANSWER: hydrochloric acid [or hydrogen chloride; or HCl before read; or muriatic acid before read; prompt on HCl after read; prompt on muriatic acid after read]
This substance is dissolved in zinc chloride in a reagent used for classifying alcohols named for Lucas.
With a zinc amalgam, it participates in the reduction of ketones to alkanes in the Clemmenson Reduction. It
is mixed with nitric acid to make aqua regia. Though it is highly corrosive to skin, this acid, also called
muriatic acid, is often used by high school students in classroom titration labs. It lowers the pH of stomach
contents as a major component of gastric acid. For 10 points, name this strong acid symbolized HCl.
ANSWER: hydrochloric acid [or spirits of salt; accept muriatic acid before mentioned; accept HCl before mentioned]
It is not an amalgam, but this substance is a catalyst in the Clemmensen reduction. The Leblanc
process has been abandoned because it generates this compound as a byproduct. Industrially, this
compound is used to pickle steel and synthesize PVC plastics, and with (*) nitric acid, it forms aqua
regia. Found in gastric juice, for 10 points, name this binary acid composed of a hydrogen atom and the
second lightest halogen, also known as HCl.
ANSWER: Hydrochloric Acid (accept HCl before given)
This acid was responsible for water pollution as a byproduct of the Leblanc process. This acid and zinc
chloride comprises the Lucas reagent, which distinguishes between classes of alcohols. This acid and zinc
amalgam is used to reduce a carbonyl group to a methylene group in the Clemmensen reduction. A
combination of nitric acid and this monoprotic acid is the liquid aqua regia, which is used to dissolve
platinum and gold. This acid is released from the parietal cells in a dilute form as part of gastric acid. For 10
points, name this strong acid with formula HCl.
ANSWER: hydrochloric acid [prompt on HCl; or hydrogen chloride; or muriatic acid]
This compound is a byproduct in the production of the soda ash in the LeBlanc process, which is
subsequently removed through the Deacon process. Ethylene and this compound are reacted to form the
monomer in PVC. An older name for this compound is muriatic acid. A solution of this compound and
nitric acid can dissolve gold and platinum. Gastrin stimulates this compound's secretion in the body. For
10 points, identify this acid found naturally in the stomach that has formula H Cl.
ANSWER: hydrochloric acid [or H Cl until it is read; or muriatic acid until is read]
It's not water, but this substance hydrolyses gluten to isolate glutamic acid during the production of MSG,
and it is produced along with a plastic during the halogenation of ethylene. This compound and zinc
amalgam reduces ketones to alkanes in a reaction named for Clemmensen. Involved in the production of
PVC, three parts of this compound mixed with one part of nitric acid can dissolve gold or platinum, while
its reaction with sodium hydroxide yields water and table salt. It is commonly found in aqua regia as well as
stomach acid. For 10 points, name this strong diatomic acid with chemical formula HCl.
ANSWER: hydrochloric acid [or spirits of salt; or muriatic acid; or HCl before mention]
Like sulfuric acid, this substance is used as a catalyst in the alkylation of isobutane. When used with
antimony trifluoride to treat chloroform, Teflon is created. This chemical is prepared by reacting its anion's
namesake mineral with sulfuric acid, or as a byproduct in the creation of phosphoric acid. It does not
completely dissociate in water, so it penetrates skin very easily, reacting with calcium to dissolve bone.
Because of the very low entropy of hydration for its anion, despite being incredibly corrosive, it is a weak
acid; that high strength comes from the strongest-known bond with hydrogen. Stored in Teflon containers,
name this haloacid used to etch glass, with formula HF.
ANSWER: hydrofluoric acid [accept HF before the end; accept aqueous hydrogen fluoride]
An isotope of this element is created when neutrons escaping from a fusion reaction hit lithium atoms.
Lindlar's catalyst adds only two atoms of this element to alkynes instead of four. A "standard" electrode
named for this element is used as a zero reference to compare other electrode potentials. An isotope of this
element is found in heavy water while another isotope of it is tritium. For 10 points, name this element
which is produced with oxygen in electrolysis, where water is split into its constituents, and that has atomic
number one.
ANSWER: hydrogen [prompt on deuterium; prompt on tritium]
The bicarbonate ion is equivalent to the carbonate ion with an ion of this element added. Tritium
[TRIH-tee-um] and deuterium [doo-TEER-ee-um] are isotopes of this element. Between it and
electronegative elements like (*) oxygen and fluorine, a bond named for this element can form. Arrhenius
[uh-RAY-nee-uss] defined acids as substances that increase the concentration of this atom's ions. For 10
points, name this gaseous element, the lightest on the periodic table, and the first one.
ANSWER: hydrogen (prompt on H; prompt on hydronium or H3O+)
As rocket fuel, the metastable metallic form of this element would produce a specific impulse 3 times
greater than the Space Shuttle main engine. The fuel hydrazine features four atoms of this element
surrounding a pair of (*) nitrogen atoms, and the external tank of a Space Shuttle held liquid forms of
oxygen and this diatomic gas. The most abundant element in the universe is, for 10 points, what element
with atomic number 1 and atomic symbol H?
ANSWER: Hydrogen
This element was used in Ionescu and Mihu's precursor to the MASER, which itself was developed by
Ramsey and Kleppner using a polarized form of this element for energy. This element was used instead of
silver in Phipps and Taylor's followup to the Stern-Gerlach experiment. The Rydberg formula can be used
to determine different spectral lines for this element, the most important of which are the Lyman, Balmer,
and Paschen series. This element has isotopes known as deuterium and tritium, and the low density of ice
and high boiling point of water arise because of its namesake bonds. Name this most abundant element in
the universe, with atomic number 1.
ANSWER: hydrogen [accept H until mentioned]
Carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and a gas made of this element are found in syngas. This element
is added to fats and oils in order to saturate them. Most of this element's pure form is generated by
reacting natural gas with water under high temperature and pressure. Nitrogen, (*) oxygen, and
fluorine can form bonds named after this element with it. Bronsted-Lowry acid or base activity is
determined by the ability of a species to gain or lose a cation of this element. For ten points, name this
lightest element, which has symbol H.
ANSWER: hydrogen
The radiation emitted by the gaseous form of this element penetrates gas clouds at 1420 megahertz and has
a characteristic 21cm wavelength. The Fischer-Tropp process entails converting a mixture of carbon
monoxide and this element into usable energy. The stretches of bonds of carbon and this element show up at
2850 to 2950 in infrared spectra. When this element acquires a negative charge, it can be used to reduce
carbonyl groups and carboxylic acids. This element is often produced when zinc is combined with
hydrochloric acid. Some isotopes of this element include tritium and deuterium. For 10 points, name the
first element on the periodic table.
ANSWER: Hydrogen [or H-;or H+]
A mixture of carbon monoxide and the natural form of this element is called syngas. The Lyman and the
Balmer series were developed to describe the spectral patterns of this element. The ionized form of this
element is at the heart of Bronsted-Lowry theory. Electrolysis of water produces the gaseous form of this
element at the cathode. In the Haber process, the diatomic form of this element is mixed with nitrogen gas
to form ammonia. For 10 points, name this lightest chemical element.
ANSWER: hydrogen
. One method of producing this molecule exposes methane to water at extremely high temperatures,
and is known as the steam reforming process. Saline hydrides liberate this molecule when they come
into contact with Bronsted acids. The addition of this molecule to an unsaturated fat converts it to a
saturated fat, because addition of this molecule to an (*) alkene creates an alkane. Another method of
producing this molecule and oxygen gas runs a large overpotential through water. For 10 points, name this
flammable diatomic molecule, which consists of two atoms of the lightest element bonded together.
ANSWER: H2 (accept hydrogen gas)
This element's namesake line results from a transition between two hyperfine levels of its ground
state and is also called the "21 cm line." Reacting aluminum with bases results in the formation of
tetrahydroxoaluminate and this element, and an isotope of this element with two more neutrons than
its naturally occurring form is called [*] tritium. This element's namesake bonds are covalent interactions
that occur between this element and other elements with high electronegativity. The diatomic form of this
element is produced along with oxygen in the electrolysis of water. For 10 points, name this element with
atomic number 1 and symbol H, the most abundant element in the universe.
ANSWER: hydrogen [accept H before mentioned]
This element is the one whose behavior is most similar to muonium. Organic solvents containing the
heaviest stable isotope of this element are used in the most common form of NMR, which observes this
element's lightest isotope. It was sequestered in a palladium lattice in Fleischmann and Pons's apparatus for
cold fusion. Reforming of methane with steam yields carbon monoxide and this element's molecular form.
The reduction potential of its cation form on a platinum electrode defines a zero standard electrode
potential. It forms relatively strong noncovalent bonds with electronegative atoms. Bronsted acids donate its
cation. For 10 points, name this lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen [accept H; accept hydrogen ion; accept hydrogen cation; accept H+; accept dihydrogen; accept H2; accept molecular hydrogen; prompt on "deuterium"]
This element is separated from sulfur in the Claus process. The molecular form of this element is added to
pyridine [PEH-rih-deen] to cause several reactions leading to the formation of pentane, and the addition of
this element changes an alkene into an alkane. Just outside the cores of Jupiter and Saturn, astronomers
have found the metallic form of this element. The isotopes of this element are protium, deuterium, and
tritium. Name this element, the first in the periodic table.
ANSWER: hydrogen or H
This element's series of spectral lines named for Lyman are all ultraviolet, and all its visible spectral lines
are within the Balmer series. According to the Bronsted-Lowry theory, its cation is donated by acids. In
addition to having isotopes like tritium and deuterium, this element's extremely strong dipole-dipole
interactions, its namesake "bonds", explain the high boiling point of water. For 10 points, name this
colorless gas, an element with atomic number one and symbol H.
ANSWER: hydrogen
The reionization of this element is a major era in the universe's history. The Lyman series occurs in this
element. The Rydberg equation is used to find the Balmer series for this element, which is the namesake of
an interaction between oxygens and amides in secondary structures of proteins. pH is the measure of the
concentration of an ion of this element. It is fused in the proton-proton chain. An explanation for the high
boiling point of water is provided by this element's namesake bonds. For 10 points, this lightest element
with atomic number one.
ANSWER: hydrogen
This element is the namesake of a hypothesis proposed by Martin and Mueller concerning the first
eukaryotic cells. In agostic interactions, an atom of this element is bonded to carbon and a metal. This
element and carbon are namesakes of common types of NMR spectroscopy. Lyman and Balmer name two
spectral series of this element, whose isotopes include tritium. An electrostatic attraction between an atom
of this element and two electronegative atoms is known as its nameske bond. For 10 points, name this
element with an atomic number of one.
ANSWER: hydrogen
The Laguerre polynomial gives the radial part of the state vector for this element that has a namesake line
that forms when it transitions between two ground level states, called its "twenty-one centimeter line." All
of its visible spectral lines are within the Balmer series, and it has an isotope with two more neutrons than
normal that is called tritium. It also has a "heavy" form that is called deuterium. For 10 points, name this
lightest element, the most abundant in the universe, with chemical symbol H.
ANSWER: Hydrogen
The "slush" form of this element was proposed as a form of rocket fuel. A Hungarian physicist once
wanted to use a device based off of this element to create an artificial harbor in Alaska. One of its
isotopes is used as a non-radioactive label in chemical experiments and in solvents for NMR
spectroscopy. Although it's not radium or promethium, another isotope of this element was used in
luminescent paint for watches. These isotopes are, respectively, (*) deuterium and tritium. For ten
points, name this element that has the smallest standard atomic weight, the first element on the periodic
table.
ANSWER: hydrogen
During arc welding, metals often become more brittle when exposed to this molecule, which is released
when superacids react with alkanes. The burning splint test detects this substance, which adsorbs to
palladium-carbon. A reduction potential of zero is assigned to the production of this substance at a standard
electrode. The ionized form of this molecule can be exactly solved using the Schrodinger equation because
there are no electronic repulsion effects. When acids react with metals, this gas is released. For 10 points,
name this flammable gas, the most abundant in the universe, composed of the lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen gas [or H2]
This element was combined with chlorine [KLOR-een] using light by Max Bodenstein [BOH-den-stayn] in
the first explanation of a chain reaction. In 2011, two German scientists claimed to create the metallic form
of this element, which normally exists around the cores of large planets. It is the only neutral atom that can
be solved exactly with the Schrodinger equation, and an earlier attempt to explain it was the Bohr model.
Name this element whose diatomic [die-uh-TOM-ic] gas is the lightest molecule, the first element in the
Periodic Table.
ANSWER: hydrogen or H
The negative ion of this element is sometimes complexed with lithium and aluminum. The standard
electrode containing this element is defined as zero volts at all temperatures. The "bi" in sodium
bicarbonate refers to this element. When bonded to oxygen, nitrogen or fluorine, this element forms its
namesake powerful intermolecular bond. If this element has one or two neutrons, it is known as deuterium
(doo-TARE-ee-um) or tritium, respectively. For 10 points, name this lightest chemical element with symbol
H.
ANSWER: hydrogen [or H before mentioned]
Two atoms of this element are appended in the Birch Reduction. One isotope of this element replaces a
lighter isotope in a chloroform derivative used as a solvent in NMR. That isotope was discovered by Harold
Urey. A compound in which this element is combined with oxygen is broken down by the enzyme catalase
(CAT-uh-"lace"). Isotopes of this element include deuterium (doo-TAIR-ee-um) and tritium. Two of this
element fuse to create helium. For 10 points, name this lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen [or H]
This compound transforms Adams' catalyst to platinum black. This compound is added to organic
molecules by a catalyst containing cyclooctadiene coordinated to iridium, named for Crabree. The plus-one
ion of this compound is a common example of the use of perturbation theory in quantum chemistry classes.
This compound is mixed with carbon monoxide to form syngas. Below 33K, this compound becomes a
liquid, and is combined with liquid oxygen in hypergolic rocket fuel. The addition of this compound across
a double bond is used to transform saturated compounds into unsaturated ones by reducing double bonds to
single bonds. For 10 points, name this compound consisting of two atoms of the lightest element bonded
together.
ANSWER: H2 [or dihydrogen gas]
A T1 relaxation time of under 150 ms is diagnostic of this molecule as a ligand, and the Kubas
complex was the first discovered with this molecule as a ligand. Upon complexing, this molecule
decreases its vibrational frequency from around 4300 wavenumber to 2800 wavenumber. Carbon
monoxide and this substance are mixed together in syngas, and the fact that spin-flipping one particle
in this molecule takes a photon of frequency 1420 megahertz is the basis of a (*) MASER. Its MO
diagram shows two electrons in a sigma sub g orbital and none in a higher sigma sub u orbital. Combining
three molecules of it with one molecules of nitrogen creates two molecules of ammonia in the Haber-Bosch
process, and this molecule exists as an explosive gas at room temperature. For 10 points, name this
molecule which consists of two atoms of the lightest element bonded together.
ANSWER: H2 or dihydrogen
For species that behave like this system, all atomic orbitals with the same principle quantum
number are degenerate. It is the only atomic system for which the Schrodinger equation can be
solved exactly, and the Rydberg equation can be used to obtain its (*) Balmer spectral series. When an
electron is removed from this atom it can protonate water to yield an acidic species, and this is the only
atom for which the Bohr model holds. For 10 points, name this atom consisting of a proton and an
electron, the first element on the periodic table.
ANSWER: hydrogen atom
This interaction occurs between every four residues of a standard alpha helix, as well as the link
between matching base pairs in DNA. On phase diagrams of water, a negative slope between the solid
and liquid phases can be attributed to this phenomenon. This phenomenon, which is stronger than (*)
van der Waals forces but weaker than intramolecular forces, causes water to expand upon freezing. For 10
points, name this weak type of bonding that occurs between atoms of oxygen, nitrogen, or fluorine and its
namesake element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding
A weak form of this interaction can arise between a soft acid and soft base consisting of pi electrons.
The low barrier form of this interaction occurs in enzymatic transition states where the donor and
acceptor are closer than usual. Its presence in secondary protein structure allows for the formation of
alpha helices and beta sheets. This type of interaction also links adjacent nuclear bases in DNA. For 10
points, name these bonds that form between electronegative elements with lone pair electrons and the
namesake element, which occurs in liquids like ammonia and water.
ANSWER: hydrogen bond
The Zundel cation displays a symmetric example of these structures that have been studied in the bifluoride
ion, and those structures possess significantly higher energies than asymmetric ones.. The existence of these
between every nth carbonyl group and n+4 th amino group imparts the alpha-helical structure to amino acid
chains, and they are also responsible for causing the crystalline arrangement of water molecules in ice. For
10 points, identify these structures which impart greater stability to compounds containing the lightest
element.
ANSWER: Hydrogen bonds
Gilli's studies of the transition state forms of these entities employed their resonance-assisted versions in 1(X-phenylazo)-2-naphthols. The migration of a proton along one of these provides one step in Grotthuss
diffusion, which helps explain why they are grouped with related oscillating ion interactions. These
interactions can form clathrate-like cages to separate two types of molecules. They occur over a range of 2.2
to 2.5 Angstroms in their short-strong or low-barrier forms, and these interactions occur between i and i+4
positions on alpha helices. Stabilization via these interactions explains the low density of ice. For 10 points,
name these strong covalent interactions typically occurring between fluorine, nitrogen, or oxygen and the
namesake element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds [or H-bonds]
This was used in 2004 to explain the bizarre behavior of a mixture of cyclodextrine and methylpyridine. In
NMR, they cause a shift in the signal of a proton to a lower field. A system of them helps antibodies bind to
their corresponding antigens, and they help keep molecules in DNA bound together. The IUPAC
determined that one criterion for classifying bonds as these is that they are primarily
electrostatic attractive forces, not dispersive forces. Their bond length is approximately 2 Angstroms, twice
that of covalent bonds, and the strength of these bonds is about one tenth of covalent bonds. FTP, name this
type of intermolecular bond that is responsible for the extremely high boiling point of water, an extremely
strong type of dipole-dipole forces.
ANSWER: Hydrogen Bonds (prompt on dipole-dipole before it is mentioned)
In the active site of chymotrypsin, these phenomena create the oxyanion hole. These phenomena
typically occurs over a length scale of 200 picometers, and nylon has several of them between
adjacent chains. These phenomena between carbonyl and amide groups are responsible for forming
the structure of alpha helices and beta sheets, and they are also present between (*) nucleotide bases
on DNA. They are responsible for the high boiling point of water, since one water molecule can form four
of these. They are stronger than van der Waals interactions but weaker than ionic or covalent bonds. For 10
points, name these interactions between an electronegative atom and an atom carrying the namesake light
element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding [or H bonding]
Smart rubber uses these to heal itself after being torn. The parallel parts of a beta sheet are
connected by these. They play a role in the secondary structure of proteins in addition to linking
complementary base pairs in (*) DNA. They were proven to have a small degree of covalent character in
the late 1990s, a property hypothesized by Pauling, while the viscosity of glycerol, the high boiling point of
water, and the ability of ice to float on water are attributed to these interactions. For 10 points, identify these
bonds that occur when relatively electronegative atoms, such as oxygen, nitrogen, or fluorine, are linked
with atoms of the namesake element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds
This type of interaction was first proposed in a 1920 paper by Latimer and Rodebush. The presence of this
type of interaction is preferred in E2 and SN2 but not E1 and SN1 reactions. Protein secondary structure
involves this type of interaction between different atoms in the amide backbone. In ice, this type of
interaction is important in determining the crystal structure formed. It also causes water to have a high
boiling point. For 10 points, name this interaction that requires both a donor and acceptor of the namesake
simplest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding [or H bonding; prompt on hydrogen; prompt on H]
Two of these interactions occur between two molecules of a carboxylic acid in the vapor phase, and
they typically occur over a distance of 200 picometers. These interactions occur between every fifth residue
of an alpha helix and between the nitrogenous bases on strands of DNA. This interaction between water
molecules gives it a relatively high boiling point. For 10 points, name this type of weak interaction in
which an electronegative atom attracts an atom of the lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding [or H bonding]
This effect is responsible for the enol tautomer being favored over the keto tautomer in less-polar solvents.
The strongest form of it appears in the bifluoride ion. It occurs thrice in G-C base pairs but twice in A-T
base pairs, and it connects every carbonyl in an alpha helix to an amino four residues away. The relativelylow boiling point of H2S relative to water is a result of this interaction, which is intermediate in strength
between covalent bonds and van der Waals interactions. In general, for this to occur, fluorine, nitrogen, or
oxygen must act as an electron acceptor. For 10 points, identify this type of dipole-dipole interaction
between certain electronegative atoms and the lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding
Biphenol and thiourea catalysts make use of this phenomenon to activate imines and carbonyls. Solvents
such as DMSO and THF do not participate in this phenomenon and thus do not solvate anions-that is
because they lack its namesake "donors." This phenomenon occurs between the i and i+4 positions in an
alpha helix and links together the base pairs of DNA. This phenomenon, which explains the high boiling
point of water, is a special case of dipole-dipole interactions where one atom is bonded to a nitrogen,
oxygen, or fluorine. For 10 points, name this intermolecular force involving a namesake element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding [prompt on "dipole-dipole" interactions before mention]
Organocatalysts that exploit this interaction include the (thio)urea ones. The 6-12 Lennard-Jones potential is
replaced with a 10-12 potential when modeling this interaction. A signature of this interaction is a redshift
in IR spectra, which corresponds to bond lengthening. It was first elucidated in its most common setting by
Latimer and Rodebush. This interaction helps stabilize the secondary fold in protein folding and is
responsible for the alpha helix. Protic solvents are defined as being able to participate in it. This interaction
results from lone pairs of electrons on electronegative atoms bonded to a namesake element. For 10 points,
identify this relatively strong intermolecular interaction that explains the high boiling point of water.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds [or H-bonds; or word forms]
In the Zimm-Bragg model, these interactions are responsible for moving molecules from the C state
to the H state, and a double version of this phenomenon was discovered by Brown and Haseltine
between certain metallic compounds and acidic groups. A bifurcated form of this phenomenon is
present when two centers are involved, while a carbonylated aza-crown ether will show the lowbarrier type of them. Histidine stabilizes O2 in a bent position above the porphyrin ring of
hemoglobin using them. This interaction is responsible for the dimerization of carboxylic acids and the
negative azeotropy of hydrogen flouride solutions, and their increased occurence in GC-rich DNA gives
those segments their stability. Its responsible for giving alpha helices their shape, and also grants water its
high boiling point. For 10 points, name this non-covalent interaction in which an electronegative acceptor
pulls on a donor containing a namesake atom.
ANSWER: Hydrogen bonding
The "symmetric" types of these interactions seem to violate the duet rule, and occur in high-pressure
ice known as "Ice X." This is the main mechanism by which R-groups in DNA interact, and the spacing of
them results in the alpha helix and beta pleated sheet. Water's high boiling point is due to the high ratio
of these bonds to the low molecular mass. For 10 points, name this type of bond resulting from the
dipole-dipole force between an electronegative atom and the namesake element bonded to nitrogen,
oxygen, or fluorine.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds [prompt on H; prompt on dipole-dipole bonds/forces]
Carbonyls act as donors in this interaction, but amines can act as either a donor or acceptor. This
interaction allows carboxylic acid to form dimers. As temperature decreases, the strength of these increase,
and they allow for the formation of six membered puckered rings in ice. They can be intermolecular or
intramolecular, and are formed between a highly electronegative atom and an atom of the namesake
element. For 10 points, name these interactions that help explain many of properties of water, which are
named for one of the elements found in water.
ANSWER: hydrogen bond
The Grotthuss mechanism explains proton diffusion through a network of these entities, whose strongest
form, in which a proton is perfectly centered between two atoms, can be found in formic acid or the
bifluoride ion. These interactions with a "symmetric" variety are responsible for the secondary structure of
proteins and the high boiling point of hydrogen fluoride. These interactions require very electronegative
atoms like fluorine, nitrogen and oxygen, and they are responsible for the decreased density of ice. For 10
points, name these strong dipole-dipole interactions present between water molecules, named for the lightest
element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds [or h-bonds]
These can be analyzed by the Burgi-Dunitz approach and are the reason for the unique negative slope of the
solid-liquid line on water's phase diagram. Dihydrogen oxide has two lone pairs and two free protons per
molecule so it can form two of these, while ammonia can only form one because although it has three
protons it only has a single lone pair. These are re-formed by RAD51 and 52 in a process called annealing,
and three of these are formed between cytosine and guanine and two between adenine and thymine. These
consist of a proton stuck in a pickle between two highly-electronegative atoms, namely nitrogen, fluorine, or
oxygen. FTP, name this particularly strong intra- or more commonly intermolecular bond that shares its
name with the lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds
The properties of elastomers used in thermoplastics rely on this force giving way at high
temperatures. An interaction named for Hoogsteen requires an unusual number of these to
form, and the Pauling-Corey rules concern the role of this force in secondary structure. This
force is responsible for water's ability to solvate anions, and it is modeled as the interaction
between a bonding or nonbonding orbitals with an antibonding orbital. For 10 points, name
this force between electronegative atoms and its namesake element with atomic number
one.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding
One model for studying these phenomena is Bader's AIM theory while the Buckingham-Fowler model and
the EPIC model both add this phenomenon to studies of solvation. A compression associated with an
"improper" one of these phenomena is known as their blue-shifting variety. This phenomenon can be
described using a so-called 10-12 potential amd it is the most important interaction in determining
secondary protein structure. It accounts for the angle of 109.5 degrees in a certain abundant molecule, and it
also accounts for the high surface tension of that molecule, water. For ten points, identify this phenomenon,
a bond which forms between a polar molecule and a certain light atom.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds
Fabiola and Chapman added a pair of angles to a potential modelling these phenomena, which are
often modelled by the Dreiding equation. These phenomena are modelled by a 12-10 potential.
Thiourea catalysis makes extensive use of these phenomena, and these phenomena are responsible for
the dimerization of carboxylic acids. These phenomena occur between residue n and n plus four in a
standard (*) alpha helix. These phenomena commonly cause gross deviations from Raoult's law by
inducing azeotropy, and these phenomena
are responsible for the high boiling point and remarkable solvent properties of water. For 10 points, name
this type of weak intermolecular interaction between a heteroatom and an atom of the namesake very light
element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding
The "symmetric" type of this interaction exists only at high pressure, and acetone is an acceptor of, but
never a donor to, these interactions. According to the Pauling-Corey rules, their occurrence between
position n and n-plus-4 in a protein yields an alpha helix; they can also cause beta sheets. One atom
involved must be highly electronegative, such as nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine. They cause the hexagonal
structure of ice to be less dense than water. For 10 points, name these intermolecular attractive forces which
hold a compound close to an atom of the lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds [accept hydrogen dipole-dipole forces/interactions]
An alcohol with formula C13H28O uniquely cannot undergo these interactions because of its large tertbutyl groups. Hoogsteen base pairing employs these interactions, which are strongest when they are
symmetric. Typically, nitrogen, fluorine, and oxygen facilitate these interactions, which are stronger than
van der Waals interactions. These interactions can form a dimer of H2O. They cause the hexagonal lattice
of ice crystals and the high boiling point of water. For 10 points, name these bonds, which are named after
an element with atomic number one.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds [accept word forms like hydrogen bonding; or H-bonds; prompt on hydrogen or H]
Carboxylic acids are known to form dimers in the gas phase, which is the result of strong variety of this
force. In proteins they are responsible for the formation of beta sheets and alpha helices. They are
responsible for the complementary paring of bases within DNA with thymine and adenine forming two and
guanine and cytosine forming three. They are formed when the acceptor has a relatively electronegative
element that attracts the namesake element seen in this bond. This is shown most often in water which can
behave as both a donor and accepter. FTP name this intramolecular force whose acceptors are most often
oxygen and nitrogen and are concerned with the first element on the periodic table.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding
An "improper" form of this phenomenon typically arises only in the presence of weak
hyperconjugation, and is characterized by a blue-shifted stretching frequency. In molecular
mechanics, this phenomenon is modeled by a 10,12 potential, a variant of the Lennard-Jones
potential. The (*) bifluoride anion exhibits a strong form of this phenomenon as part of a three-center fourelectron bond. The "i plus k to i" interaction in polypeptides is an example of this phenomenon, and when k
equals four, corresponds to an alpha helix. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which an
electronegative atom and a namesake element interact weakly, which explains the high boiling point of
water.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding
This phenomenon confers stability to the enol tautomer of beta-keto ketones as well as to dimerized
carboxylic acids, while the strongest, symmetric form, occuring at around forty kilocalories per mole,
is illustrated by the bifluoride ion. Different numbers of this phenomenon account for why the human
genome contains about as many C bases as G bases. Responsible for (*) protein secondary structure like
beta sheets, it lowers the volatility of and raises the heat of vaporization of water. For 10 points, name this
type of extremely strong dipole-dipole interaction "accepted" by nitrogen and oxygen and "donated" by its
namesake, the lightest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding [prompt on dipole-dipole interaction until mention]
This interaction was first mentioned by Moore and Winmill in 1912 and it is most powerful in
bifluoride ions. This occurs between i and i+4 on an alpha helix, and, in water, these have length 1.97
angstroms. Adenine and Thymine interact via (*) two of these while Guanine and Cytosine share three.
Adhesion often occurs because of these. For ten points, name this type of bond, which is responsible for the
surface tension and high boiling point of water, the interaction between an electronegative ion and the
lightest element.
ANSWER: Hydrogen Bond (accept H-Bond, prompt on bond)
A capital letter is used to denote these stabilizing agents in the Zimm-Bragg model, and high-pressure
formic acid has exhibited their symmetric variety. The presence of these entities in the coiled coil of
the quaternary structure of collagen gives the protein its tensile strength. Occasionally appearing in
bifurcated form, they are used in "smart rubber" and usually occur with Fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen and
their namesake. Weaker than covalent forces, these dipole-dipole bonds often cause materials to have high
boiling points. For 10 points, identify these bonds, famously present in water and named for the lightest
element.
ANSWER: Hydrogen Bonds
Smart rubber uses them to reform itself when it is torn because they can reform instantaneously in
that substance. In DNA, three of them occur between (*) complementary base pair purines, and two
between pyrimidines. They also account for the relatively high boiling point of water and the low density of
ice. For 10 points, which type of bond is found between an electronegative atom such as oxygen or nitrogen
and its namesake element?
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds
Recently they have been used in smart rubber because they are easier to repair after being broken. These are
the reason for various plant phenomena like capillary action, as dipole-dipole interactions involving them
are very strong. Secondary structure of proteins results from these, as alpha helices and beta sheets are
created by the interactions of these between various side chains. Nitrogen and fluorine can serve as the
electronegative atom, though oxygen is the most common one. Water can have up to four, FTP, of what
type of bond found between a namesake atom covalently bonded to an electronegative atom and another
nearby electronegative atom.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds (prompt on H bonds)
This type of interaction was first proposed in a 1920 paper by Latimer and Rodebush. The presence of this
type of interaction is preferred in E2 and SN2 but not E1 and SN1 reactions. Protein secondary structure
involves this type of interaction between different atoms in the amide backbone. In ice, this type of
interaction is important in determining the crystal structure formed. It also causes water to have a high
boiling point. For 10 points, name this interaction that requires both a donor and acceptor of the namesake
simplest element.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonding [or H bonding; prompt on hydrogen; prompt on H]
These entities are present in Hoogsten base pairing, and they are strongest when symmetric. These entities
are considered electrostatic attractive forces, and one form of these is present in borane-ammonia
complexes. They allow for the bonding of nucleotides in adenine and thymine, in addition to other
nucleotides in DNA. These types of bonds occur between a highly electronegative element such as nitrogen,
oxygen, or fluorine with a certain element. For 10 points, name these strongest intermolecular forces in
covalent molecules which are responsible for surface tension and many of the other properties of water.
ANSWER: Hydrogen Bonds [accept Hydrogen after "bonds" is mentioned]
"Low barrier" types of these entities occur in the catalytic triad of serine proteases. A unique form of
these is present in borane-ammonia complexes. In RNA and proteins, they are chiefly responsible for
secondary structure. Water expands upon freezing because these entities become ordered. They usually
involve fluorine, nitrogen, or oxygen and their namesake element. For 10 points, name these exceptionally
strong dipole-dipole interactions.
ANSWER: hydrogen bonds
The bifurcated variety of these entities are present in beta-sheets, and they are considered electrostatic
attractive forces rather than dispersive ones. They are responsible for the stability of alpha helices, and they
keep nucleotides in DNA bonded together. These entities form between nitrogen, fluorine, or oxygen and a
namesake element, and account for the high boiling point of water. For 10 points, identify these interactions
named for the element that must be present for them to occur.
ANSWER: Hydrogen bond
The standard electrode for electrochemistry involves the reduction of this substance. It is the
lighter of two substances that are formed when carbon dioxide reacts with water. Its concentration is
found in the numerator for Ka. Its concentration is often found using an ICE table. These substances,
which are donated by (*) Bronsted-Lowry acids, are equivalent to hydronium ions. For 10 points, name
this substance whose presence is measured by pH.
ANSWER: hydrogen ion [or H+; or proton; or hydronium ion before mentioned; do not prompt or accept "hydrogen" or "hydride"]
One industrial synthesis of this compound involves the auto-oxidation and regeneration of a 2-amyl
anthrohydroquinone catalyst. Secondary antibodies used in western blots can be conjugated to an
enzyme extracted from horseradish that breaks down this molecule. Another enzyme that acts on this
compound couples its breakdown with the formation of a disulfide bond between two glutathione
molecules. Mixing this compound with iron three plus creates a reagent used to treat wastewater,
named for (*) Fenton. An enzyme that breaks down this compound contains four heme groups and has one
of the highest known turnover rates. Usually stored as a 3% aqueous solution, this compound dissociates via
ultraviolet light into hydroxyl radicals. For 10 points, name this compound broken down by catalase, a
component of bleach with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: Hydrogen Peroxide [or H2O2]
This compound was used as a monopropellant for the Bell Rocket Belt and is most commonly manufactured
by the anthraquinone process. Using this compound in the second step of ozonolysis leads to the formation
of carboxylic acids. It has recently begun to be used to in wastewater plants to treat odors, since it is less
toxic than hydrogen sulfide. When in solution with the Fe2+ ion, it constitutes Fenton's reagent. With
iodine as a catalyst, it can be decomposed in the "elephant's toothpaste" reaction into water and diatomic
oxygen. For 10 points, name this compound with chemical formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [accept H2O2 before it is read]
The Krutzsch process produced about a ten percent aqueous solution of this compound, but was never
commercialized. This compound is produced commercially by sending bubbles of air through a solution of
anthracene, leading to the autoxidation of 2-alkyl anthrahydroquinone to a 2-alkyl anthraquinone. That
process is known as the AO process and was invented by Riedl and Pfleiderer. This compound is found with
ferrous salts in Fenton's reagent, and oxidizes sodium hypochlorite to give oxygen. A three percent aqueous
solution of it is useful for treating minor wounds. It is broken down to oxygen and water by catalase. For 10
points, name this oxidizing agent with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [accept H2O2 before mentioned]
This compound and a base are added to convert a hydroxylated ortho- or para-phenyl aldehyde into
a benzenediol and a carboxylate in a reaction named for Dakin. Though its crystals are tetragonal, in
the gaseous phase this compound displays a twisted C2 symmetry and has an unusually high barrier
of rotation of 29.45 kilojoules per mole about its central bond. The most common way to transform a
sulfide into a sulfoxide is by treating it with this compound. Biologically, (*) halogenation reactions are
facilitated by enzymes that use it as an oxidant. In organic chemistry, the reagent mCPBA serves the
purpose of this much simpler compound. This is the simplest compound to contain an oxygen-oxygen single
bond. For 10 points, name this compound commonly used to disinfect cuts, which has formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [or H2O2 until it is read]
This is the simplest compound exhibiting a "skew chain" dihedral angle of about 120 degrees as a
compromise between steric and hyperconjugative effects. mCPBA is synthesized from
meta-chlorobenzoyl chloride and this compound. Potassium iodide catalyzes the disproportionation
of this compound, releasing lots of foam. The anthraquinone process makes this compound. Though
this compound is not linear, it readily homolyzes into (*) radicals because it has four electrons in pi star
orbitals. This very strong oxidizing agent is used to treat wastewater as Fenton's reagent, and in the body, it
is broken down by catalase into water and oxygen gas. For 10 points, name this compound with an
oxygen-oxygen single bond, and formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [or H2O2 before it is read; prompt on peroxide]
The lack of a structure that is named for breaking down this compound results in Zellweger syndrome.
That structure is the most common microbody and was discovered by Christian de Duve. This compound
has a very similar structure, and is analogous, to hydrogen disulfide and is a common non-chlorine based
bleaching agent. Catalase catalyzes the decomposition of this compound to water and oxygen. For 10
points, identify this simplest peroxide with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [or H2O2 before it is read]
This compound is formed through the oxidation of 2-ethyl anthrahydroquinone, and it mixes with
hydroquinone in the abdominal gland of the bombardier beetle. This compound is mixed with iron to
form Fenton's reagent. This compound contain an oxygen-oxygen single bond, which is easily
cleaved by heat or light to form two (*) hydroxyl radicals. Mixing this compound with aluminum
hydroxide forms a compound used to bleach hair. For 10 points, name this compound with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [or H2O2 before it is read]
Calcium carbonate, iron-three acetate, and this compound are used to decarboxylate the
intermediate in the second step of the Ruff degradation. The industrial synthesis of this compound is
accomplished via repeated oxidation and hydrogenation of alkyl anthroquinones in the AO process.
Biosensors for this compound typically utilize nanoparticles coupled to an enzyme isolated from
horseradish called HRP. An iron catalyst and this compound compose a reagent used to oxidize
contaminants in waste water, named for (*) Fenton. This compound is commonly used in the oxidation
step following hydroboration, and as an oxidizing agent, it is stronger than ozone and permanganate. In its
decomposition, two molecules of this compound yield two molecules of water and one oxygen, a reaction
catalyzed by catalase in the liver. FTP, name this chemical compound with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [or hydrogen dioxide; or H2O2 before mentioned]
The anion of this compound attacks a trialkylboron compound to produce boric acid and an antiMarkonikov alcohol in Brown hydroboration-oxidation. Alkyl derivatives of this compound also promote
anti-Markonikov addition of hydrobromic acid to alkenes because its weak single bond is a radical initiator.
Iron and this compound oxidize wastewater in Fenton's reagent. It spontaneously disproportionates because
its central atom's oxidation state is -1. Superoxide dismutases synthesize oxygen and this compound. In
response, catalase breaks down this compound in namesake organelles in the liver. For 10 points, name this
disinfectant with formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [or H2O2 before mention; prompt on "peroxide"]
Acetanilide is often added to this substance to stabilize it. This compound can be a byproduct of the
hydrolysis in ozonolysis. Along with an iron catalyst, it is present in Fenton's reagent. This inorganic
compound can be used in the Baeyer-Villiger reaction. It can be used as a rocket fuel, and it the liver it is
decomposed by catalase. This compound is a strong oxidizing agent and is useful in bleaching and killing
microbes. For 10 points, name this compound with chemical formula H2O2.
ANSWER: hydrogen peroxide [or dioxidane; accept H2O2 before read]
The chiral ligand DIPAMP was used with this reaction by William S. Knowles to create an industrial
process for the production of L-DOPA. Under conditions that would normally produce this reaction, benzyl
ethers are cleaved to produce toluene and an alcohol. The enthalpy change of benzene undergoing this
reaction can be used to estimate its resonance energy. The first efficient homogeneous catalyst used for this
reaction was Wilkinson's. Another catalyst used for this reaction allows the production of cis-alkenes from
alkynes and is Lindlar's catalyst. This reaction that can be catalyzed by Raney nickel when used to increase
the amount of saturated fats in vegetable oil. For 10 points, name this reaction that involves adding the
lightest element to a bond.
ANSWER: hydrogenation [or hydrogen addition before it is read; prompt on reduction or saturation]
A high-pressure reaction of this type carried out on bituminous coal is the Bergius process.
Ruthenium complexed with an enantiomer of BINAP is used for Noyori's asymmetric one. Other
organometallic catalysts of this process include Crabtree's and chlorotris(triphenylphosphine)
rhodium, which is Wilkinson's catalyst for accomplishing this. This can be done to benzene using Raney
nickel, and lead acetate is used to poison Lindlar's catalyst as it performs this operation gently on alkynes,
giving the cis product. The subject of many studies on small-molecule activation, for 10 points, name this
process, which involves adding the simplest diatomic gas to an unsaturated compound.
ANSWER: hydrogenation [prompt on reduction]
One reaction of this type reacts alpha, beta-unsaturated carbonyls with Hantzsch esters under amine
catalysis. Discoverers of an asymmetric version of this reaction used in the industrial synthesis of L-DOPA
from an achiral arene won part of the 2001 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. That asymmetric form of this reaction
can be catalyzed by ruthenium-BINAP complexes developed by Noyori. A square-planar
tris(triphenylphosphine) rhodium(I) complex was developed in 1966 to homogeneously catalyze this
reaction; that is Wilkinson's catalyst. When this reaction is incomplete, it can result in cis-trans
isomerization, and thus its "partial" form is responsible for the production of trans fats. For 10 points, name
this reduction that involves reacting a substrate with the namesake light gas.
ANSWER: hydrogenation [accept transfer hydrogenation before "incomplete" is read, and prompt on it afterwards; prompt on "reduction"]
One compound that performs this process consists of a metal bonded to pyridine, triscyclohexylphosphine, and 1,5-cyclooctadiene. Another compound contains a central ruthenium atom
bonded to one chlorine atom and three triphenylphosphine groups. Those compounds are catalysts
named after Crabtree and Wilkinson. This process can be performed using a mixture of solvated
sodium in (*) liquid ammonia to obtain a trans product or by using a compound that contains palladium
poisoned with quinilone. This process is often performed using Lindlar's catalyst or Raney nickel, and
typically involves the reduction of an alkyne or an alkene to an alkane. For 10 points, name this chemical
process which as its name suggest involves the addition of the lightest chemical element.
ANSWER: hydrogenation
A Monte Carlo simulation predicts that it prefers to migrate to the surface of a cluster of similar molecules
due to the mismatch of bond angles. The Zundel and Eigen structures for it show that it forms complexes
with two and three molecules respectively, and other structures are mostly unresolved due to its short
existence during autoionization. Arrhenius defined an acid as a substance which releases it in aqueous
solution, and it is the strongest acidic species that can exist in water. For 10 points, identify this ion, the
protonated form of water.
ANSWER: hydronium or H3O+ or oxonium
In a 2007 paper published in J. Phys. Chem., Markovitch and Agmon determined the bond energies of this
molecule, and two propositions for its solvation are the Zundel and Eigen cation models. Reacting imines
with these molecules yields ketones, and they are formed from the protonation of water, which suggests they
be called oxonium, though Arrhenius used another name when suggesting acids form them in solution. For
10 points, identify this cation, a water molecule possessing an added hydrogen, with formula H3O+.
ANSWER: hydronium ions [accept oxonium early; do not accept "hydride" or "hydrogen ions", as the first sentence rules this out]
This property of compounds is utilized in a form of chromatography developed by Shaltiel. That
technique uses sepharose beads and "salting out." Examples of amino acids with this distinction include
leucine, valine, and phenylalanine. This property is caused entropic driven interactions. Structures in the
center of a micelle have this distinction. Substances described by this are usually non-polar such as
hydrocarbons. For 10 points, name this property of not interacting with water to the point of seemingly
being repelled by it.
ANSWER: hydrophobic [accept word forms]
Two measures of this property are the logs of the distribution coefficient and the partition coefficient. Those
are the "log D" and "log P" measures, respectively. Substances with this property have very high contact
angles, which may cause them to exhibit the lotus effect. An interaction named for this property contributes
to the stability of protein tertiary structure, as amino acids with this property are entropically favored to
clump together. The fatty tails of phospholipids have this property, which is why they are found buried
within double membranes. For 10 points, name this property possessed by oils, fats, and other substances
that repel water.
ANSWER: hydrophobicity [Accept lipophilicity. Accept hydrophilicity before "contact angles."]
Strain 121 was discovered in one of these ecosystems. An organism that lives in these ecosystems uses
multiple forms of hemoglobin to shuttle gas to symbiotic bacteria colonizing the trophosome that takes up
its coelom instead of a gut. Martin et al. proposed that acetate production during serpentinization in these
ecosystems is driven by a natural form of chemiosmosis facilitated by the alkalinity of peridotites. The
"iron-sulfur world" theory is based on studies of these ecosystems, which are inhabited by scavenging
"dandelions" and Riftia tube worms. The Lost City field and Loki's Castle black smokers are examples of
these ecosystems, which are more volatile than cold seeps. For 10 points, name these chemosyntheticallydriven geothermal ecosystems on the ocean floor.
ANSWER: hydrothermal vents [or hydrothermal chimneys; accept black smokers until it is read; prompt on "vents"; prompt on "deep sea," "ocean," "deep sea communities," or "ocean communities"]
A bond between aluminum and three of these ions creates gibbsite, which is a primary component of
bauxite. Combining one atom of beryllium with two of this ion creates an amphoteric substance. Slaked
lime consists of calcium combined with two of these ions. The ionic compound of this substance with
sodium is a commonly used base in titrations and detergent manufacture. For 10 points, name this highly
basic ion, which combines with a hydrogen ion in order to form water.
ANSWER: hydroxide [or OH minus]
Two moles of this ion react with alumina in the Bayer process to refine bauxite, which consists of
many minerals that all contain this ion. Boric acid contains three of this ion coordinated to a boron
atom. Besides tellurium, radium, strontium, calcium, barium, ammonium, or alkali metal ions,
cations paired with this anion are insoluble. Alkali and alkali earth metal ions paired with this anion
form strong (*) bases. For 10 points, identify this ion symbolized OH-.
ANSWER: hydroxide ion [or OH-]
A compound containing three of this functional group is bonded to fatty acids in most fats. Fischer
projections show the stereochemistry of carbons bonded to this functional group. Two examples of this
functional group are found in antifreeze. Glucose contains five of them. The simplest compound with this
functional group can cause blindness if consumed and is called the "wood" type of this group. Compounds
with this functional group are synthesized in yeast fermentation. For 10 points, name this functional group
consisting of oxygen bonded to hydrogen, which is present in ethanol and other alcohols.
ANSWER: hydroxyl [or alcohol before mention]
In the much-maligned Cieplak model for addition to carbonyl groups, this phenomenon is responsible
for stabilizing the transition state, and this effect is responsible for beta-silicon-enhanced ionization.
A common demonstration of this effect is the increasing stretching frequency of the C-O double bond
in cyclopropanone versus cyclopentanone. Heteroatoms prefer the axial orientation in cyclohexane
systems due to the anomeric effect, which is sometimes called "negative" this. This effect is
responsible for forcing ethane into a (*) staggered conformation. This effect is the reason why the C-C
single bond in 1,3-butadiene is shorter than the bonds in butane and and why tertiary carbocations are more
stable than primary ones. For 10 points, name this effect in which sigma donate electron density to
neighboring empty p-orbitals.
ANSWER: hyperconjugation [accept anomeric effect before mention, prompt on "conjugation"]
Fernandez and Frenking used energy decomposition analysis to evaluate the strength of this effect in
substituted ethanes. The beta silicon effect is one variety of it. Conant and Kistiakowsky observed this
effect early on in unsaturated compounds such as 1,3-butadiene, while aside from bent bonds, this effect is
the most promising explanation for why some gauche conformations are more stable than anti ones. This
optimal configuration for this effect is when the participating orbitals are co-planar. This effect is widely
seen to stabilize carbocations, and is similar to resonance but does not feature a true bond.. For 10 points,
identify this effect in which electrons in a sigma bond interact with a p-orbital or pi-orbital to create a more
stable extended orbital.
ANSWER: hyperconjugation
One form of this substance is classified into VHDA, HDA, and LDA, according to its density. In earth
science, diamond dust is composed of this substance. Proteins known as AFPs bind to this substance,
allowing for the survival of many sympagic organisms. In planetary science, the name of this
substance is used as an alternate name for (*) volatiles. When lava erupts through this substance,
volcanoes known as tuyas are formed. Objects made of this substance can cause the depression of the
Earth's crust, leading to isostatic rebound when removed. Objects made of this substance can form valleys
named aretes and hills known as drumlins. For 10 points, name this substance which makes up glaciers and
the polar caps.
ANSWER: ice [prompt on water or equivalents]
The formation of this substance can yield metastable ikaite as a byproduct. The type of it that
encloses polynyas initially forms as frazil. Diatoms that inhabit platelet communities beneath this
substance preferentially produce chlorophyll c in response to low-light conditions. April 2012 data
from a neutrino detector (*) embedded in and named for this substance suggest that gamma-ray bursts
don't produce ultra-high energy cosmic rays. Prokaryotes living in close proximity to this substance are
often enriched in dimethyl sulfoxide and glycols. The thickness of one type of this substance is most
accurately measured with seafloor-moored upward-looking sonar. Delta-O-18 in vertical cores of this
substance is a proxy for atmospheric temperature. For 10 points, name this solid that is particularly
abundant in Antarctica.
ANSWER: ice [prompt on "water" or obvious equivalents; do not accept things made of ice like "glaciers" because that's not a substance; do not accept other solid forms of water like "snow"]
When found in the interstellar medium, this substance usually contains a methanol component and
is amorphous. Lake Vostok was found under a large mass of this substance. Large structures that
consist of this substance are created by calving, which can occur to (*) shelves of this substance. The
most common form of this substance has a hexagonal lattice due to hydrogen bonding, which makes it less
dense than its liquid form. For 10 points, identify this solid form of water.
ANSWER: ice [prompt on water; prompt on H2O]
The Zipper-Rift model is one explanation for the formation of this material during one part of the Earth's
history. Nye's equation gives the profile of aggregates of it. A tuya is a volcano underneath this. According
to one hypothesis, the largest amount of this substance present on Earth was during part of the
Neoproterozoic era. Since this has a high albedo, feedback loops involving this and reflected light are
important in climate models. Information about past climates can be gleaned from trapped gases and pollen
in cores of this. The last greatest extent of this material was about 20,000 years ago. For 10 points, name
this material that makes up glaciers.
ANSWER: ice [or frozen water]
The arrangment of atoms in this substance is governed by the Bernal-Fowler rules. This material
can be colored by ogives, and some examples of it exhibit moulins and bergschrunds. Firn is an
intermediate in the formation of the most common terrestrial form of it. A form of mechanical
weathering named for it occurs when soil heaves and creates lenses within rock pores, a process
known as (*) wedging. One method of reconstructing the climate record is to extract and analyze "cores"
of this substance. Strong upward air currents drive the repeated layering of this material onto condensation
nuclei in clouds before finally falling as hail. For 10 points, name this material which occurs in
temperatures below 32 degrees Fahrenheit and is less dense than its liquid form.
ANSWER: water ice [accept snow, frost, hail, glaciers, icebergs, etc before mention; prompt on "water"]
These geological periods are characterized by a higher than normal ratio of oxygen-18 to oxygen-16 in
ocean sediments. Variations in the Earth's movements that lead to a decrease in insolation were once
theorized to cause these periods, and those variations are Milankovitch cycles. We are still in the
Pleistocene one, and a "Little" one lasted from 1500 to 1850 AD. For 10 points, name these periods of time
characterized by glaciers marching forward and a reduction in global temperatures.
ANSWER: ice age [or glacial age or glacial period]
One theory of these phenomena was developed by Karl Schimper and Louis Agassiz, whose work
drew upon the ideas of Goethe and de Charpentier. The first of these events, probably triggered by
the Great Oxygenation Event, was known as the Huronian, while the most recent one created many
pluvial lakes. They can be identified through chemical proxies such as isotopes in sediment (*) cores,
and organisms that lived during these time periods include ground sloths, saber-tooth cats, and mastodons.
For ten points, identify these periods of long-term reduction in the Earth's surface temperature, which may
have resulted in a Snowball Earth.
ANSWER: ice ages (accept glacial ages and glaciations)
The Huronian one may have been triggered by the oxygen castrastrophe. The Driftless zone was
relatively unaffected the last time one of these occurred. Variation within one of these can be caused by
Milankovitch cycles. An event called the Wisconsinan occurred during the most recent one which is named
for the Pleistocene epoch. During these time periods, relatively drumlins and moraines were formed. For 10
points, name these periods of low global temperatures and increased glacial extent.
ANSWER: ice age [accept glacial age or glacial period before mentioned]
Louis Aggasiz (AH-gah-see) was the first to propose that these events had occurred. The ratio of
oxygen-18 to oxygen-16 is used to determine the timing of these events. Variations in the eccentricity, axial
tilt and precession of the Earth's orbit, known as Milankovitch (MIH-lank-UH-vitch) cycles, are thought to
contribute to the start of these periods. Though not a real one, the "Little" one of these occurred after the
Medieval Warm Period. For 10 points, name these periods of time when large parts of the Earth are
covered with ice sheets.
ANSWER: ice age
One of these occurrences is named after Karoo, South Africa. One problem relating to these entities
may be partially explained by the Dole Effect, which relates the ratio of oxygen-18 to oxygen-16
based on types of photosynthesis, which could partially explain the hundred-thousand-year problem
of them. Their frequency is predicted by Milankovitch cycles, and the most recent one contains divisions
named for Wisconsin and Greenland. The most recent one culminated in the LGM, and a so-called "little"
one occurred in between 1300 and 1800. For 10 points, name these periods in the earth's history when the
planet is covered with lots of frozen water.
ANSWER: ice ages [accept glacial ages or anything that suggests massive glaciations]
The entropy of this type of substance can be predicted by the Sackur-Tetrode equation, and their molecules
move randomly while observing Newton's laws of motion and not interacting. The Boltzmann constant is
the ratio of the namesake constant of this substance to Avogadro's number, while the law of these
substances can be refined by the Van der Waals equation. Modeled by the kinetic-molecular theory, their
namesake constant equals about 8.31 joules per mole-kelvin. Name these theoretical substances that obey
the laws of Gay-Lussac, Avogadro, Charles, and Boyle, as well as their namesake law, which states that P V
equals n R T.
ANSWER: ideal gases [or perfect gases; prompt on gases; accept modifier of "monatomic"]
One problem concerning the substances is solved using the Sackur-Tetrode equation and is presented in
the Gibbs paradox. The law named for these substances is not effective when dealing with high pressures or
low temperatures. That law is a combination of laws named for Charles and Boyle. These substances are
assumed to have no attractions between themselves, and have completely elastic collisions. For 10 points,
name this hypothetical form of a phase of matter, which is modeled by its same named equation of PV=nRT
("P-V equals N-R-T").
ANSWER: ideal gases [prompt on gases]
According to the equipartition theorem, a molecule from one of these has an average kinetic energy of three
halves times Boltzmann's constant times temperature. Two quantum mechanical equivalents of these are
named for Fermi and Bose, and they exhibit a compressibility factor of one. The product of the pressure
and volume of one is equal to the product of the number of moles, temperature, and a namesake constant.
For 10 points, name this theoretical mixture of point masses without intermolecular forces in a certain state
of matter.
ANSWER: Ideal Gas [prompt on Gas]
For an isothermal process, the change in entropy of one of these systems is proportional to the natural log of
the ratio of final to initial pressure. In these systems, the internal energy and enthalpy are solely functions of
temperature, and the heat capacity at constant pressure is equal to the heat capacity at constant volume plus
R. These systems have a fugacity coefficient of 1, a compressibility factor of 1, zero intermolecular
attractions and zero particle volume. In these systems, which tend to occur at high temperatures and low
pressures, Gay-Lussac's and Boyle's Laws are true. For 10 points, name this theoretical phase of matter
whose namesake law states that PV = nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gases [DO NOT PROMPT OR ACCEPT on "gases" alone. Prompt on "ideal system"]
The entropy of one of these is the subject of the Gibbs paradox, and their entropy is described by
the Sackur-Tetrode equation. Each of this kind of molecule has kinetic energy of "three halves times
k sub b" times the temperature, and they can modeled by the (*) Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. The
kinetic theory assumptions that govern them include point like masses and elastic collisions with no
intermolecular forces. For 10 points, name these gases whose associated law says that PV equals nRT.
ANSWER: monatomic ideal gases [prompt on gases]
The Peng-Robinson equation accounts for the acentric factor or non-sphericity of these substances that have
a compressibility factor of one. One model predicts that they have negative entropy as temperature
approaches zero; that is the Sackur-Tetrode equation for monatomic ones. Taking into account particle size
and intermolecular forces for an equation that describes these substances gives the more accurate Van der
Waals equation. Helium behaves most like these substances at high temperature and low pressure. They are
described by a combination of Charles', Gay-Lussac's, and Boyle's Laws. For 10 points, name these
substances whose namesake law states that P V equals n R T.
ANSWER: ideal gases [accept ideal gas law; prompt on gases; do not accept "real gases"]
The entropy of one of these may be found exactly by the Sackur-Tetrode equation, and Bose-Einstein
statistics describe one of these substances made up of photons. The free electron model analyzes the valence
electrons of a metal as though they behaved like one of these. Substances tend to behave more like these as
temperature increases and particle number decreases, thereby decreasing the relative size of intermolecular
forces. For 10 points, name these substances, which name an equation of state often given as PV = nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas [prompt on gas]
These substances have a compressibility factor of 1, and each of their particles has an average kinetic
energy of "three-halves k T." The Sackur-Tetrode equation gives the entropy of a monatomic one of these
substances, which undergo completely elastic collisions and have no intermolecular attractions between
particles. Two additional parameters allow the Van der Waals equation to more closely model real systems
than these substances' namesake equation, which is a combination of Gay-Lussac's, Charles', and Boyle's
laws. For 10 points, name these hypothetical substances whose namesake law states that "P V equals n R T."
ANSWER: ideal gases [accept ideal gas law]
One problem concerning the substances is solved using the Sackur-Tetrode equation and is presented in
the Gibbs paradox. The law named for these substances is not effective when dealing with high pressures or
low temperatures. That law is a combination of laws named for Charles and Boyle. These substances are
assumed to have no attractions between themselves, and have completely elastic collisions. For 10 points,
name this hypothetical form of a phase of matter, which is modeled by its same named equation of PV=nRT
("P-V equals N-R-T").
ANSWER: ideal gases [prompt on gases]
These substances have a coefficient of thermal expansion equal to one over temperature, and the
viscosity of these substances is proportional to quantity T over T sub zero to the three-halves
according to Sutherland's formula. A naive derivation of the entropy of these substances leads to a
divergence at absolute zero, though accounting for quantum mechanical effects allows for the
derivation of the (*) Sackur-Tetrode equation. These substances necessarily have a compressibility factor
equal to one. These substances consist of noninteracting substituents and have infinitely small particles. The
product of Boltzmann's constant and Avogadro's constant is equal to their namesake constant, which equals
approximately 8.31 in SI units. For 10 points, name these substances which are described by the law PV
equals nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas
The Drude model assumes that the electrons in a metal form one of these are non-interacting. The entropy
of one of these substances may be found via the Sackur-Tetrode equation, and their adiabatic index for a
monatomic one is five-thirds. Materials for which this theoretical model does not apply may be better
modeled by the van der Waals equation; these substances have pressures and volumes that vary in inverse
proportion. For 10 points, name these theoretical constructs, phases of matter where the particles occupy
zero volume and between which there are no intermolecular forces.
ANSWER: ideal gases
The entropy of one of these is the subject of the Gibbs paradox, and their entropy is described by
the Sackur-Tetrode equation. Each of this kind of molecule has kinetic energy of "three halves times
k sub b" times the temperature, and they can modeled by the (*) Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. The
kinetic theory assumptions that govern them include point like masses and elastic collisions with no
intermolecular forces. For 10 points, name these gases whose associated law says that PV equals nRT.
ANSWER: monatomic ideal gases [prompt on gases]
For a state variable, residuals are the difference between the variable's actual value and what the value
would be for one of these substances. Their internal energy is independent of pressure, and they have a
compressibility factor of 1. They have perfectly elastic collisions, negligible particle volume, and no
intermolecular attractive forces according to the kinetic theory, an assumption that requires low pressures
and high temperatures. For 10 points, name these substances that obey the equation PV = nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gases [prompt on gases]
One of these systems consisting entirely of photons enclosed in a perfectly absorptive container is a model
for blackbody radiation. One basic model of these things describes pressure as arising from elastic
collisions with their containers. A more-sophisticated law describing these things accounts for
compressibility and intermolecular forces using "a" and "b" parameters, and was developed by van der
Waals. A constant named for these things is about 8.31 in SI units and is denoted by the letter "R". For 10
points, name these gases which are described by their namesake law, which reads "P V equals n R T".
ANSWER: ideal gases [accept ideal after "gases" is read; prompt on "gas" or word forms]
A naive derivation of the entropy of these substances shows that it is negative infinity at absolute zero,
but that result can be corrected by deriving the Sackur-Tetrode equation. These substances have a
compressibility factor of one. The dimensionless heat capacity of these substances is equal to either 3/2 or
5/2 depending on whether they are monatomic or diatomic. These substances have very small molecules
and no attractive or repulsive forces between molecules, and generally follow the kinetic-molecular theory.
For 10 points, name these substances governed by a namesake equation of state written P V equals n R T.
ANSWER: ideal gas
At relativistic speeds, the one-half term in the formula for these substances's energy goes away,
leaving just three times T times the Boltzmann constant. When these substances are monatomic,
their heat capacity ratio "gamma" is five-thirds. An a over v-squared term is added to P in an
equation used when that is not the case. One equation governing them is derived by combining
Avogadro's, (*) Boyle's, and Charles's Laws. For 10 points, identify these theoretical substances which
satisfy the equation PV equals nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gases [prompt on gases]
This constant appears in the denominator of the variable that multiples the square of the quantity one minus
the ratio of solubility parameters to give the enthalpic component of the Flory-Huggins interaction
parameter. This constant equals the molar mass times the difference in specific heat for a compound at
constant pressure and that compound at constant volume. It also equals negative activation energy over
temperature, times the natural log of the ratio of the equilibrium constant to the pre-exponential factor, by
the Arrhenius equation. Boltzmann's constant equals this constant divided by Avogadro's number. For 10
points, name this constant that also equals the product of pressure and volume divided by the product of
moles and temperature by the law after which it is named.
ANSWER: ideal gas constant [or molar gas constant; or universal gas constant; prompt on R]
This quantity is equal to the molar mass times the difference in specific heat between a constant pressure
and constant volume process. The specific heat capacity of a crystal can be approximated by three times
this quantity, divided by the molar mass, according to the Dulong-Petit Law. It is equivalent to the product
of Avogadro's number and the Boltzmann constant, and equals 8.314 joules per mole Kelvin. It is
multiplied by temperature in the Arrhenius equation, the Nernst equation, and the equation that describes its
namesake fluids. For 10 points, what fundamental constant symbolized R is used to unify such equations as
Charles' Law, Gay-Lussac's Law, and Boyle's Law?
ANSWER: ideal gas constant [or universal gas constant; prompt on R before mentioned]
The molar heat capacity for a metal is roughly equal to three times this quantity, according to the Law of
Dulong and Petit. Like entropy, it is most often expressed in joules per mole Kelvin. The product of this
quantity and temperature also appears in the Nernst equation. In the Arrhenius equation, the activation
energy divides both this quantity and temperature. It is equal to the product of Boltzmann's constant and
Avogadro's number. For 10 points, give this constant equal to about 8.31 joules per mole Kelvin, usually
symbolized R.
ANSWER: ideal gas constant [or molar gas constant; or universal gas constant; accept R before it is read]
According to the equipartition theorem, for one mole of a substance with one degree of freedom,
one-half temperature times this quantity gives the average kinetic energy. This quantity is equal to
the product of Avogadro's (ah-voh-GAH-droh) number and the (*) Boltzmann constant. The product
of pressure and volume equals the product of the number of moles, temperature, and this constant in a
certain law. For 10 points, name this constant symbolized R appearing in a law describing a type of "ideal"
substance.
ANSWER: ideal gas constant [accept R before mention]
This and the Faraday constant are the only two constants appearing in the Nernst equation, and in
the Arrhenius equation, e is taken to the power of negative activation energy divided by the product
of temperature and this constant. It is equal to (*) Boltzmann's constant multiplied by Avogadro's
number. For 10 points, name this constant equal to approximately 8.3 joules per mole Kelvin and which
appears with pressure, volume, temperature, and number of moles in a law modeling the "ideal" variety of
its namesake state of matter.
ANSWER: universal or ideal gas constant
Deviations from this law tend to zero at a temperature named for Boyle, and one form of this law relates
pressure to the atomic mass constant and mass density. First stated by Emile Clapeyron in 1834, August
Kronig and Rudolf Clausius derived this law by assuming that molecules are point masses undergoing only
elastic collisions, and the van der Waals law provides a more general version of this law by correcting for
these assumptions. For 10 points, identify this equation of state for a hypothetical one of the namesake type
of gas, in which P V equals n R T.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
One derivation of this law equates the dot product of the position and force vectors to the surface integral of
the force exerted by the walls of a container; that method uses statistical mechanics. Adding the terms
lowercase a and b to this law to account for the forces between particles and the space they fill gives the (*)
Van der Waals equation. It can be rearranged to give density and the molar mass. When the kinetic
molecular theory's assumptions fail at low temperature and high pressure, this law fails as well. Charles's
and Boyle's Laws are included within, for 10 points, what law usually stated P V equals n R T?
ANSWER: ideal gas law
The generalized form of this equation includes a factor used to calculate the attraction between two
particles and the volume excluded between them. The constant involved is identical to Boltzmann's
constant, and it is derived from Boyle's and Charles's Law. For ten points name this chemical equation
that relates the product of pressure and volume with the product of the mole count, namesake constant and
temperature of a particular phase of matter.
ANSWER: ideal gas law or universal gas law
The virial equation expands on this equation by using a power series. An improvement on this
equation takes into account the size of particles and intermolecular forces. That modification has
coefficients labeled a and b that are specific to each compound. This equation's namesake constant
can be written as (*) 8.314 joules per moles Kelvin. Generalized by the van der Waals equation, this
equation can be derived from combining Boyle's, Charles', and Avogadro's laws. For 10 points, name this
law that is usually stated as PV equals nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
The ratio between the volume of these entities and the volume of their counterparts defines the
compressibility factor, and the Sackur-Tetrode equation solves for the entropy of a specific type of these
substances. A molecule of these substances has an average kinetic energy of three-halves times Boltzmann's
constant times the absolute temperature. Johannes van der Waals generalized these substances' namesake
equation by accounting for differences in pressure and volume; that law can be written as "PV equals nRT."
For 10 points, name these theoretical substances that consist of randomly moving point particles unaffected
by intermolecular forces.
ANSWER: ideal gases [prompt on "gases"]
The constant in this equation is equal to Avogadro's number times Boltzmann's constant. A corrected
form of this law has terms to account for intermolecular attraction and the volumes of particles. That law
with parameters called a and b is named for van der Waals. This law is a combination of Gay-Lussac's
Law, Charles's Law, and Boyle's Law. For 10 points, name this law which sets PV equal to NRT, a law
governing the least dense form of matter.
ANSWER: ideal gas law [prompt on partial answer]
The derivation of this law assumes that when a particle hits a wall, the change in momentum equals two
times the particle's mass times its horizontal velocity; this equation thus assumes that molecules are hard
spheres that undergo perfectly elastic collisions. This relation can be modified by adding constants that
account for molecular volume and intermolecular forces as seen in Van der Waals law. Created by
combining Avogadro's, Charles' and Boyle's laws is, for 10 points, what chemical law commonly stated
as PV = nRT?
ANSWER: ideal gas law
The Soave equation adds an acentric factor to this statement, and the virial equation measures deviations
from this law using a compressibility factor. This law derived by Benoit Clapeyron can account for density
in its "dirty mop" form, and when A and B terms are added to account for the volume and interactions
between particles, it is called van der Waals equation. Containing a namesake constant that is Boltzmann's
constant times Avogadro's number is, for 10 points, what law usually stated as PV equals nRT?
ANSWER: Ideal Gas Law
The virial ("VEER"-ee-uhl) equation includes a compression factor that measures deviations
from this law. Another modification of this law includes coefficients accounting for molecule's size
and interactions, and was developed by Johannes van der Waals ("WALLS"). It was originally
stated as a combination of (*) Boyle's Law and Charles's Law. The constant in this equation is usually
expressed in terms of joules per Kelvin per mole. For 10 points, name this equation of state that is usually
written as P V equals n R T.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
In the classical derivation of this law, the change of momentum of one molecule is considered as it hits a
wall, as this is used to calculate pressure as a bulk property. The compression factor and the virial equation
are two modifications made to better model properties of the entities that are modeled by the simple form of
this equation of state. A modification made to this equation involving "a" and "b" parameters dependant on
molecular size is the van der Waals equation for real gases. For ten points, name this equation of state of
gases, which relates pressure, volume, temperature, and number of moles with the gas constant R in the
equation PV = nRT.
ANSWER: Ideal Gas Law
This law was first derived by Benoit Clapeyron, and its namesake constant is equal to the
Boltzmann constant multiplied by Avogadro's number, which equals approximately 8.3 joules per
mole Kelvin. A modification of this law takes into account attractive forces and particle volume and
is named for (*) van der Waals. It can be thought of as a combination of Avogadro's, Boyle's, and Charles's
laws. For 10 points, name this equation of state approximating behavior of its namesake state of matter,
often represented as PV equals nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
One equation that improves upon this law exhibits oscillatory behavior that is corrected by Maxwell's
equal area rule. This law can be derived by assuming that kinetic energy is equal to one half Boltzmann's
constant times temperature and by assuming that collisions off a wall are perfectly elastic. It can be
rewritten to include density if one of the terms is substituted with total number of moles divided by molar
mass. It is corrected by the Van der Waals equations and assumes that gases have negligible volume and
zero interaction with one another. For 10 points, name this gas law typically written as PV=nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
The Drude [DROO-duh] and free electron models model the behavior of electrons as if they were
one of these substances. The internal energy of one of these substances is only dependent on
temperature, according to Joule's ["jewel's"] second law. These substances have a compressibility
factor of one, and monatomic [mahn-uh-TAH-mik] ones have a heat capacity of 3/2 ["three halves"]
at constant volume. Substances tend to act more like these with higher temperature and lower
pressure, when intermolecular forces are weaker. The namesake constant of these substances is
roughly 8.314 joules per mole-kelvin. Identify these substances whose namesake equation states that
PV = nRT, and which are used to model a certain phase of matter.
ANSWER: ideal gases [prompt on gases]
The Redlich-Kwong equation is derived from this statement, which be modified using the acentric and
compressibility factors. One modification of this statement uses a and b terms to represent intermolecular
forces and volume. That modification of this law is called Van der Waal's equation. This equation of state
combines Boyle's and Charles's Laws. For 10 points, name this law usually stated pV equals nRT that
governs a namesake state of matter.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
An alternative method of stating this law is that its namesake substances must have a compressibility factor
of unity. Deviations from it tend to zero at a temperature named for Boyle, at which the first order
approximation to the virial equation is equivalent to this statement. It assumes that particles of the namesake
substances have zero volume, participate in perfectly elastic collisions, and have no intermolecular
attractions; those assumptions were first corrected for by the van der Waals equation of state. For 10 points,
identify this law which states that certain substances can be described by the equation of state PV=nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
Emile Clapeyron was the first to develop this law. One form of this law contains variables that describe the
amount of attraction between molecules and the volume that they take up. Its constant can be divided by
Avogadro's number to obtain Boltzmann's constant. The van der Waals equation is a generalization of it,
while it is a combination of Avogadro's law, Charles' law, and Boyle's law. For 10 points, identify this
ubiquitous law that can be used to find the pressure, volume, temperature, and/or the amount of a certain
phase of matter.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
One equation that modifies this law contains variables labeled "a" and "b" that take into account particle
interactions. It can be rewritten to equate pressure to density divided by molar mass. This law is not
accurate at low temperatures and high pressures or during phase transitions. It can be replaced with the
related, and somewhat more accurate, van der Waals (van dur VALZ) law. This law is a combination of
Boyle's, Charles's, and Avogadro's (ah-vo-GOD-roz) laws. For 10 points, name this law, which is usually
written as "PV equals nRT."
ANSWER: the ideal gas law
The acentric and compressibility factors appear in one modification of this result, which can be derived
using the divergence and equipartition theorems. A refinement of this law uses the empirical values a and b
to account for the volume of particles, and is named for the discoverer of some intermolecular interactions,
the van der Waals equation. It is a combination of Avogadro's law, Gay-Lussac's law, Charles' law, and
Boyle's law, and is derived via the kinetic theory of its namesake phase of matter. For 10 points, name this
law usually stated as PV = nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
When one side of this equation is divided by the other, a parameter symbolized Z , called the
compressibility factor, is obtained. One correction to this equation uses parameters symbolized a and b,
representing molecular volume and attractive forces. The virial equation is a more useful correction to this
equation. A restatement of this equation uses particle number times Boltzmann's constant, rather than
number of moles times this law's namesake constant. This law is a combination of Guy-Lussac's, Charles',
and Boyle's Law. For 10 points, name this law often stated "PV = nRT".
ANSWER: ideal gas law
The equipartition theorem and Gauss' divergence theorem can be used to prove a form of this law using
particle number multiplied by Boltzmann's constant. This law applies best at high temperatures and low
pressures. It can be derived by synthesizing the laws of Avogadro, Boyle, and Charles, and applying a
namesake constant equal to about 8.31 joules per Kelvin mole. For 10 points, name this equation of state,
often written as "PV equals nRT", which applies to a certain phase of matter.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
A deviation from this equation leads to a compressibility factor that can be calculated by dividing the left
side of this equation by its right side. This law assumes negligible molecule size and elastic collisions and is
thus most applicable at high temperature and low pressure conditions and when its subject is monatomic,
and the van der Waals equation modifies this law by including terms for the volume of particles and the
intermolecular attractive forces. For 10 points, name this law which combines Boyle's and Charles' laws,
which states that pV=nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas law [prompt on Boyle's law or Charles' law before mentioned]
This equation can be simplified into certain processes such as the isentropic process where entropy is
constant or the isobaric process where pressure is constant. Since it neglects molecular size and
intermolecular attractions, it works best on gases that are monatomic at high temperatures and low
pressures. This law states that the product of pressure and volume is equal to the product of the amount of
substance, its constant, and its absolute temperature. FTP name this law of gases that is a combination of
both Boyle's and Charles's gas laws.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
Deviations from this equation can be found by plotting the compressibility factor against pressure;
the virial expansion is often used to measure those deviations. The Peng-Robinson equation is a good
alternative to this equation at low pressures and the Redlich-Kwong equation is a better alternative
at high pressures. A more common alternative is an equation that introduces parameters (*) a and b,
the van der Waals equation. For 10 points, name this equation of state describing the behavior of a
sufficiently dilute gas, which states that PV equals nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas equation or law
This law gains an acentric factor in the Soave equation, which is central to the Peng-Robinson
modification of it. At higher densities, the virial expansion gives corrections to this law. Redlich and
Kwong modified this law, which was first improved by the van der Waals equation. It is most accurate
when temperatures are high and pressure is low. For 10 points, name this law derived from the laws of
Charles and Boyle, which states that PV equals nRT.
ANSWER: ideal gas law [accept Peng-Robinson equation/law before read; accept Redlich-Kwong equation/law before read; accept van der Waals equation/law before read]
The Gibbs paradox follows from this equation by failing to treat entropy as an extensive variable,
and this equation implies that internal energy is independent of volume. One modification includes a
term for molecular size and interactions, while a common approximation using this equation gives a
volume of (*) twenty two point four liters. The namesake constant of proportionality is equal to the product
of Avogadro's number and Boltzman's constant. Applying in the limit of high temperature and low
pressure, for 10 points, name this equation that states P V equals N R T and describes a particular state of
matter.
ANSWER: Ideal Gas Law
This statement implies that the compressibility factor is always equal to one, and one term in an equation
derived from it squares the term n over V. That modification to this law introduces the variables a and b,
and this statement is dependent on the assumptions that particles do not take up space and that all collisions
between molecules are perfectly elastic. Intermolecular forces are accounted for in a modification of this
equation by van der Waals. For 10 points, name this equation of state that combines Boyle's, Charles', and
Avogadro's laws, often written as P V equals n R T.
ANSWER: Ideal Gas Law
Hydrogen bonding in gaseous molecules of formic acid allow it to violate this rule. In most instances, at
non-relativistic speeds the Maxwell-Boltzmann Distribution applies to the materials governed by this law. A
pair of factors representing molecular interaction was added to a modification of this equation by van der
Waals. This equation is a combination of the equations of Charles, Boyle, and Gay-Lussac. For 10 points,
name this equation that describes a fluid by claiming that pressure multiplied by volume is equal to
temperature times the number of moles times a namesake constant symbolized R.
ANSWER: ideal gas law
A theoretical proof of this equation can be made by assuming that the molecules involved are point masses
without volume which collide with each other while still conserving linear momentum and kinetic energy.
An alternative form of this equation involves substituting the product of Boltzmann's constant and the
actual number of molecules for the product of the number of moles and the universal gas constant. Written
as PV=nRT, this is, FTP, what law derived from Avogadro's law and the Combined Gas Law?
ANSWER: Ideal Gas Law prompt on Ideal
Cumulate rocks are a subtype of this kind of rock. This is the type of rock in which "flow banding" may be
observed. Silica content can classify these rocks into felsic, mafic, and ultramafic varieties. Rhyolite,
diorite, and gabbro all belong to this group. Varieties of this most abundant type of rock found in the
Earth's crust are classified as either intrusive or extrusive depending on whether they were formed below or
on the surface. For 10 points, name these rocks that form from cooling magma or lava, contrasted with
sedimentary and metamorphic rocks.
ANSWER: igneous rocks
A fibrous of this rock type is known as Pele's hair, while a member of this rock type forms pillows near
mid-ocean ridges. Dikes of this rock type can intrude into existing rock, and obsidian is an example of an
extrusive type of this rock. For 15 points, name this rock type which forms from cooled magma, including
basalt and granite.
ANSWER: igneous
These entities are considered phaneritic if they are produced slowly or aphantic if they are more
rapid, a combination of the both would be porphyritic. The composition of these materials leads to
them being classified as (*) felsic or mafic, and all batholiths are composed of them. This rock type
includes andesite and periodite, as well as the material that makes up much of the oceanic crust. For 10
points, rhyolite, gabbro, basalt, granite are what types of rocks, whose name suggest their origin by lava or
magma?
ANSWER: igneous rocks
In order to explain why, in these rocks, certain groups of minerals were rarely found together, Bowen's
reaction series was developed. This class of rock is often grouped based on textures like "aphanitic" or
"porphyritic," or chemically as being mafic or felsic. This class is typically divided into plutonic, or
intrusive, and volcanic, or extrusive. FTP, identify this large class of rocks, including rhyolite, basalt,
granite, and obsidian, which forms when magma or lava cools and crystallizes and which is contrasted with
metamorphic and sedimentary.
ANSWER: Igneous Rock
Conspicuous concentrations of minerals much larger than the grain size in this type of rock are called
phenocrysts. Colonnades and entablatures are two structures formed by this type of rock when it
exhibits fractures along a vertical plane, giving a hexagonal shape, which is known as columnar
jointing and exhibited by Devil's Tower and the Giant's Causeway. Rheomorphism is responsible for
layers in this type of rock that differ in composition, texture, or geochemical make-up, which are
called (*) "flow bands". The formation of large provinces of it is associated with extinction events. It can
form laccoliths, batholiths, and plutons. This type of rock can be extrusive or intrusive, and its most
common types are granite and basalt. For 10 points, name this type of rock formed by the cooling of magma
or lava.
ANSWER: igneous rocks [anti-prompt on "basalt"]
The grains of this kind of rock are classified based on whether they are phaneritic (fan-er-it-ick) or
aphaneritic (eh-fan-er-it-ick) based on crystal size and visibility. These rocks are classified based on their
silicon content as felsic or mafic. Formations with large amounts of exposed rock of this type are called
batholiths, and usually form when sedimentary rocks have eroded from around instrusive formations. Often
expelled via pyroclastic flow, the most notable rocks of this kind are granite and basalt. For 10 points, name
this type of rock made from cooled magma.
ANSWER: igneous rock
Hypabyssal types of these rocks form discordant dikes, while plutonic types form cordant laccoliths. Mafic
types of these rocks, which contain relatively heavier elements and are exemplified by peridotite, are
contrasted with their felsic types including rhyolite. One of these rocks that cools without forming crystals,
obsidian, is an extrusive type of these rocks as is basalt, while granite is an extrusive one of these. For 10
points, name this type of rocks formed from magma, contrasted with sedimentary and metamorphic rocks.
ANSWER: igneous rocks
These entities are considered phaneritic if they are produced slowly or aphantic if they are more
rapid, a combination of the both would be porphyritic. The composition of these materials leads to
them being classified as (*) felsic or mafic, and all batholiths are composed of them. This rock type
includes andesite and periodite, as well as the material that makes up much of the oceanic crust. For 10
points, rhyolite, gabbro, basalt, granite are what types of rocks, whose name suggest their origin by lava or
magma?
ANSWER: igneous rocks
A phenocryst is a noticeable crystal much larger than the grains found in the porphyritic variety of these
rocks, which can be classified as aphanitic or phaneritic based on grain size. Komatiite is an example of an
ultramafic kind of this rock, and they can also be classified as felsic based on silica, magnesium, and iron
content. Diorite, an example of this kind of rock, is chemically equivalent to andesite, an extrusive rock.
Plutons consist of this kind of rock, examples of which include batholiths and laccoliths. One kind of this
rock is formed at divergent plate boundaries; that is basalt. For ten points, name this class of rocks which
forms from cooling magma or lava.
ANSWER: igneous
In the 1990s, Eric Middlemost argued that this group could best be classified using chemical means,
showing the importance of the TAS diagram, though the QAPF diagram can be used if one has more
compositional information. Miariolitic cavities can form in a type known as pegmatite, and the
textures of these rocks are usually either (*) phaneritic or aphanitic, depending whether they are formed
intrusively below the crust or extrusively above it. Mafic rocks are a dark green subset of this class,
examples of which include basalt and granite. For 10 points, name these types of rocks created from
volcanic action, which are neither metamorphic nor sedimentary.
ANSWER: igneous rocks
These entities can be grouped with the TAS classification system based on their alkali composition,
and if their individual grains are distinguishable, they are phaneritic. The hypabyssal type of these
rocks is formed between a pluton. Their silicon content classifies them as either (*) mafic or felsic, and
a large clump of them known as basoliths can be surrounded by an intrusive mass, exemplified by Devil's
Tower. These rocks form crystals because of their slow cooling and some examples are basalt and granite.
For 10 points, name these rocks formed from cooled magma.
ANSWER: Igneous rocks [prompt on rocks until mentioned]
Rare examples of this rock type include komatiites and carbonatites. Observation of fabrics in rocks of this
type led to the development of Bowen's Reaction Series. Porphyritic, graphic, or trachytic textures are
common to rocks of this type, which are classified as felsic when rich in quartzes or feldspars. They are
classified as intrusive when they solidify at depth and extrusive when they are formed on the surface. For 10
points, name this rock type, an example of which is granite, encompassing rocks that crystallize from
magma or lava.
ANSWER: igneous rock
The TAS Classification names these objects, which often form through the Tholeiitic or calc-alkaline series.
Vine, Matthews, and Morley found patterns in one type of these, whose namesake "large provinces" are
found in places including the Siberian Traps and Deccan Traps. Including rocks such as andesite and
peridotite, this type of rock makes up batholiths and laccoliths, and can be classified based on metal and
silicon content as felsic or mafic. Based on crystal size they are phaneritic or aphanitic and based on
formation they are intrusive or extrusive. For 10 points, name this type of rock, examples of which include
granite and basalt, formed from cooled magma.
ANSWER: igneous rock [Prompt on a specific igneous rock, e.g. "granite" or "basalt." Prompt on "Rock."]
In the Povarov reaction, an aromatic one of these compounds reacts with an electron-rich alkenol molecule
in order to form a quinoline. Tetrahydropyrines can be formed from a molecule of this type and a diene in
the Aza modification of the Diels-Alder reaction. When used in an addition reaction with a secondary
amine, an ionic salt of this type of compound is formed and can further react to create a Mannich base. They
can be formed from the use of hydrozoic acid and alkenes in one version of the Schmidt reaction. Including
such types as Schiff bases and azomethines, for 10 points, identify these functional groups that are
characterized by a carbon-nitrogen double bond.
ANSWER: imines
Cyclic ones are formed in the Bischler-Napieralski reaction, which incorporates POCl , also essential to a
3
formylation reaction using these intermediates named for Vilsmeyer. One is formed in the first step of the
Ugi reaction, and they can be formed from tertiary alcohols or alkenes in the Schmidt Reaction. They are
well known intermediates in the Fischer indole synthesis, while those stabilized by aryl groups can act as
bases named for Schiff. A protonated one reacts with cyanide to produce an amino acid in the Strecker
synthesis. This functional group may be reduced under gentle conditions like sodium cyanoborohydride. For
10 points, name this functional group, characterized by its carbon-nitrogen double bond.
ANSWER: imine
The Parkes process relies on this property to extract silver from lead, and iron sulfide is the main
component of this type of magma. This property of the liquid phase of heteroazeotropes (HEH-tuh-roh-AYzee-oh-trohps) allows for their continuous distillation, and partition coefficients in chromatography are
determined by this property of octanol. This property also prevents the formation of a copper-cobalt alloy.
In general, mixtures with this property have very large, positive enthalpies of solution, while emulsifiers like
lecithin (LEH-sih-thin) help overcome this property in foods such as salad dressing. Most obvious in a
mixture of oil and water, identify this physical property in which two liquids are unable to dissolve in one
another.
ANSWER: immiscibility [accept word forms; prompt on insolubility or word forms thereof; do not accept "miscibility"]
Dallas Abbott's discovery of the Burckle structure led to the hypothesis that one of these phenomena
indirectly created the Fernambosy (fer-nam-BOE-see) Chevron on Madagascar. These phenomena are
responsible for the production of tektites. The moon's formation was probably a result of one of these
phenomena. An iridium-rich layer of soil gave rise to the hypothesis that one of these caused the K-T
extinction. For 10 points, name these events, one of which is thought to have caused the extinction of the
dinosaurs.
ANSWER: meteorite impact events [or meteorite impacts; accept any answer that indicates that a body is colliding with the Earth; accept meteor, meteoroid, comet, asteroid, bolide and other synonyms in place of meteorite or body]
Coesite eclogites in the place where this event occurred have been attributed to Ypresian uplift.
Simulation of the Euler poles involved in this event suggest that the forces involved were on the order
of teranewtons per meter. One theory states that the loss of 2000 kilometers of crust in this event was
initially compensated by the thickening of crust in a region bounded by the ATF and the main
boundary fault. Evidence that this event probably did not occur before the early Eocene is based on
the sudden appearance of emplacements of Spontang ophiolites in one participant in this event.
Other evidence that this event began about 50 million years ago is derived from the presence of (*)
zooplankton-containing chert in the Yarlung-Tsangpo suture. Resulting in the closure of the Neotethys
Ocean, for 10 points, name this tectonic event that produced the Himalayas.
ANSWER: the India-Asia collision [accept anything that mentions an interaction between the Indian tectonic plate and the Eur-Asian tectonic plate; prompt on "Himalayan orogeny" or anything that mentions the Himalayas or Tibet being formed]
One of these compounds synthesized from phenol and phthalic anhydride was once used as a laxative,
but is now known to be a carcinogen. Cresol Red and bromythol blue are examples of these compounds,
which demonstrate the endpoint of a titration. Better-known ones include red cabbage and a substance
which turns pink in basic solution, phenolphthalein. For 10 points, name these compounds which
distinguish between acids and bases.
ANSWER: pH indicators
Aurin is an example of this class of compounds that dissolves in alcohol, while anthocyanins are common
ones isolated from plant cell vacuoles. Hydrion papers serve this role, functioning for every value of the
property they measure, and alizarin forms an azo version of these entities. They function because of the
change in chemical properties at their equivalence points, and many different kinds such as methyl red and
bromothymol blue combine in the universal one of these. For 10 points, give this name for chemicals that
change color depending on the pH, examples of which include litmus paper and phenolphthalein.
ANSWER: pH or acid-base indicators
One natural variety of this compound is found in blueberries, and is called anthocyanin
(AN-tho-SYE-uh-nin). Another example of this compound is named for its similarity in color to the
mineral malachite (MAL-uh-kite). Another one of these compounds is used as a color marker in gel
electrophoresis, while another can turn fuchsia when it is used. Bromophenol (BRO-me-FEE-nol) blue and
phenolphthalein (FEE-nol-THAY-leen) are examples of, for 10 points, what type of compound whose color
changes are used to determine the pH of a substance?
ANSWER: pH indicators
A form of these substances that marks a shift to a specific electric potential is known as the redox type.
The most notable type of these substances includes chemicals like cresol (KREE-sol) red and bromothymol
(BRO-mo-THY-moll) blue and demonstrates the endpoint of an acid-base titration. For 10 points, name
these chemicals that reversibly change color at a certain chemical point and include acid-base examples like
phenolphthalein (FEE-nolf-THALE-een).
ANSWER: indicator [or pH indicator; or acid-base indicator]
One of these molecules is synthesized by the addition of two phenols to an acid anhydride that is produced
using a vanadium catalyst. A similar one has the highest known value of Kreft's index and is used in gel
electrophoresis. They include many triarylmethane dyes, including one whose several forms have an
isosbestic point at around 515 nanometers, as well as anthocyanins. A "universal" one is typically a mix of
many of them with different transition ranges. Cresol purple is the precursor to another one, bromocresol
green. For 10 points, name these compounds that change color depending on the pH of a solution, including
phenolphthalein and litmus.
ANSWER: pH indicator [prompt on dye before "universal"]
One type of motion at this location is called Slichter modes, and the existence of this location was first
proposed by Inge Lehmann. The rotation of this region and its interaction with a region above it give rise to
the dynamo theory, the idea that this region is responsible for the Earth's magnetic field, and this region is
theorized to be solid despite its high temperature, because of the high pressure here. For 10 points, identify
this deepest region of the Earth, located within a similarly-named "outer" region.
ANSWER: inner core [prompt on core]
This region's upper boundary is the innermost of two named for Lehmann, at which P-waves
turn into S-waves that can travel through this region, but not the one above it. This area was
originally thought to be a single homogenous crystal, though it is now known to not even be
symmetric. This region is estimated to be (*) 6200 Kelvin, about as hot as the surface of the Sun. For 10
points, identify this layer, a solid ball of iron and nickel found at the very center of the Earth.
ANSWER: inner core [prompt on partial answer]
The growth of this region is hypothesized to release heat to its neighboring region and contribute to the
dynamo effect. The boundary dividing this region from that neighbor is called the Lehmann discontinuity.
This region is thought to be younger than the Earth and consists mainly of iron and nickel crystals under
high pressure. For 10 points, name this layer of the earth surrounded by a liquid "outer" region.
ANSWER: inner core [do not accept or prompt on "core"]
The discontinuity between this region and the one above it is sometimes named for Bullen. This region
was discovered after seismic waves from a New Zealand earthquake were studied by Inge Lehmann. Since
this region helps drive convection in the layer above it, it is partly responsible for the dynamo effect, by
which the Earth's magnetic field is produced. For 10 points, name this layer of the earth mostly composed
of a solid iron and nickel alloy and surrounded by a liquid, "outer" counterpart.
ANSWER: inner core [prompt on core]
The boundary between this region and the one above it can be home to trapped spheroidal modes known as
Stoneley modes. The existence of PKJKP waves traversing this region has not been observed, but highfrequency PKiKP waves refracted through this region can be used to constrain the properties of its
boundary. The boundary of this region sees a sharp increase in P-wave velocity over a distance of about 5
kilometers, and this region has a high Poisson ratio of about 0.45. The area between this region and the
region directly above it is known as the "mushy zone", and the presence of this region was inferred from the
presence of a "shadow" by Inge Lehman. This region of the earth has a radius of about 1215 kilometers,
which is growing as the Earth cools and more material accretes in this region. For 10 points, identify this
solid region of iron and nickel in the center of the earth.
ANSWER: inner core [prompt on core; accept outer core before "PKiKP"]
The three translational oscillations of this region are called the Slichter triplet. The anisotropy of this region
was studied using PKIKP travel times. Discovered by Inge Lehmann, this region has a radius of about 1200
kilometers and a temperature comparable to the Sun's surface. This region is located below the layer that is
responsible for Earth's magnetic field. This solid layer primarily consists of a nickel-iron alloy. For 10
points, name this layer that is surrounded by the outer core.
ANSWER: inner core [prompt on "core"]
Marvin Herndon proposes that this entity contains a large amount of uranium sulfide acting as a breeder
reactor. Verhoogen proposed that this entity's growth releases heat to a surrounding body that creates
Earth's magnetic field via dynamo effects. Gubbins and Loper attribute that phenomenon to gravitational
convection in that surrounding layer. This entity has been estimated to rotate a degree per year faster or
slower than the earth at large. Discovered in 1936 by Inge Lehmann, for 10 points, name this solid nickeliron ball with temperature estimated to be around 5700K, younger than the earth as it, as J. A. Jacobs
predicted, is freezing out of the liquid layer outside it.
ANSWER: inner core
A model for one type of this phenomenon ensemble averages over all possible angles of orientation, and A
over distance to the twelfth minus B over distance to the sixth gives its potential. A term for polarizability is
introduced in an equation for the Debye type of this phenomenon. Moles squared over volume squared
times a corrects for this in the Van der Waals equation. This type of interaction may also result in a partial
charge on a hydrogen atom and a dipole moment, and noble gases attract can attract one another by the
London dispersion type. For 10 points, identify these interactions, including Van der Waals forces and
hydrogen bonds, which occur between molecules.
ANSWER: intermolecular forces [accept IMF, accept Debye force before mention; prompt on partial]
In a Fermi gas, this quantity is proportional to h-bar over 2 m times the number of particles raised to the
five-thirds power, over the volume raised to the two-thirds power. For a system that obeys the van der
Waals equation of state, this quantity contains an additive factor of the particle number squared times the a
constant over volume. For an arbitrary system, this quantity is given by the derivative with respect to the
thermodynamic beta of the partition function, and the Helmholtz free energy is obtained by subtracting
temperature times entropy from the average value of this quantity. For a closed system the change in this
quantity is given by the work done by the system plus the heat, and for an ideal gas it is given by the threehalves times the number of particles times Boltzmann's constant times temperature. For 10 points, identify
this quantity which represents the total amount of kinetic and potential energy in a gas.
ANSWER: internal energy [prompt on partial answer]
This quantity is divided by particle number and raised to the three-haves power in one l-n term of
the Sackur-Tetrode equation. The derivative of the partition function with respect to the
thermodynamic beta gives this quantity. For an ideal gas, the derivative of this quantity with respect
to entropy gives temperature, and this quantity is three-halves times particle number times
Boltzmann's constant times temperature. This quantity minus temperature times entropy gives the
(*) Helmholtz free energy. The change in this quantity is equal to the work done on the system plus the heat
added according to the first law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized U, which
can also be expressed as the sum of kinetic and potential terms for a gas.
ANSWER: internal energy [or U before mention; prompt on energy or total energy]'
The width of this approximately two-dimensional region varies with the Madden-Julian Oscillation,
in which also vary the strength of convection and the rate of cyclogenesis here. The INDOEX
experiment found that aerosol optical depth was minimized above this region. This region tends to be
"hemmed in" by subtropical highs at the descending branches of Hadley cells, which block it from
reaching cool deserts along western coastlines such as the Atacama and Sonoran. The axis of this
region is generally found between three and ten degrees north latitude because this region is formed
by the (*) confluence of the trade winds. FTP, name this region known for strong convection and
unpredictable rainfall, an area originally known by sailors for its frequent absence of strong winds.
ANSWER: intertropical convergence zone [or equatorial convergence zone or equatorial trough or intertropical front or doldrums]
A symporter that takes up sodium and this anion is inhibited by perchlorate and pertechnate, and a
common flow cytometry stain for DNA contains propidium complexed with this anion. Adding this
anion to a solution of the diatomic form of the element in it forms a trimeric minus-one ion of its
constituent element. The classic version of the Finkelstein reaction involves adding a compound of
sodium and this anion. A compound of silver and this anion is commonly used in photography plates,
and it is also found in Lugol's solution. Since it forms blue charge-transfer complexes this anion is used to
test for the presence of starch in solution. An enzyme that is targeted by autoantibodies in Hashmotos
disease attaches this anion to tyrosine derivatives in a certan gland in the neck. For 10 points, name this
anion, a common form of an element found in the thyroid gland.
ANSWER: Iodide [accept iodine I suppose]
Hans Landolt discovered a type of clock reaction named for this element that turns dark blue. Tablets of
a salt of this element and potassium are handed out during nuclear accidents to protect from certain
emissions. All salts containing chlorine, bromine and this element are soluble unless they contain silver,
lead or mercury. Because kelp contains the ion of this element bonded to potassium, it is used to treat a
goiter, or swelling in the thyroid gland. For 10 points, name this element used to fortify table salt.
ANSWER: iodine [prompt on I]
In human body, pendrin is responsible for the uptake of this element. Rhodium bound to carbon, oxygen,
and this element is used as a catalyst in the Monsanto process. It is complexed to three acetal groups in
Dess-Martin oxidation, and the formation of alpha-aminophosphonates can be catalyzed by it in a variation
of the Kabachnick-Fields reaction. Addition of it in its diatomic form is the first step in a reaction that yields
anti-diols, the Prevost reaction, while a methyl halide compound containing this element is used in Hofmann
elimination. When mixed with starch, it turns a dark blue color, which is the key visual feature of the clock
reaction. For ten points, name this element, the heaviest non-radioactive halogen.
ANSWER: iodine
With zinc, this element is found in a carbenoid that forms a cyclopropane in the Simmons-Smith reaction.
This element's compound with hydrogen catalyzes the first step in the Cativa and Monsanto processes for
producing acetic acid. This element is found in an anion that is produced slowly and then consumed quickly
in a namesake clock reaction. Its silver salt is used in cloud seeding, and it is found naturally in diatomic
form as a solid that sublimates at room temperature into a purple gas. This element is part of Lugol's
solution, which turns blue-black on reacting with starch. For 10 points, name this halogen with symbol I.
ANSWER: iodine
A binary compound of this element and silver undergoes a phase transition at 147 C to become a fast
ion conductor. Iridium is bound to two atoms of this element and two molecules of carbon monoxide
in the resting form of the catalyst for the BP Cativa process. Vicinal diols can be cleaved into
aldehyde or ketone fragments by a compound with this atom in the middle. A compound containing
a pentavalent atom of this element is used as a mild oxidant for alcohols and is named for (*) Dess
and Martin. Treating solutions containing this element's anion with Ag+ gives a pale yellow precipitate that
doesn't dissolve in excess ammonia. This element is used to test for starch, and at STP, it is a purple solid.
For
10 points, name this heaviest non-radioactive halogen, found right below bromine on the periodic table.
ANSWER: iodine [or I]
This element forms a namesake cycle with sulfur whose net reactant is water and net products are
hydrogen gas and oxygen gas. A hormone that includes this element is thyroxine (thy-ROX-een), which
loses one atom of this element to yield its active form. Preparations of this element include Lugol's solution,
and its presence in the diet prevents goiter. For 10 points, name this halogen often used as a test for starch
and in a disinfecting agent, which on the periodic table appears below bromine but above astatine.
ANSWER: iodine
The Dess-Martin reagent contains this element attached to oxygen groups. This element forms the
central atom of the acid used alongside the Schiff reagent in the PAS stain, and in another procedure this
element is used as a mordant and followed up by a safranin counterstain. This element is also used to test
for starch in solution, and deficiencies result in goiters. For 10 points, name this element, a heavy halogen
whose solutions are usually purple, with atomic number 53 and symbol I.
ANSWER: iodine
The vapors from this element are commonly used as a visual aide in thin layer chromatography. Its
triatomic molecule, along with starch, sulfuric acid, and hydrogen peroxide are used in a popular clock
reaction. At slightly heated temperatures, this element sublimates to produce purple fumes and a tincture of
this element is a common disinfectant used to clean wounds. Because thyroid hormones are derived using
this element, it is typically added to table salt to prevent goiters. For 10 points, name this only solid halogen
with chemical symbol I.
ANSWER: iodine
Thiosulfate reduces a triply-bonded form of this element in a common laboratory demonstration of a
clock reaction. This element turns dark blue in the presence of starch. The silver salt of this element was
once used in photography. At room temperature, the solid form of this element visibly sublimes into a gas.
It is added to sodium chloride to prevent goiters of the thyroid gland. For 10 points, name this purplish gas,
the heaviest non-radioactive halogen, which has symbol I.
ANSWER: iodine [or I before it is read]
Lugol's solution primarily consists of this element. A popular clock reaction mixes hydrogen
peroxide with atoms of this element, resulting in the production of its triatomic form which is then
reacted with thiosulfate. This element is commonly used to detect starch in solution, and a vapor of it
can be used to develop thin-layer chromatography plates. It (*) sublimates at relatively low
temperatures, and the thyroid gland relies on it. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 53
and symbol I.
ANSWER: iodine
A three-membered ring containing a cation of this element is nucleophilically attacked by acetate to
form a vicinal diol in the Woodward cis-hydroxylation. An acid of this element and oxygen is used to
cleave vicinal diols into carbonyls. This element binds to 7 fluorine atoms in a classical example of a
pentagonal bipyramidal compound. This is the largest element that can bind to silver in a chemical
used in (*) photographic film. Deficiency of this element in the human body leads to an enlarged thyroid, a
condition known as goiter. This element is used to test for starch by staining it a blue-black color. The only
diatomic element to be solid at room temperature, for 10 points, name this second-heaviest halogen, whose
chemical symbol is I.
ANSWER: iodine [prompt on "I"]
A diode pump is a vacuum pump that is also known as this type of pump, and it is used in lasers that
are replacing this type of gas laser. This term names the type of exchange that is common between
two electrolytes. Proteins in lipid bilayer membranes that regulate cell volume form channels named
for these particles because they allow these types of particles to pass into and out of cells. Plasma
is made of these particles. Bonds of atoms with large differences in electronegativity are named for
these particles. Names of these particles typically end with the suffix "-ide", "-ite", or "-ate". Identify
these atoms and collections of atoms that have a net charge.
ANSWER: ions
The energy necessary to form one of these is approximated computationally by Koopmans' theorem.
MALDI and electrospray are two techniques to form these species in mass spectrometry. One type of these
obeys a naming convention such that those with one more oxygen atoms are prefixed with "per" and with
two fewer with "hypo." Those examples include carbonate and sulfate. For 10 points, name these species
with a number of electrons that leads them to be charged.
ANSWER: ions [or polyatomic ions; or cations; or anions]
A collider named for relativistic collisions of these particles achieved a temperature of four trillion kelvins
in 2010 at Brookhaven National Lab. The thrusting of these, sometimes done to control movement in space,
is done using the Lorentz force or the Coulomb force. Channels of these exist in cell membranes, and a high
concentration of them in a gas-like state is a plasma. A type of batteries are named for the fact that they use
this type of lithium particle. Name these molecules or components of molecules whose names typically end
with the suffix -ate or -ite, and that have either a positive or negative net charge.
ANSWER: ions
"Soft" methods for the generation of these species include field desorption, ESI, and MALDI. Electron
impact uses a beam of electrons to create these species in preparation for mass spectrometry-that technique
generates the "fragment" variety of these species. Mulliken electronegativity is equal to one-half the sum of
the electron affinity and the energy needed to create one of these species-that quantity is at a minimum for
alkali metals and maximum for noble gases. Bicarbonate, perchlorate, and sulfate are examples of
polyatomic ones. For 10 points, name these chemical species possessing an abnormal amount of valence
electrons, leading to a positive or negative charge.
ANSWER: ions [accept more specific things like cations, polyatomic ions, etc]
Fajans' rule can be used to determine this chemical concept. One measure of the strength of these
bonds can be found using the Born-Haber cycle. That energy can also be approximated using the
electrostatic potential. Solid compounds containing these bonds form (*) lattice structures which follow
the maximum packing rule, and conduct electricity when melted. These bonds have high melting points and
conduction as a liquid and atoms in these bonds have high differences in electronegativity. For 10 points,
identify this type of bond in which one atom transfers an electron to another, often contrasted with covalent
bonds.
ANSWER: Ionic bonds [accept Covalent bonds until Born-Haber]
The "matrix-assisted laser desorption" and "electrospray" varieties of this process are used to
prepare a sample for mass spectrometry. A metal ribbon is often coated with graphite in the "thermal"
kind of this process, which produces plasma if the input to this process is a gas. One measure of
electronegativity averages the electron affinity and the energy associated with this process. For 10
points, name this process by which a neutrally charged atom or molecule gains or loses electrons to
become charged.
ANSWER: ionization
According to Koopman's theorem, the energy required for this process equals the energy of the highest
occupied molecular orbital. For this to happen, an electron must reach a potential energy of zero. When a
gas is heated to very high temperatures, this phenomenon occurs, and the gas becomes plasma. Helium has
the largest value of any element for the namesake "energy" of this process. For 10 points, name this process
in which an atom loses an electron and acquires a positive charge.
ANSWER: ionization [or forming ions; or losing an electron; or becoming positively charged]
The Keldysh parameter quantifies partly how likely this process is to occur as a consequence of tunneling.
The degree to which this condition predominates in a gas is given by the Saha equation, and this condition
is dominant in and constitutive of plasmas. A common version of this process occurs when a photon
interacts with an atomic electron at a frequency corresponding to the binding energy. For 10 points, identify
this process that, in atoms, typically leaves behind a nucleus with excess positive charge.
ANSWER: ionization
The magnitude of this quantity equals the energy of the highest occupied molecular orbital. This property
for silver is lower than one might expect, because it deviates from the aufbau principle to have a filled 4d
subshell. For a hydrogenic atom, this quantity equals nuclear charge squared times 13.6 electron-volts. One
analog of this quantity for solids is called the work function. Given this property's similarity to electron
affinity, it is unsurprising that it increases towards the top right of the periodic table. For 10 points, give this
name for the amount of energy required to remove an electron from a gas-phase atom.
ANSWER: first ionization energy [or ionization potential]
One method of calculating this quantity is by using Koopman's theory, which requires determining the
highest occupied molecular orbital's energy. Within a group, this quantity decreases as the atomic number
increases due to the shielding effect, which reduces the effective charge of the nucleus, making the
outermost electrons easier to remove. Give the term for the energy required to remove an electron from a
neutral atom.
ANSWER: first ionization energy (accept just first ionization after "energy" is read)
This quantity is plotted on the X-axis against "counts" on the Y-axis in a technique used to measure
this quantity developed by Kai Siegbahn. One version of this quantity is represented by a vertical line
on potential energy diagrams and is dependent on geometry; that "vertical" version of this quantity
is contrasted with its "adiabatic" variety. This quantity is measured by UV and X-ray PES. Strong
reducing agents tend to have smaller values of this quantity. It is equal to the negative energy of the
HOMO according to (*) Koopman's theorem. In the Bohr model, this quantity is equal to negative z
squared over n squared all times 13.6 electron-volts, and it is the single-atom analog for the work function.
This quantity generally increases across a period, reaching a maximum for noble gases. For 10 points, name
this quantity, which is the amount of energy needed to remove an electron from a gaseous, neutral atom.
ANSWER: first ionization energy [or binding energy; or IE]
For Rydberg states, this quantity over hc is the y-intercept of a plot of wavenumber versus
one over n squared. The vertical form of this quantity assumes no change in bond length and is
greater than its adiabatic form. This quantity is roughly equal to the negative energy of the
highest occupied molecular orbital. Photoelectron spectroscopy measures this quantity for
materials. This quantity unexpectedly drops between nitrogen and oxygen due to the stability of
half-full subshells. Mulliken averaged this quantity and electron affinity to calculate
electronegativity. This quantity is analogous to the wavefunction of a metal, and it usually
increases across a row on the Periodic Table. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of
energy required to strip an electron away from a molecule.
ANSWER: ionization energy [or ionization potential]
Di-tungsten tetra(hpp) has the lowest known value of this quantity for a stable material. This quantity is
equal to the negative energy of the HOMO according to Koopmans' theorem. Within the Bohr model, this
quantity equals negative atomic number squared times 13.6 divided by n squared. With some exceptions
like aluminum and gallium, this quantity increases toward the right within a period. For 10 points, name this
quantity, the amount of energy needed to remove an electron from a gaseous atom or molecule.
ANSWER: first ionization energy
The negative of this value over the product of Boltzmann's constant and temperature is an exponent in the
Saha equation. The vertical form of this value is larger than its adiabatic form, which does not require
conservation of molecular geometry in its measurement. This value is computed using Koopmans's
Theorem, and its analog in solid-state physics is termed the work function. The average of this value and
electron affinity is used in Mulliken's electronegativity scale, and its value increases across a period and up
a group. For ten points, name this thermodynamic quantity, the amount of energy need to remove a valence
electron from an atom in the gas phase.
ANSWER: ionization energy or ionization potential
Depending on whether geometry is preserved or not, there are adiabatic and vertical varieties of this
quantity. A property for the highest occupied molecular orbital is equated to this quantity via Koopmans'
theorem. Mercury has an unusually high one. This quantity is the opposite of electron affinity. Due to
shielding, this quantity generally decreases down a group, but increases across a period. For sodium, the
second one is way higher than the first one. For 10 points, name this energy required to remove an element
from an atom.
ANSWER: first ionization energy [or first ionization enthalpy; just ionization needed after "energy" is read]
The van Allen belts shuttle particles between the magnetosphere and this region. A layer in this region is
named for Arthur Kennelly and Oliver Heaviside. At night, only the F layer of this region is significantly
present, but it has D, E, and F layers during the day. This layer refracts radio waves, making long-range
radio communication possible. For 15 points, identify this region of the atmosphere characterized by the
presence of particles ionized by solar radiation.
ANSWER: ionosphere [prompt on thermosphere]
This region can be modeled as the outer edge of a waveguide in which sferic waves can propagate
and Schumann resonances can occur. Modulated heating is used to generate ELF and VLF waves in
this region by the HAARP project. One structure that connects this region to one above are field
aligned and forms a z-pinch; that is the Birkeland current. The interaction of Lyman-alpha radiation
with nitric oxide causes increased (*) electron density in this region's D layer. Also consisting of an F
layer and a E layer, which is also called the Kennelly-Heaviside layer, this region is notable for its
refraction and reflection of radio waves. For 10 points, name this layer of the atmosphere which forms the
aurora borealis where it meets the magnetosphere and is composed of many electrically charged molecules.
ANSWER: ionosphere
This layer is home to the winter and equatorial anomalies, as well as an electrostatic field known as the
equatorial electrojet. The NASA AEROS probes were launched to explore its F layer, which is also called
the Appleton layer. Its D layer is affected by polar cap absorption during solar proton events. Its other
sections include the E layer, named after Kennelly and Heaviside, and the sporadic E layer, which can cause
hops in radio signals. For 10 points, name this inner layer of the magnetosphere, named for its high
concentration of charged particles.
ANSWER: ionosphere [prompt on magnetosphere before it is read]
Its maximum usable frequency is calculated by dividing by its angle of attack. The open system space
tether, once produced, will use energy from this region. Studied by the Alouette series of satellites, this
region contains many unreachable propagation paths which can open up during Sporadic-E events. Very
Low Frequency signals that hit prior to SIDs affect its D layer. It also contains the Kennelly-Heaviside
layer and interacts with solar flares. For 10 points, name this uppermost part of the atmosphere, which
contains many charged particles.
ANSWER: ionosphere
The uppermost portion of this region splits into two during the day, and its composition is altered by the
presence of sunspots. This structure's existence was confirmed by Edward Appleton, and its F layer was
named for him. The D layer, which absorbs high frequency radio waves, diminishes greatly after sunset.
For 10 points, solar radiation can dislodge electrons from gas atoms in what region of the atmosphere?
ANSWER: ionosphere
An Sq current system in this region can result in an equatorial electrojet. Solar flares cause disturbances in
its lowest layer, resulting in shortwave fadeouts, and its E region or Kennelly-Heaviside layer reflects AM
waves. Its F1 and F2 layers make up the Appleton layer, and geomagnetic storms in the magnetosphere
result in auroras visible in this layer of the atmosphere. It is formed by solar radiation, which produces free
electrons. Lying above the mesosphere, for 10 points, name this part of the thermosphere named after the
charged particles it contains.
ANSWER: ionosphere [prompt on thermosphere]
The eleven year solar cycle of the sun affects the frequency of waves that can be reflected off this layer of
the atmosphere. This layer contains the F1 and F2 layers, which combine into the Appleton layer at night,
due to the lack of sunlight acting on the entities that compose this layer. The E layer of this layer of the
atmosphere can cause hops in radio signals, and solar radiation produces free electrons which make up this
layer. For 10 points, name this layer of the atmosphere that is part of the thermosphere, named after the
charged particles that compose it.
ANSWER: Ionosphere [prompt on Thermosphere]
Peaks arise in this method only when a vibration would change the sample's dipole moment, and it is
complementary to Raman spectroscopy, which picks out quadratic modes. Samples are prepared for
this technique by bracketing with potassium bromide salt plates or by mulling with (*) Nujol.
Carbonyl compounds possess a characteristic peak at about seventeen hundred inverse centimeters in this
form of spectroscopy, in which all compounds, past a thousand inverse centimeters, exhibit a cluttered
"fingerprint region." For 10 points, name this method of spectroscopy named for a region of the EM
spectrum longer than visible light.
ANSWER: IR spectroscopy [or infrared spectroscopy]
A zinc selenide crystal causes total internal reflection in the attenuated total reflectance type of this
technique. The two dimensional form of this technique is used to dynamically follow hydrogen bond
formation. Unlike a similar technique, this technique requires a compound to have a change in its dipole
moment rather than a permanent dipole. This technique can detect certain motions like rocking, wagging,
and scissoring. Samples are prepared for this process using Nujol oil or a potassium bromide pellet.
Carbonyl compounds have a peak of about 1700 wavenumbers, and several useful vibrations occur in the
"fingerprint" region of its spectrum. For 10 points, name this type of spectroscopy that causes vibrations
using wavelengths longer than visible light.
ANSWER: infrared spectroscopy [or IR spectroscopy]
Polymer samples can be prepared for use in this procedure by dissolution, then deposition on an ionic
substrate, then evaporation in a technique known as cast film. More usual preparation techniques include
mulling with a heavy paraffin like Nujol and spreading between salt plates; salt is used as a medium for this
analytic technique since it is transparent to the probe used. That probe radiation can be understood as
inducing motion corresponding to normal modes in the analyte molecular Hamiltonian, so the lines that this
techniques produces are, to first order, characteristic of the types of bonds present. For 10 points, name this
chemical technique that analyzes bonds by probing absorption and emission of light with wavelengths
longer than the visible but shorter than the microwave.
ANSWER: infrared spectroscopy
One form of this technique used for monolayers adhered to metal substrates is called polarizationmodulation-this, and another minimizes sample preparation and is called DRIFTS. Modes only give
peaks in this technique if they change a molecule's dipole moment, and samples for this technique
may be ground into a mull with nujol or placed between potassium bromide salt plates. Two normal modes
of acid anhydrides appear around eighteen hundred wavenumbers in this technique, which features a
muddled "fingerprint region." For 10 points, name this form of spectroscopy that relies on a wavelength just
longer than visible light.
ANSWER: IR spectroscopy
In this technique, neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet lasers can be used to produce
picosecond "pump" and "probe" pulses. Metal carbonyl complexes undergo a peak shift in this
technique due to pi backbonding. The selection rule for this technique requires that the molecule to
be analyzed undergo a change in dipole moment, making this technique complementary to (*) Raman
spectroscopy. The molecular motions involved in this technique can be modeled as a simple harmonic
oscillator. Hydroxyl groups have a characteristic broad peak in this technique around 3300 to 3600 inverse
centimeters. For 10 points, name this form of spectroscopy in which the vibrational modes of molecules are
probed using light with a wavelength just larger than that of visible light.
ANSWER: infrared spectroscopy or IR
Replacing a carbonyl in tetracarbonylnickel with a ligand and performing this technique can give
electron donating ability; that technique was pioneered by Chad Tolman on phosphine ligands.
Preparation for this procedure may involve grounding the sample into a potassium bromide matrix.
Information on pi-backbonding in carbonyl complexes is often obtained using (*) Raman spectroscopy
and this technique. In this technique, carbonyl compounds absorb at around 1700 inverse centimeters. This
technique studies vibrational modes like wagging, rocking, and scissoring, and has a fingerprint region. For
10 points, name this form of spectroscopy that studies molecular vibrations with light having longer
wavelengths than visible light.
ANSWER: IR spectroscopy (or infrared spectroscopy)
One variety of this technique can eliminate the need for external calibrations, a result called the Connes
advantage, and one variation of this technique can be used to find anharmonicity by measuring deviations
from the diagonal. It is often used to detect backbonding, and samples are commonly prepared using a nujol
mull or by mixing with potassium bromide and pressing into a disk. Interferometers are used in its FT
variety, and it features "fingerprint region" on the right side. The results of this technique are analyzed by
plotting transmittance against wavenumbers, and it is used to identify functional groups based on the
stretching and rotating vibrations of dipole bonds. FTP, identify this type of spectroscopy which uses
electromagnetic radiation longer than visible light but shorter than microwaves.
ANSWER: Infrared (IR) spectroscopy
. In one variation of this technique, a beam is directed toward a dense crystal in contact with the analyte,
producing an evanescent wave that is absorbed by the analyte. That variant of this process does not require
any sample prep and is known as attenuated total reflectance. A molecule can be analyzed using this
technique if changes to the direction or magnitude of its bond length causes a change in its dipole moment.
Preparing a sample for this process often involves an oil called Nujol or creating a pellet out of potassium
bromide, and part of the spectrum produced by this process is called the fingerprint region. This technique
analyzes movements known as rocking, wagging, or scissoring and typically involves light from 4000-400
inverse centimeters. For 10 points, name this form of spectroscopy which as its name suggests involves light
with a slightly longer wavelength than visible light.
ANSWER: infrared spectroscopy [or IR spectroscopy]
A variant of this technique eliminates lots of preparation by passing light through a zinc selenide
crystal such that it experiences total internal reflection with the sample. Ultrafast lasers facilitate the
two-dimensional Fourier transform variant of this technique. NASA has a new database of data from
this technique for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Solid samples can be prepared for it by being
integrated with potassium bromide or ground into a (*) mull. Molecules containing carbon-hydrogen
and triple bonds produce high stretching frequencies in this technique, and carbonyls produce a
characteristic
strong peak at 1700 inverse centimeters. The range on its readout from 1450 and 600 inverse centimeters is
called the fingerprint region. For 10 points, name this type of spectroscopy that uses light with a longer
wavelength than visible light.
ANSWER: infrared spectroscopy [or IR spectroscopy; or "spectrometry" in place of "spectroscopy"]
One modification of this technique puts the sample over a zinc selenide crystal and uses attenuated
total reflection to analyze the sample in the original phase. Anharmonicity, chemical exchange and
hydrogen bond formation and breaking can be detected in the two-dimensional version of this
technique, which uses a pair of pulses followed by a detection phase. Samples are prepared by
grounding into a mull of nujol or smearing onto salt plates. The area in the readout from 500 to 1500 units
is known as the fingerprint region in this technique, and a peak around 1700 wavenumbers is indicative of a
carbonyl compound. For 10 points, name this type of spectroscopy that uses wavelengths longer than visible
light to probe vibrational modes of molecules.
ANSWER: IR spectroscopy or Infrared Spectroscopy
One type of this technique is beneficial because of the higher signals produced, the so-called Jacquinot
Advantage. Another form of this technique, developed from techniques used in NMR, uses picosecond-long
exposures to track dynamics, the so-called two dimensional or color-correlated form of it. Samples can
either be ground into a nonvolatile mull of nujol or spread across a pair of salt plates. In this technique,
higher stretching frequencies tend to correspond to bonds to lighter elements like hydrogen, and one part of
it is the group frequency region. Containing the fingerprint region, for 10 points, name this type of
spectroscopy that uses electromagnetic radiation with longer wavelengths than visible light.
ANSWER: IR Spectroscopy [or Infrared Spectroscopy]
Preparation of certain polymers for this technique typically involves dissolving in a non-hygroscopic
solvent before applying the sample to a cell. Preparing solids may involve pushing the sample through a die
press to generate a translucent material for this technique or combining the sample with a mulling agent
such as Nujol prior to application on potassium bromide salt plates. This technique produces a spectrum
with a fingerprint region and characteristic absorbance leads to stretching and bending of bonds in
molecules in this technique. It produces a broad peak for alcohols around 3300 inverse centimeters. For 10
points, name this spectroscopic technique using wavelength slightly longer than that of visible light.
ANSWER: IR spectroscopy [or infrared spectroscopy]
The attenuated total reflection type of this can be used on compounds with a low surface area, while the
diffuse reflectance type can be used to study samples that are not sufficiently transparent. The multiplex
advantage explains the use of the Fourier Transform type of this. Diatomic bonds are generally not found in
the fingerprint region, and the stretching seen using this technique generally occurs at higher frequencies
than the bending. Most types of this use some sort of absorption, because each bond in the molecule will
absorb only its characteristic frequency. For 10 points, name this type of analytical technique, which
categorizes compounds based on the frequency of the vibration of its bonds when exposed to radiation of
waves longer than those of visible light.
ANSWER: infrared spectroscopy [or IR spectroscopy]
Compounds studied by this technique may be mixed with mineral oil to form a nujol mull, and potassium
bromide pellets can also be mixed with solid analytes in another variation. This technique is only useful
with compounds that see a change in dipole moment, which is why homonuclear diatomics cannot be
studied using this technique. The spectrum produced by this technique has a region unique to each molecule
called the "fingerprint" region, and carbonyl containing groups have a characteristic response to it at around
1700 wavemumbers. For 10 points, name this spectroscopic technique that uses light shorter than
microwaves but longer than red visible light.
ANSWER: IR Spectroscopy [or Infrared Spectroscopy]
The optimization aspect of the two-dimensional form of this technique arises from the photon echo. Devices
such as the Nernst filament and the Globar are used as sources of emission in this technique, in which a
solid sample is added to potassium bromide and flattened into a thin slice. This technique shows a broad
peak around 3500 inverse centimeters to indicate a hydroxyl group, making it useful for revealing the kinds
of functional groups present. FTP name this type of spectroscopy that involves the interaction of molecules
with the namesake electromagnetic energy whose wavelength is in between microwaves and visible light.
ANSWER: infrared spectroscopy [accept IR spectroscopy]
Harold Urey and Harmon Craig plotted the fraction of this element in elemental form versus its fraction in
sulfides and hydrides in order to study the composition of chondrites. In x-ray observations of active
galactic nuclei, the ionization state of the emitting material can be inferred from the energy of the k-alpha
line of this element. This element's isotopes 58 and 56 have the second and third highest binding energies
per nucleon, respectively, making this element the last other than nickel and cobalt to be produced in stellar
cores via fusion. The convective circulation of the liquid form of this element generates the dynamo effect,
as this element makes up most of the Earth's outer core. For 10 points, identify this element, a metal which
on Earth is typically extracted from ores like magnetite and hematite.
ANSWER: iron
One reagent containing this element along with hydrogen peroxide generates radical hydroxide
groups and is used in the treatment of waste-water. In addition to Fenton's reagent, this was the central
element complexing with two dienyl rings in the first observed metallocene. It can be isolated from its
carbonate ore which is called siderite, and Bosch modified the Haber process by using the oxide of this
element as a catalyst. For 10 points, identify this element which can alternatively be called ferrum.
ANSWER: iron [or Fe; accept ferrum until mentioned]
This is the heaviest element in a solution added to test for the presence of phenols. Its chloride,
though milder than aluminum chloride, is still widely used as a Lewis acid in Friedel-Crafts
reactions. Its pentacarbonyl is commonly seen because this element has eight valence electrons.
Mossbauer spectroscopy is commonly performed using an isotope of this element. The most
famous sandwich compound consists of this metal bound to two cyclopentadienyl rings. This
metal and cyanide are present in Prussian blue, and its sulfide is known as pyrite, or Fool's Gold.
For 10 points, name this transition metal which is oxidized from +2 to +3 during rusting.
ANSWER: iron [or Fe; or ferrum]
This element sometimes exists in a gamma phase allotrope known as austenite. The pigment Prussian blue
ideally contains seven ions of this element complexed with eighteen cyanide ions. The mineral magnetite is
an oxide of this element, and impure forms of this element undergo the Bessemer process to form an alloy
of this metal and carbon. The mineral siderite is this element's carbonate, and a main source of this metal
for its large-scale production comes from hematite. In humans, atoms of this element complex with the
proteins myoglobin and hemoglobin. For 10 points, name this element, a metal that forms steel with carbon
and whose other oxide is rust.
ANSWER: iron [or Fe; accept ferrum]
This element is bound to sodium, carbon, and oxygen in Collman's reagent. The strongest permanent
magnet is made from an alloy of neodymium, boron, and this element. The first metallocene
discovered contained this element, and it is the central atom in Mohr's salt. It catalyzes the FischerTropsch process, and this element catalyzes the production of ammonia in the (*) Haber-Bosch
process. Its 56 isotope is very stable, and it usually has a charge of +2 or +3. For 10 points, identify this
element with atomic number 26, found in the ores magnetite and hematite, with symbol Fe.
ANSWER: Iron [accept Fe early]
A ring of atoms of this element was placed on a copper surface by Crommie, Lutz, and Eigler
using a scanning tunneling microscope to create a quantum corral. Prussian blue is a complex of this
element with cyanide. Its allotropes include austentite, and its 57 isotope is commonly used to
demonstrate the Mossbauer effect. The first metallocene contained an atom of it sandwiched between
two cyclopentadiene rings. Either ruthenium or this element comprises the most common catalyst for
the (*) Haber-Bosch process, and it usually occurs in plus 2 and plus 3 oxidation states, which are known
as ferrous and ferric. For 10 points, name this element, alloys of which form steel, with atomic number 26
and symbol Fe.
ANSWER: iron
The dye Prussian blue contains a complex of cyanide surrounding this element. The first metallocene
consisted of two cyclopentadienyl rings sandwiching an atom of this metal in between. The most
common isotope of this element are produced by nickel-60 undergoing alpha decay. This metal is
found with oxygen in (*) hematite and with sulfur in pyrite, or fool's gold. An atom of this element is
coordinated at the center of hemoglobin proteins in red blood cells. For 10 points, name this element which
is smelted with carbon to form steel, symbolized Fe.
ANSWER: iron (or Fe before mention)
In the Noyori [3+2] reaction, a compound containing two atoms of this element and nine carbonyl groups is
used to generate cyclopentadienones. In some bacteria, a specific type of chelating agent known as a
siderophore complexes with ions of this element, and its levels in the blood can be assayed by measuring
FR5RI. Mohr's salt contains a central atom of this element, and seven atoms of it are found in every
molecule of Prussian blue. Pauson and Kealy found this element coordinated to two cyclopentadiene
molecules in the first example of a metallocene, and catalase contains four atoms of it coordinated to a
certain tetrapyrrole. FTP, name this metal, which is found coordinated to porphyrin in myoglobin and
hemoglobin.
ANSWER: iron
This element is part of a sandwich compound with two cyclopentadienyl ("SIGH"-klo-PEN-tuh-dye-EENuhl) ligands. Nuclear fusion in stars halts at this element, since elements heavier than this require a
supernova to form. The form in which this element is typically found, the pig type, has excess carbon
removed and metals like chromium added. An ore of this element is hematite, and this element is refined to
form steel. For 10 points, name this element with symbol Fe.
ANSWER: iron [or Fe before mentioned]
Enterobactin and bacilibactin are bacterial compounds which have a high affinity for one ion of this
element. A behavior named for this element can be analyzed by a model that describes interaction energies
as functions of the lattices spins which can only be positive or negative; that model is the Ising model. Since
this element has the highest binding energy of any element, its 56 isotope is the highest stable nuclide that
can be formed by fusion in stars. The carbonate ore of this mineral is called siderite, and a deficiency of this
element leads to anemia. For 10 points, identify this element found in ores such as magnetite and hematite.
ANSWER: iron [accept Fe or ferrum]
Carl Scheele moistened this element to separate nitrogen from air, and Antoine Lavoisier combined this
element with water to demonstrate the conservation of mass. This element and ruthenium are the two most
common catalysts in the Haber Process. The sulfide of this element is the primary component of marcasite
and pyrite. A concentration of this element with nickel is typically seen in stars undergoing a supernova, and
this element together with nickel makes up most of the Earth's core. Oxides of this element in the presence
of moisture form rust. Name this element whose Latin name is ferrum.
ANSWER: iron or Fe
This element forms a red solution when it complexes with thiocyanate, and although it is not aluminum, a
chloride of this element catalyzes a Friedel-Crafts alkylation. The oxide of this element is used industrially
to produce ammonia in the Haber-Bosch process, and this element exists in a solid solution with carbon in
its gamma variety austenite. This element is derived from the ore hematite, and its brass-colored pyrite is
commonly known as "fool's gold". For 10 points, name this transition metal with chemical symbol Fe.
ANSWER: Iron
This metal is found in Mohr's salt and in the first discovered metallocene. One isotope of this metal
has an extremely high nuclear binding energy and is thus the heaviest element formed in stellar
nuclear fusion processes. In the body, it is found at the center of porphyrin molecules. When bound
to cyanide this element forms the pigment Prussian Blue and adding thiocyanate to a solution is one
method of detecting this element. This metal is typically found as magnetite and hematite and in the
body is responsible for the color of red blood cells. For 10 points, name this transition metal whose oxides
are typically referred to as rust.
ANSWER: iron
This element's rare two minus oxidation state is present in a disodium tetracarbonyl complex that,
when solvated with dioxane, is known as Collman's reagent, and a common reactive form of this
element is a powdered decomposition product of its pentacarbonyl. Prussian blue is a cyanide of this
element, whose gamma allotrope is called austenite. This element is in the group with the highest d
occupancy to readily form a double bond to oxygen. This metal is the center of the first metallocene
synethesized, and it is strengthened, by the addition of carbon, into steel. For 10 points, name this transition
metal element whose two plus and three plus cations are called "ferric" and "ferrous."
ANSWER: iron [or Fe]
At high pressures, this element forms an allotrope that is hexagonal close packed, denoted as
epsilon. Prussian blue is a pigment containing this metal element. This element is bonded to sulfur in
pyrite. Coke is used in blast furnaces to (*) smelt compounds with this element, which produces a
high-carbon product known as the pig type of this element. In the presence of water, this metal's oxides
form rust. For 10 points, name this ferromagnetic transition metal that is often used to make steel.
ANSWER: iron
In a process devised by Edward W. Davis, an ore of this metal located in the Mesabi Range is transformed
into pellets. One of this element's sulfides is a polymorph of marcasite, and one of its oxides can exist in the
kidney ore variety. In addition to taconite and pyrite, this metal is found in hematite, which gives Mars its
red appearance. A blast furnace is used to create the "pig" type of this metal, which is used to produce steel
in the Bessemer process. Rust forms on the surface of this metal in moist air. For 10 points, name this metal
found in ferrous and ferric compounds.
ANSWER: iron
Most red giants will eventually fuse into a core of this element before going supernova. Every radioactive
element with a mass above that of this element will eventually decay primarily into it, although it is possible
to fuse isotopes of elements heavier than it into metastable nucleides. When it is neutrally charged, it has an
unfilled d shell, and often has a charge of +2 or +3. A lack of this element in blood causes anemia. For 10
points, name this most stable element in the universe, whose ions are often called ferrous or ferric.
ANSWER: iron
Hereditary buildup of this element in the liver is found in a disease known by shorthand as HHC. At
standard pressure, this element has allotropes labeled alpha through delta, the gamma allotrope of
which is face-centered cubic and is called austenite. Mossbauer spectrometry is often conducted on
the 57 isotope of this element, which is the (*) heaviest that can be produced via the silicon-burning
process in a star. It is the most common element by mass in the Earth, and its ores include limonite,
goethite, magnetite, and hematite. For 10 points, name this metallic element that is strengthened by carbon
to form steel.s
ANSWER: iron [or Fe]
Two cyclopentadienyl (SIKE-lo-pent-uh-die-EE-nul) rings coordinated to this element result in a very
stable organometallic compound. For all elements before this element, nuclear fusion releases energy,
resulting in its namesake peak. In the most common form of the thermite reaction, aluminum reacts with an
oxide of this element. Like nickel and cobalt, it is permanently magnetized. The conversion of this
element's +2 ion to +3 happens in rusting. For 10 points, name this element with symbol Fe.
ANSWER: iron [or Fe]
The biogeography of these landforms was studied by Robert Macarthur and E. O. Wilson. Arcs of
these things can be produced by diapirs like mantle plumes. Those arcs of these entities are formed
by hotspots. Uplifted crust can form the coral variety of these from an atoll. Surtsey is a newly
formed one of these landforms. A seamount is a volcano that is not tall enough to be one of these
entities. An (*) archipelago is a group of these landforms. For 10 points, identify these landmasses
surrounded by water.
ANSWER: islands
Many examples of this relationship involve components that may be separated by reaction with
tartaric acid. This relationship, first discovered between cyanic and fulminic acid, may emerge when
steric effects prevent a compound from rotating around otherwise freely rotating bonds. (*)
Tautomers are rapidly interconverting examples of one form of this relationship. Another example of this
relationship occurs between cis and trans examples of the same alkene, a type of diastereomerism (die-ahSTARE-ee-AH-mer-ism). Another example of this relationship, called "constitutional," exists between tertand n-butane. For 10 points, name this relationship describing molecules with different structural formulas
but the same molecular formula.
ANSWER: isomers
The nuclear version of this term refers to metastable excitations of atomic nuclei. The
Cahn-Ingold-Prelog rules are used to name one type of them. The terms cis and trans are used to describe
geometric ones, which are of a stero type. The other main type are structural ones. For 10 points, name this
term that refers to compounds that are similar in the number and type of atoms but differ in the
arrangements of those atoms.
ANSWER: isomers
One version of these entities consists of pairs denoted dextro- and levo-; molecules that demonstrate that
type of this phenomenon are called chiral. Besides the optical ones, or enantiomers, another one of these
pairs has cis- and trans- varieties; that is the geometric type of these. The structural type of this
phenomenon occurs when two compounds have the same atoms, but those atoms are connected differently
to one another. For 10 points, name these compounds that have the same chemical formula but different
properties.
ANSWER: isomers [accept isomerism; accept stereoisomers before "structural"; prompt on "enantiomers" before mentioned]
One of these compounds found in a six-coordinate complex is known as the facial or fac type. Coordination
compounds can form the linkage varieties of these compounds, while meso compounds are not these
compounds. Racemic mixtures are formed from the optical varieties of these compounds, which can be
formed when a carbon is bonded to four different groups and which rotate polarized light in different
directions. 2-Propane and n-butane are the smallest alkanes which are examples of these compounds, and
examples of these compounds involving a double bond are denoted cis and trans. For 10 points, gives this
term for compounds that have the same molecular formula but different structures.
ANSWER: isomers [accept word forms such as "isomerism"]
In coordination chemistry, these compounds have mer and fac types. The optical types rotate
plane-polarized light in opposite directions and are denoted R or S. The geometric type of these compounds
often differ in their structure around a double bond, in which case they are named cis or trans, or E or Z.
Dimethyl ether and ethanol are two of these compounds with the formula C2H5O (C-two-H-five-O). For
10 points, give this term for compounds that contain the same atoms arranged differently.
ANSWER: isomers
When hydrocarbon chains show different amounts of branching, it is called the "chain" type of this
relationship. A certain enzyme that knots DNA turns it into the "topological" type of this. One example of
this relationship is seen when two molecules are mirror-images of each other; they are called enantiomers.
Also grouped into stereo- and structural types, for 10 points, name this relationship characterized by shared
molecular formulas but different structural formulas.
ANSWER: isomerism [accept word forms such as isomers]
A class of enzymes named for this phenomenon includes gyrase and is divided into type I and type II based
on how they convert DNA between forms exhibiting this phenomenon. A functional group's occupation of
the axial or equatorial positions on cyclic molecules and the inability of molecules to rotate about a double
bond give rise to the cis-trans type of this phenomenon, and non-superposable mirror images called
enantiomers exemplify the "stereo" variety. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which two molecules
have different structures but the same molecular formula.
ANSWER: Isomerism [accept Topoisomerism before "positions"]
A racemic mixture contains equal number of these kinds of substances, resulting in polarized
light passing through it unrotated. The "linkage" type of these differ from one another in where the
metal ions attach to ligands. That and the "coordination" type are "structural" examples of these
substances. Those differ in the chemical bonds, as opposed to the "stereo" type which have different
spatial (*) arrangements. For 10 points, name these substances with identical formulas but different
chemical properties.
ANSWER: isomers [or isomerism; or enantiomers before "linkage type"]
"Uranium X2" and "Uranium Z" were the first discovered compounds exhibiting the nuclear variety of this
phenomenon. Hydrogen exhibits the spin variety of this phenomenon in its para and ortho forms. Friedrich
Wohler noticed this phenomenon when preparing silver cyanate, and Cahn, Ingold, and Prelog name a set of
rules for naming another variety of it which uses R/S and E/Z descriptors. Tautomers exhibit this
phenomenon with respect to a hydrogen atom. Describing relationships between the cis and trans fatty
acids, for ten points, name this term that describes molecules with the same molecular formula but different
atomic arrangement.
ANSWER: isomerism
Hydrogen gas exhibits a spin form of this phenomenon, and the interconversion between the keto and enol
forms of some molecules reflects another type of this phenomenon. Another form of this explains why
thalidomide is always teratogenic in vivo. That form is characterized by the direction of the rotation of
polarized light, which distinguishes different enantiomers. There are four different forms of butene due to
this phenomenon, which also considers cis and trans versions of molecules. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon in which compounds have the same molecular formulas but different structural formulas.
ANSWER: isomerism [prompt on specific types to which the clues allude, such as "chirality," "enantiomers," "tautomerism," "optical," "structural," et cetera]
In nuclear chemistry, this term can refer to a metastable nuclide produced by gamma decay, though the
more typical form of this concept can also indicate the inertness of complex ions. Alfred Werner employed
this concept to replace chain theory with coordination theory, and ambident ligands are key to explaining
the linkage type of this concept. Friedrich Woehler provided the first evidence of this concept by comparing
ammonium cyanate and urea, while optical activity is the only means of separting enantiomeric examples
like L- and D-glyceraldehyde. Also describing relationships such as cis versus trans fatty acids and butane
versus methylpropane, identify this concept in which two compounds have the same molecular formula but
a different arrangement of atoms.
ANSWER: isomerism
Coordination compounds containing nitrate or thiocyanate ligands possess the "linkage" form of this
property, while coordination compounds exhibiting a different form of this property can be denoted using
the prefix "mer". While it's not chirality, another type of this property is exhibited by tartaric acid, which
rotates plane-polarized light as an example of an "optical" one. Prefixes such as "neo" or "n" are used to
denote compounds possessing the "constitutional" or "structural" forms of this property. For 10 points,
name this property in which two molecules have different conformations or structures despite having the
same molecular formula.
ANSWER: isomerism [accept word forms such as isomers, accept more specific answers]
Cahn-Ingold-Prelog notation is used to differentiate between two members of one type of these sets
of molecules. Members of that type that also contain an internal plane of symmetry are known as meso
compounds. The presence of anti and gauche conformations can produce rotational ones, and another
type exists in cis and trans forms, while isobutane and n-butane are constitutional ones. For 10 points,
name these compounds with the same molecular formula but different chemical and physical properties
due to the arrangement of their atoms.
ANSWER: isomers [accept enantiomers before "meso" is read; accept stereoisomers before n-butane]
Louis Pasteur studied the impact of this phenomenon on polarized light using tartrate crystals. Another
example of this is observed by bombarding Azobenzene with certain photons. The topological type of this
occurs in DNA molecules with different linking numbers. Historically important examples include
dextrotartaric acid and levotartaric acid, as well as comparisons between silver cyanate and silver fulminate
made by Friedrich Wohler [VOH-lur]. The type of this that impacts functional groups is cis/trans, which is
a geometric form of this phenomenon. The chain and position types are structural forms. Name this
phenomenon exhibited by different molecules with the same chemical formula.
ANSWER: isomers [accept word forms; accept stereoisomer before "structural"]
These compounds are described using the E-Z [E dash Z] notation when they occur across alkenes, and a
more generalized version of that notation is the cis-trans notation. Both of those are examples of
diastereomers [di-uh-stereo-mers], and examples of these include cyclohexane and hexene. Differing
bonding patterns make up structural ones of these compounds. When these compounds are mirror images of
each other, they are referred to as enantiomers [en-anti-omers]. For 10 points, name these compounds that
have varying chemical structures despite having the same chemical formula.
ANSWER: isomers [accept word forms like isomerism]
The anticoagulant Coumadin is a derivative of this molecule and polymers of this compound form the
side chains of ubiquinone and vitamin K. Plants can emit a blanket of this molecule to alter their lipid
bilayers, increasing leaf thermal tolerance. When eight of these molecules are linked together they
can form (*) carotenoid pigments such as the vitamin A precursor beta-carotene and lycopene. Natural
rubber is a linear head to tail polymer of subunits of this molecule. It is also the building block of lipids. For
10 points, name this methylated butadiene that polymerized to form terpenes.
ANSWER: isoprene (prompt on terpenes)
Reversible expansions and compressions that have this property constitute two stages of the
Carnot cycle. In this type of reversible expansion, the work done equals RT times the log of the ratio
of the volumes. For ideal gases undergoing this type of process, work is equal to the negative of (*)
heat, as these processes proceed with no change in internal energy or enthalpy, and pressure times volume
is constant. For 10 points, name this property possessed by phase transitions, which occur with no change
in temperature.
ANSWER: isothermal processes [or constant-temperature processes until "temperature" is read; prompt on phase transitions; do not accept "adiabatic processes"]
Methane is used as a scavenger for fluorine atoms in a type of Molecular Laser Separation named for
these entities. These things are used to label amino acids in the SILAC procedure. One method of
separating them relies on the Szilard-Chalmers effect. The GBEIF equation describes the partial
separation of these items kinetically in nonequilibrium systems. Proxies of climate are based on the
equilibrium fractionation of these things. Their incorporation into a part of a molecule whose bond is
broken during a particular reaction causes a slowdown in (*) reaction rate known as their namesake
kinetic effect. Their relative abundance is used to plot an isochron in a form of dating that relies on the
transformation of stable ones to unstable ones. For 10 points, name these entities which differ by number of
neutrons, nuclei with the same atomic number but different atomic mass.
ANSWER: isotopes [accept more specific answers like isotopes of hydrogen]
In 2011, Zheng-Tian Lu and physicists at Argonne Laboratory dated the Nubian Aquifer by studying these
entities in the groundwater. Frederick Soddy first identified these objects, which Harold Urey used to
determine the temperature of paleolithic oceans. The Kinetic [this] Effect states that the presence of these
objects in a reaction influences the rate of the reaction. A synonym for this term is "nuclide." One of these
substances was fluorinated and collected using gas centrifugation at Oak Ridge, Tennessee; that radioactive
variety is U-235. For ten points, name these varieties of an element's atoms which contain different numbers
of neutrons.
ANSWER: isotopes (prompt on "atom" before mention, accept krypton atoms or radioactive isotopes before "these objects", accept nuclide before mention)
Type B treatment of this material leads to improved transparency while Type C helps
dye it. Typically divided into nephrite and another form, common impostors of this
material include aventurine quartz, grossularite, and serpentine. Ranging between 5.5 and
7.0 on the Mohs hardness scale, Burma and Guatemala are the primary sources of this
material. Neolithic sources of it included Liaoning and the Yangtze river delta, and it has
been considered the "imperial gem" since the Shang dynasty. For ten points, name this green
gemstone important in Maori, Mesoamerican, and Chinese cultures.
ANSWER: Jade (accept Nephrite before mentioned)
If upon diagonalizing the Hamiltonian of the two-dimensional isotropic harmonic oscillators where g
is quadratic coupling constant associated with this effect, in the case of vanishing g, the potentials of
the equation are referred to as a "Mexican hat." Two adiabatic electron states can model the
selection rule of vibronic coupling associated with the (*) E x E version of this effect. The benzene
cation often experiences multi-mode and pseudo versions of this effect and it frequently occurs in the d and
e sub g orbitals in octahedral complexes. For 10 points, name this doubly eponymous effect which predicts
distortions in molecular shape due to non-degenerate valence molecular orbitals.
ANSWER: Jahn-Teller Effect
These phenomena are often strongly affected during the winter by the Madden-Julian Oscillation, which
typically acts in the North Pacific to split one of these prior to so-called "pineapple express" events. Data
from a rawinsonde that encounters one of these can be difficult to interpret, as they can greatly perturb the
ascent rate. They develop troughs and ridges in a pattern of large meanders due to Rossby waves, and they
flow around blocking anticyclones. Two of the strongest examples of these phenomena are associated with
the polar fronts. They generally are found near the tropopause and their strong vertical shear is thought to
be the cause of clear air turbulence. For 10 points, name these "rivers of air" that affect travel times on
some flights.
ANSWER: jet streams
At night during the spring and summer, a low-level example of these systems develops over the Plains
states. Severe weather can be caused by the upward motion of air at the right entrance and left exit region
of theses systems. Namesake "streaks" can be found within these systems. Meanders in these systems result
in the formation of troughs and ridges and are a result of Rossby waves. These systems are typically found
near the tropopause and at the boundary of Hadley and Ferrell or Ferrell and polar cells. Although not
fronts, these systems are classified into polar and subtropical. For 10 points, identify these narrow bands of
fast-moving air in the upper atmosphere.
ANSWER: jet streams [prompt on jet streaks until it is read]
The large meanders in them are called Rossby waves and can extend over 20 degrees or more of latitude.
They form in areas of the tropopause with large temperature gradients, and the magnitude of the gradient
determines the strength of the winds produced. These winds can reach speeds in excess of 100 miles per
hour and always flow from west to east. It is because of them that flights from New York to London take
about 1 hour less than flights in the opposite direction. For ten points, name these narrow high-altitude air
currents.
ANSWER: Jet streams
The Hampson-Linde cycle uses this effect, which takes place below the inversion temperature. Its namesake
coefficient is positive for most substances other than hydrogen and helium and is equal to the partial
derivative of temperature with respect to pressure, as enthalpy is held constant. This effect involves a
deviation from the laws of both Boyle and one of its namesakes. Used to liquefy gases, name this doublyeponymous effect in which a non-ideal gas changes temperature as it is throttled.
ANSWER: Joule-Thomson effect [accept the order of names swapped; accept substitution of Kelvin for "Thomson"; accept throttling process before the last word; accept reasonable other words instead of "effect", including "expansion"]
One process that makes use of this effect was developed by Charles Tipler, while a very similar process
making use of this effect is partly named for William Hampson. If the thermal expansion coefficient times
temperature equals one, then this effect's coefficient is zero, while this effect is commonly used in the Linde
process. This effect is most commonly used when the gas is below the inversion temperature, which means
that its namesake coefficient is positive. Ideal gases don't experience this effect, which occurs at constant
enthalpy. FTP, identify this throttling process, which causes the temperature of a gas to change as it
expands through a valve, named after two scientists.
ANSWER: Joule-Thomson (OR Joule-Kelvin, accept names in either order)
Central Asian mountains were created during this period by the Cimmerian Orogeny. Windy Hill Member is
the oldest subdivision of the Colorado Morrison Formation which displays a distinctive sequence of
sedimentary rocks belonging to this period. The Hettangian and Tithonian stages are the first and last stages
of this geological period. The Tethys Sea was formed during this period between the two continents
Gondwana and Laurasia which were formed as a result of the breakup of Pangaea. Followed by the
Cretaceous Period, for 10 points, name this geological period, preceded by the Triassic Period, known for
reptiles and dinosaurs.
ANSWER: Jurassic Period [prompt on Mesozoic Era]
Clays from this region have glassy spherules with limestone-like chemistry, and another characteristic of
this region is the presence of quartz with various criss-cross patterns. Abnormally high concentrations of a
transition element at this region led to a proposition that the Chicxulub Crater was caused by a meteor
striking the Earth, and was advanced by Walter and Luis Alvarez. It is thought that the dinosaurs died out at
the same time that this rock layer was formed from dust and debris from a meteor about 65.5 million years
ago. For 10 points, identify this layer of rocks that mark the distinction between the Cretaceous and Tertiary
periods.
ANSWER: K-T Boundary [accept Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary early; accept K-Pg boundary o Cretacious-Paleogene boundary]
The existence of this entity supports a theory that invalidated the Deccan Flats Hypothesis. It contains
fragments of shocked quartz and tektite glass. Luis Alvarez and his son Walter hypothesized the reason for
this entity's existence. It has high levels of iridium, which suggests that it was formed concurrently with the
object that formed the Chicxulub Crater on the Yucatan Peninsula. For 10 points, name this boundary
formed by the asteroid that killed the dinosaurs, usually named for two letters that abbreviate the periods it
demarcates.
ANSWER: the K-T boundary [accept Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary; accept Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary; accept K-PG boundary]
The Shallow-Hydrothermal variety of this geologic feature occasionally forms via hydrogen sulfide
oxidation, which produces gypsum. Cenotes, a common structure found in these features, are used to
access water sources on the Yucatan Peninsula. Disappearing Irish lakes called turloughs are
exclusive to these regions which also feature small clustered grooves called darren. dolines are the
characteristic features of these regions, which can be formed via the carbon dioxide cascade. Bedrock in
these areas is usually composed of Dolomite and Limestone, rocks with an unusual susceptibility to
weathering by acid rain. For 10 points, name these geologic regions which feature sinkholes and caves.
ANSWER: Karst Topography
Its name comes from the region of Kras, a plateau in southwestern Slovenia and northeastern Italy. Areas
exhibiting it in the United States include the Ozark Plateau and the Hill Country of Texas. Many of these
regions include extensive cave systems, along with surface features such as sinkholes, limestone pavements
and disappearing streams. Formed when acidic water eats away at the limestone or dolomite bedrock, FTP
identify this type of topography that can features giant limestone towers.
ANSWER: Karst Topography
Azlactone intermediates are formed when alpha-amino acids react with acetic anhydrides to produce these
in the Dakin-West reaction, while the large ring alicyclic type are produced by the Ruzicka synthesis.
Aromatic forms of these are created using organic nitriles in the Houben-Hoesch reaction, and also form
from esters in the Fries rearrangement. The methyl type produces a positive result in the iodoform test, and
unlike a similar compound, these almost always give a negative result when reacted with Tollens' reagent.
Produced by the oxidation of secondary alcohols, for 10 points, name this type of organic compound
consisting of a carbonyl attached to two carbon atoms, whose simplest example is acetone.
ANSWER: ketone (accept Dakin-West reaction before "these")
Adolph-Strecker amino acid synthesis is one process that creates amino acids naturally from these, and
these can be fully reduced to alkanes when they undergo the Wolff-Kishner reduction. Acyloins are a
special type of these that react with the Tollen's reagent, and the Wittig reaction produces alkenes from
these. Unlike aldehydes, they have two hydrocarbon groups attached to the carbon atom of their carbonyl
group. Types of these include di-, cyclic, and unsaturated. For ten points, name these substances that are
formed from the oxidation of alcohols, the simplest example of which is the solvent acetone.
ANSWER: ketones
These compounds form Weinreb amides by the Wittig reaction, and varieties of these substances with
alpha-hydrogen centers participate in a type of tautomerism named for these compounds and enols.
Examples of these compounds include a compound with abbreviated formula Ph2CO ("P-H-TWO-C-O"),
benzophenone, which like other members of this family features a carbonyl group. For 10 points, name this
functional group which consists of a carbon double bonded to an oxygen and to two other carbon atoms.
ANSWER: ketones
Fukuyama developed a method to produce these compounds from thioesters and organozinc halides.
These compounds are reacted with 2,4-dinitrophenyl hydrazine, giving a positive result, in Brady's
test. These compounds and alcohols are produced from a peroxide rearrangement named for
Kornblum ad DeLaMare. These compounds may be oxidized in the presence of a peroxyacid to an
ester in a procedure named for (*) Baeyer and Villiger, and addition of a single equivalent of Grignard
reagent gives a tertiary alcohol. For 10 points, name this functional group featuring a carbon with two single
bonds to carbon and one double bond to oxygen, the simplest example of which is acetone.
ANSWER: ketones [prompt on "carbonyl"]
Equal amounts of two isomers of one of these compounds are made by a reaction in which DMAP or
pyradine react with an amino acid. These compounds are the major product in the reaction of an
organozinc halide and thioester under palladium catalysis. Two of these, one equipped with methyl
and vynil groups, can react through two addition reactions and a dehydration to produce a third one
of these that is cyclic and alpha, beta unsaturated. These compounds are thus the products in the
Dakin-West reaction and (*) Fukuyama coupling, and both reactants and products in the Robinson
annulation. For 10 points, name this functional group consisting of two carbon atoms bonded a carbondouble-bond-oxygen group.
ANSWER: ketones [accept aminoketones; prompt on carbonyls or aminos or aminocarbonyls]
With an organometallic catalyst, the Weinreb synthesis produces these molecules from amides. Along
with anhydrides, Ozonolysis of alkynes can produce these compounds. A carboxylic acid is formed
from one of these compounds in the Haller-Bauer cleavage. This class of organic compound's
namesake "bodies" can be caused by an excess in acetyl-Co-A. The Robinson annulation uses up two of
these types of molecules, which do not change when subject to Tollen's test. The Jones oxidation of a
secondary alcohol produces, for ten points, this group of compounds consisting of a secondary carbon
double bonded to an oxygen, the simplest of which is acetone.
ANSWER: Ketone
Assimomytis et al. used LDA to catalyze an unusually anionic version of one reaction that creates these
compounds, and that reaction that makes these compounds has a photo- variant that proceeds via a
mechanism involving the cleavage of a carbon-oxygen bond to produce a radical with three distinct
resonance structures. Another reaction that makes six-membered rings usually begins with a Michael
addition of two of these compounds to an enolate and proceeds with an aldol condensation to an enone.
Those reactions are the Fries rearrangement and Robinson annulation. A negative result in the Tollens test
for these compounds distinguishes them from aldehydes. For 10 points, name this type of compound with a
carbonyl group bonded to two different substituents, the simplest of which is acetone.
ANSWER: ketones
One example of these compounds is produced by the oxidation of 2-butanol [BYOO-tah-nol], and a
common test for these substances looks for the creation of iodoform [ie-oe-doe-FORM]. When humans
produce too much of these chemicals because of too much fatty acid breakdown, their blood turns acidic,
which is a diabetes symptom. The simplest example of this, used as nail polish remover, is acetone [A-suhtone]. Name these carbonyls [KAHR-buh-nils] that are not aldehydes [AL-duh-hides] because the central
carbon is bonded to two other carbons.
ANSWER: ketones (prompt on "carbonyl")
The Friedel-Crafts acylation produces an aryl alkyl or a di-aryl one, while their deoxygenation by zinc
comprises the Clemmensen reduction. Grignard reagents react with nitriles to form them and can reduce
them to secondary alcohols. To distinguish them from other compounds with carbonyl groups, the Tollens
test does not form a silver mirror with these as in aldehydes. FTP, name this organic functional group with
two alkyl groups bonded to a carbonyl group, the simplest of which is acetone.
ANSWER: Ketones
One method of reducing these compounds enantioselectively is known as the Corey-Bakshi-Shibata
reaction, and in aqueous solutions, they usually exist in equilibrium with enols. Applying the Jones
oxidizing agent to secondary alcohols is a more common way of creating these compounds. The simplest
example of one is often used in cleanup following organic experiments due to its rapid evaporation, and
these compounds are distinguished from a similar type of compound by the presence of two alkyl groups
bonded to the central carbon. For 10 points, name this type of carbonyl compound, the simplest type of
which is acetone.
ANSWER: ketones
Amides are produced in the Schmidt reaction by reacting hydrazoic acid and a compound of this type, and
in Claisen-Schmidt condensation, one of these reacts with an aldehyde. These compounds yield tertiary
alcohols when reacted with Grignard reagents, and two of them are formed when ozonolysis is performed
on an internal alkene. Tollens' reagent will not produce a silver mirror in the presence of this functional
group, unlike in the presence of a similar group of compounds, aldehydes. For 10 points, name this
functional group consisting of a carbon double-bonded to an oxygen and single-bonded to two carbons, the
simplest example of which is acetone.
ANSWER: ketone
Dehydrating this compound forms an oxazole in the Robinson-Gabriel synthesis, and zinc compounds are
used to generate them from thioesters in the Fukuyama coupling. Another reaction used to generate them
uses thorium oxide to cyclize a dicarboxylic acid. Another method to create them uses a Lewis acid to
create an acyl chloride, which undergoes an electrophilic aromatic substitution. In addition to the Ruzicka
cyclization and the Friedel-Crafts reaction, these compounds can be created from secondary alcohols using
the Jones reagent. They exist in an equilibrium with enols in a simple form of tautomerism. For 10 points,
name these carbonyls that contain a carbon double bonded to an oxygen bound to two R groups.
ANSWER: ketones
Solid iodoform formation is involved in a common method for testing for methyl versions of this
functional group. With a thorium oxide catalyst, a dicarboxylic acid is converted into a cyclic version
of these and in another reaction, thioesters and organozinc compounds also couple to form these. In
addition to being the product of Ruzicka cyclization and Fukuyama Coupling, these tautomerizable
compounds can be treated with either (*) mCPBA or hydrogen peroxide to form esters in the BaeyerVilliger oxidation. Their "bodies" are found in the urine of starving people and, more commonly, diabetics.
These compounds result after secondary alcohols are oxidized. For 10 points, name this functional group,
which has a carbon atom double-bonded to an oxygen atom and single-bonded to two carbon groups, the
simplest of which is acetone.
ANSWER: ketones
The Wieland-Miescher (VEE-lahnd MEE-shur) and Hajos-Parrish (HI-yuss PAAR-ish) examples of these
compounds are products of the Robinson annulation, and another member of this class, the main ingredient
in artificial butter flavoring, is diacetyl (di-uh-SEE-tuhl). In the presence of mercuric sulfate, alkynes (ALkines) can be converted to these compounds by hydration, and though this class is not lipids (LIH-pids), it
does include animal musk and the androgen steroid hormones. Common solvents in this class include the
wax precipitating methyl ethyl (METH-uhl ETH-uhl) type along with the primary component of nail polish
remover, and a negative result from Tollens' reagent distinguishes this class from aldehydes (AL-duh-hidz).
Easily produced by oxidation of secondary alcohols, name this class of compounds in which a carbonyl
(car-BON-uhl) group is bonded to two other carbons.
ANSWER: ketones
The enantioselective reduction of these compounds by a bicyclic boron-containing proline derivative in the
presence of diborane was pioneered by Corey, Bakshi, and Shibata. A hydroxyl aryl version of this
functionality is produced in the Fries rearrangement. When acting on a secondary but not a primary alcohol,
the Jones reagent produces this functionality. In the presence of acid or base, it forms a tautomer with enol,
and in solution with ammonium silver nitrate, this compound fails to produce a precipitate. Thus, it has a
negative result in the Tollens test. For 10 points, name this functional group, consisting of two alkyl groups
attached to a carbonyl group, the simplest of which is acetone.
ANSWER: ketone [prompt on "carbonyl"]
The Ruzicka cyclization reaction can be used to produce cyclic versions of these compounds, and the Fries
rearrangement converts a phenyl ester to a hydroxyl aryl version of these compounds. Methyl varieties of
these and a related type of compounds can be detected using the haloform test, and they exhibit tautomerism
with enols. These compounds are reduced to tertiary alcohols, and they do not form a silver mirror in the
presence of the Tollens reagent, unlike the similar aldehydes. For 10 points, identify this class of
compounds which contains two alkyl groups bound to a carbonyl atom, and whose best known member is
acetone.
ANSWER: ketones
One of these compounds is the starting material in the Danishefsky total synthesis of taxol. The hydroxy
form of these compounds is obtained from phenyl esters in the Fries [FREEZ] rearrangement. The iodoform
test gives a positive result for the methyl type of these compounds, which generally do not react with
Tollens' reagent. These compounds react with Grignard reagents to form tertiary alcohols, and are obtained
from the oxidation of secondary alcohols. These compounds are tautomers of enols, and their simplest
example is used in nail polish remover. For 10 points, name these compounds that have two R groups
bonded to a carbonyl.
ANSWER: ketones
These compounds can be formed by reacting acyl halides with lithium dialkylcuprates. The ozonolysis of
tetra-substituted alkenes results in two molecules with this functional group. Reacting these compounds with
hydrazine and a strong base results in their complete conversion to alkanes. Acids or bases can catalyze
their tautomerization into enols, and they can be synthesized by the oxidation of secondary alcohols. The
simplest one of these is used to clean glassware in chemistry labs and is also found in nail polish remover.
For 10 points, name this type of compound exemplified by acetone that contains a carbonyl attached to two
alkyl groups.
ANSWER: ketone [Prompt on "carbonyls."]
In an effect whose name contains this word, reactions involving heavier isotopes like deuterium proceed
relatively slowly. One result of a theory whose name contains this word is that ideal gases obey a MaxwellBoltzmann velocity distribution. A substance like diamond has this kind of stability if a high energy barrier
prevents it from reacting. This kind of stability contrasts with thermodynamic stability. The field of this
name studies things like pseudo-first-order rate laws and reaction rates. For 10 points, name this field which
studies the rate at which reactions occur, and which shares its name with the type of energy possessed by a
body in motion.
ANSWER: kinetics [or kinetic isotope effect; or kinetic (molecular) theory; or kinetic stability; or reaction kinetics; or chemical kinetics; or kinetic energy]
Early pioneers of this theory included Waterston and Daniel Bernoulli, who discussed it in his
Hydrodynamica. The Knudsen regime is a more recent expansion of it, as are higher order virial
expansions. Some of this theory's assumptions are that atoms have negligible volume, elastically
collide with each other, and have negligible interactions with each other. For 10 points, name this theory
that describes the macroscopic properties of gases largely through the Maxwell-Boltzman distribution of
their velocities as they undergo motion.
ANSWER: kinetic theory of gases [prompt on "collision" theory]
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution provides the foundation for this theory. The equipartition theorem
is valid in this theory and states that a certain quantity is equal to one-half Boltzmann's constant times
temperature. This theory states that gas particles have perfectly elastic collisions and are of negligible
volume. For 10 points, name this theory which describes a gas as a large number of small particles that are
in constant, random motion, providing the basis for the ideal gas law.
ANSWER: kinetic theory of gases
One version of this model, in which objects are pushed to regions of heated low-density aether, was used by
John Herapath to mechanically explain gravitation. This theory predicts a value of 2mv for momentum
gained by the wall of a container due to a single particle, because this theory assumes that all collisions are
perfectly elastic. It also postulates that individual particles have negligible volumes and that intermolecular
attractive or repulsive forces between gas particles are also negligible. For 10 points, name this theory that
describes the behavior of ideal gases undergoing constant, random motion.
ANSWER: kinetic theory of gases [or kinetic-molecular theory]
One type of this geologic feature turns over in the spring and fall. In meromictic types of this feature
such as Nyos, carbon dioxide can erupt. The top layer of a stratified one is the epilimnion, and the oxbow
type of this feature is formed when a meander is cut off. Many of the ones found in the Great Rift Valley
contain cichlids ("SICK"-lids), and they can form in volcanic craters. For 10 points, name these bodies of
water surrounded by land, examples of which include Tanganyika (TAN-ga-NEEK-ah) and Superior.
ANSWER: lakes
Meromictic ones near volcanic regions can undergo limnic eruptions, their namesake "overturns." The
metalimnion, or thermocline, of these bodies is their region of greatest thermal gradient. Kraken and Ligeia
are examples found on Titan, and one of these named Agassiz covered much of North America during the
previous ice age. Salt pans often form at the bottom of endorrheic ones, which have no outflows. On Earth,
due to a deranged drainage system, 60 percent of these are found in Canada. The "oxbow" variety is formed
when a meander is cut off from a river. For 10 points, name these bodies of water enclosed by land, famous
examples of which include the subglacial Vostok and the largest freshwater one, Superior.
ANSWER: lakes [prompt on "mares" or "maria"; accept no other bodies of water]
Meromictic types of these geologic structures are stratified, and their topmost layer is called the
epilimnion. During the fall overturn, the thermocline in these structures disappears. Buildup of point bars
creates oxbow types of these structures from a meander. Retreating glaciers can create the kettle type of
these structures, an artificial type of which may be called a reservoir. For 10 points, identify these
landlocked bodies of water such as Ontario and Erie.
ANSWER: lakes [prompt on ponds]
Eolic ones form in wind-eroded depressions, and meromictic ones have a constant epilimnion and
hypolimnion. Endorheic ones are often bounded by a salt pan and are found in regions where riparian
erosion is uncommon. Nutrient-poor examples of these are called oligotrophic. In those regions where
endorheic ones are found, rainfall is typically low, so those examples have little occasion to rise and find an
outlet. Isolated meanders form "oxbow" ones, and fjords are examples of these entities that form in glacial
valleys. For 10 points, name these river-fed bodies of salt or fresh water that are larger than ponds.
ANSWER: lakes [prompt on enclosed bodies of water or similar]
Jokulhlaups (YO-kuhl-awps) are large outbursts from these entities. They typically consist of three
zones, one of which is the profundal zone. The majority of these entities undergo fall overturn
although that process does not occur in meromictic ones. In meromictic ones, such as Nyos, carbon
dioxide can build up, sometimes resulting in (*) limnic eruptions. Billabongs are types of these entities
formed when wide meanders are cut off and are also known as the oxbow type. Many of the oldest, largest
and deepest ones are found in rift valleys, such as the those in East Africa. For 10 points, name these bodies
of water which include Baikal and Superior.
ANSWER: lakes [or ponds]
Triggers such as a landslide can cause these entities to undergo a limnic eruption, and thousands of people
were asphyxiated by carbon dioxide when one of these named Nyos. Several of them linked in series are
called paternoster, and cirques in a glacier cirques can form a type of these called a tarn. Cutting a bend
from a meandering river will form the oxbow variety of these, and ones located on volcanoes are the crater
type. For 10 points, name these inland bodies of water, of which a set of five "Great" ones lie on the
American-Canadian border.
ANSWER: Lakes
When these bodies of water do not flow into seas, they are dubbed "endorheic" (en-duh-REE-ik).
When a glacier carves a cirque (SURK) into a mountain, one of them called a tarn may form.
Glaciers also cause a series of interconnected ones given the name "Paternoster" (PAY-ter-NOS-ter).
They are studied by limnologists (lim-NOL-uh-jists). When a meander is cut off from a river, a
U-shaped one called an (*) "oxbow" or "billabong" is formed. For 10 points, name these bodies of water
exemplified by Michigan and Superior.
ANSWER: lakes
In the meromictic form of this feature, limnic eruptions can occur, though in the holomictic kind,
thermoclines, which don't exist in meres, are disrupted at least annually. When these features are
linked in succession, they are called paternoster. One of these features can form in a cirque between
the headwall and aretes and is called a tarn. When a meander is cut off, a billabong, or [*] oxbow,
variety of this feature is formed, and glacial calving forms the kettle kind. Artificial types of these features
can be created by dams and are called reservoirs. For 10 points, name these inland bodies of water, of which
the largest in North America is Superior.
ANSWER: lakes
The discharge from a prehistoric one of these structures near Missoula, Montana is responsible for the
creation of the Channeled Scablands of Washington. When these bodies are closed or terminal, they are
termed endorheic, and when their layers don't interact, they are meromictic. These structures can undergo
deadly "overturns" in which carbon dioxide erupts from them. One of these structures was the starting point
of a body named for G.K. Warren and is named for Louis Agassiz. For 10 points, name these bodies of
water, exemplified by Victoria and Superior.
ANSWER: lakes [accept glacial lakes; prompt on reservoirs]
A tarn is one of these features that forms in a cirque, while paternoster ones are linked in succession.
The epilimnion and hypolimnions reverse seasonally in the dimictic type of these entities, while
holomictic ones are not stratified. Limnic eruptions in these structures can increase their carbon
dioxide content, and oligotrophic ones lack primary productivity. (*) Kettle ones are formed by
retreating glaciers, and the main source of outflow for endorheic ones is evaporation. Point bars can form
oxbow types of these structures from a meandering river, and these features can also be formed when water
collects in volcanic calderas. For ten points, name these inland bodies of water exemplified by freshwater
ones in North America named Huron and Superior, which are bigger than ponds.
ANSWER: lakes
Project XL is currently sponsoring several pilots of these entities aiming for increased energy capture
and quicker stabilization as opposed to conventional examples. The aformentioned bioreactor form
of these sites may be aerobic or anaerobic depending on whether air is injected. These entities'
namesake gas, also known as biogas, is mostly comprised of methane produced from anaerobic
digestion, and they are lined with impermeable geomembranes to prevent groundwatercontaminating leachate runoff. The first modern (*) "sanitary" one of these, which pioneered the
conventional "dry tomb" form, was constructed on the outskirts of Fresno, California in 1930, and a famous
former one of these, currently planned to be transformed into a park, was notably reopened to receive debris
from 9/11 and is found on Staten Island. Fresh Kills was an example of, FTP, these repositories of
municipal solid waste, colloquially known as "dumps".
ANSWER: landfills (I guess you could prompt on "dump" before it's mentioned; accept "bioreactors" before mention)
The mineral monazite consists of phosphates of several of these elements. A mixture of these elements
called misch metal is used to purify steel, and an alloy of one of these elements with cobalt produces the
strongest known permanent magnetic force. A slightly larger group consists of these elements as well as
scandium and yttrium, the rare earth metals, and cerium is the most abundant of these elements in nature.
Their namesake contraction, or unexpected decrease in ionic radius, is due the poor shielding of 4f
electrons. Including samarium and gadolinium, for 10 points, name these metals of atomic numbers 57
through 71, grouped just above the actinides on the periodic table.
ANSWER: lanthanide series or lanthanides
A mixture of these elements can increase the heat resistance of nichrome alloys and is known as
mischmetal. Many of these elements can be extracted from monazite. One of these elements was first
synthesized at Oak Ridge in 1947, and does not naturally occur on Earth. Three of these elements
were named after the town of (*) Ytterby. The ionic radii of these elements decrease across the period,
which is known as its namesake "contraction." For 10 points, name this period of rare earth metals with
atomic numbers fifty-seven to seventy-one, which lies above the actinides.
ANSWER: lanthanides [or lanthanoids; prompt on rare earth metals; prompt on rare earth elements]
The tantalate of one of these elements is the densest known white substance, and an isotope of
another of them is manufactured as the bone cancer-treating drug "Quadrumet." In addition to lutetium
and samarium, this period contains the second-lightest synthetic element, prometheum. Poor shielding
by its 4f electrons generates their namesake "contraction". For 10 points, name this period of the
elements 57 through 71, which is typically displayed in a separate part of the periodic table, just above
the actinides.
ANSWER: lanthanides [accept lanthanoids; prompt on "rare earth elements"; prompt on "lutetium" before "bone"]
A common type of solid-state laser consists of yttrium aluminum garnet combined with one of these
elements. Mischmetal is an alloy of iron oxide and magnesium oxide, along with several of these
elements, which is commonly used in ignitors. Monazite and bastnasite are the main source of these
elements. The poor shielding ability of (*) f electrons causes these elements to have progressively smaller
atomic radii, called their namesake "contraction." The only one of these elements which is synthetic is
promethium. For ten points, name these elements which make up the majority of rare earth metals, which
are located above the actinides on the Periodic Table.
ANSWER: lanthanides
A mixture of these elements can increase the heat resistance of nichrome alloys and is known as
mischmetal. Many of these elements can be extracted from monazite. One of these elements was first
synthesized at Oak Ridge in 1947, and does not naturally occur on Earth. Three of these elements
were named after the town of (*) Ytterby. The ionic radii of these elements decrease across the period,
which is known as its namesake "contraction." For 10 points, name this period of rare earth metals with
atomic numbers fifty-seven to seventy-one, which lies above the actinides.
ANSWER: lanthanides [or lanthanoids; prompt on rare earth metals; prompt on rare earth elements]
Commercial uses for these include uses in lasers and in sunglass lenses as they tend to reflect harmful UV
radiation as well as several members of this group comprising significant portions of the alloy called Misch
metal. Due to their electronic structures, members of this group tend to lose three electrons and are
therefore find their most stable oxidation states as trivalent ions. Trends among this group include the filling
up of the 4f atomic orbital and a decrease in the size of the ionic radius, the group's namesake 'contraction'.
Containing three of the four elements named after the same town in Sweden, FTP, identify this group of 15
elements that includes Erbium, Samarium, Promethium and its namesake element whose name comes from
the Greek word for "to lie hidden".
ANSWER: Lanthanides
One member of this set has a namesake "anomaly" because it is so readily absorbed in plagioclase
that it is either very enriched or depleted. Another of them forms, with iron and boron, the strongest
known magnets. All of them are trivalent, and this class of (*) elements displays a namesake
contraction. Examples include lutetium, europium, samarium and neodymium. For 10 points, identify
this set of elements, defined by their filling of the 4f subshell, one row above the actinides.
ANSWER: lanthanides [or lanthanoids]
A variation of ELISA using one member of this group takes advantage of the fact that their ions have
millisecond luminescence lifetimes and is called DELFIA. Complexes of members of this group can be
analyzed by Friere and Simas' Sparkle Model. DOTA is a chelating agent used to isolate members of
this group. Members of this group exhibit very high spin-orbit coupling and paramagnetism, which is
why one member is found in the most common MRI contrast agent. Members of this group tend to
decrease ionic radius as their (*) mass increases, a phenomenon called their namesake contraction. These
elements are the first to have occupied f orbitals, and Seaborg placed them above the actinides. For 10
points, name these elements which have atomic number from 57 to 71, shown underneath the periodic table.
ANSWER: lanthanides
These elements have high magnetic moments and form large trivalent cations. These elements are used
in color televisions and lasers due to a sharp emission spectrum in their 4f electrons. Like the transition
metals, this set of elements contains a single synthetic element; that element is prometheum. For 10 points,
name these elements often found just above the actinides on the periodic table.
ANSWER: lanthanides [or lanthanoids]
A recent model equates a quantity of this kind with the product of the maximum surface area, the surface
tension, and the number of atoms in a liquid. This quantity's flux appears in the denominator of the Bowen
ratio, whose numerator contains the related "sensible" quantity. Increased low-level convergance,
buoyancy, and updrafts are created by exploiting this quantity in cloud seeding. The "specific" form of this
quantity is equal to Q over m. This quantity divided by the product of temperature and volume is the slope
of the coexistence curve in the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. This quantity was first theorized after the
observation that adding heat to ice in water melts the ice without raising the temperature. For 10 points,
name this kind of heat involved in fusion and vaporization.
ANSWER: latent heat [accept latent after "this kind of heat" is mentioned; prompt on "heat"; prompt on "heat of fusion" until mention; prompt on "heat of vaporization" until mention]
This can be calculated using the radii and charges of all the ions involved in the Kaputinskii equation.
Other methods include a derivative of Coulomb's law and the most common method, the Born-Haber cycle,
but all methods of calculating it are approximations. In order for dissolution to occur, the new
intermolecular forces created must compensate for this quantity. The similar quantity for the reverse
process is the energy of crystallization. Measured in kJ/mol, FTP, name this quantity with symbol U, the
energy required to separate an ionic solid into gaseous ions.
ANSWER: Lattice Energy
This quantity can be calculated using the Kapustinskii equation, and a constant proportional to this
quantity can be calculated using the Ewald method and is named for Madelung. Another method for
finding it involves the reciprocal of an exponent that falls between 5 and 12 and is named for (*) Born
and Lande. This quantity can be determined experimentally using a method that atomizes a substance to
measure enthalpy, the Born-Haber cycle. For 10 points, name this quantity denoting the strength of bonds in
an ionic solid, which is also the amount of energy needed to separate the molecules of a crystal into an ionic
gas.
ANSWER: lattice energy [or lattice enthalpy]
Large differences between the classical method of estimating this quantity and an estimate made using an
equation partially named for Mayer suggest significant covalent bonding. The equation to calculate this
quantity due to one atom in a structure includes the number of charges on the atom and the Madelung
constant, which is dependent on the arrangement of atoms in the structure. This quantity, symbolized U, is
often estimated experimentally through the Born-Haber cycle, and it is defined as the amount of energy
given off when oppositely charged ions in the gas phase come together to make a solid. For 10 points, name
this quantity, the bond strength of an ionic solid.
ANSWER: lattice energy
A set of numbers used to calculate this quantity in several equations has numbers measured
at integer square roots times the radius of the coordination sphere. That set of numbers depends
only on crystal geometry, is found by summing Coulombic interactions, and are the Madelung
constants, which are used in the Born-Mayer and Born-Lande (LAHN-day) equations to
calculate this quantity. Using the atomization enthalpy of two species, and the first ionization
energy and electron affinity of the species, one can apply Hess's law to calculate this law with the
Born-Haber cycle. For 10 points, name this energy needed to convert a solid ionic compound
into its gaseous components.
ANSWER: lattice energy [or lattice enthalpy; or energy of crystallization]
Ewald summation is used to determine the Madelung constant, which in turn figures in the
numerator for determining this quantity. A low-precision value for it is given by the Kapustinskii
equation. The inverse of a number between five and twelve is subtracted from one as one factor in
another formulation of it. That equation is named for Lande and a man who, with Haber, names a cycle
that determines it, Born. Described as the enthalpy of formation of its namesake structure from gases,
for 10 points, name this energy measuring the strength of bonds in an ionic solid.
ANSWER: lattice energy
The Born-Lande equation can be used to calculate nine-tenths of this value through determination of
electrostatic energy. This determination involves an infinite number of electrostatic interactions which are
incorporated using Madelung constants. Of the six enthalpy values that compose the Born-Haber cycle of
sodium chloride, this quantity and the standard heat of formation are the only ones that involve both
species. It is greater for solids composed of divalent cations and increases with ionic radii. For 10 points,
the magnitude of the energy of crystallization is equal to what quantity defined as the energy needed to
separate a mole of a solid into a gas of its ions?
ANSWER: lattice energy (accept crystallization energy before mentioned)
A lack of info about cation-anion distances can prevent the use of the Kapustinskii equation to determine
this value. Another method of calculating it involves squaring both the charge of ions and electrons and
knowing the Madelung constant. A process that involves the enthalpy of sublimation and the electron
affinity is yet another way to calculate this quantity. It generally increases as ionic charge increases and it is
equal to the negative of the energy of crystallization. For 10 points, name this quantity often symbolized U
that measures how much energy is required to separate a solid mole of an ion or molecule into a gas.
ANSWER: lattice energy
One equation used to calculate this quantity multiplies two terms with a sum of radii in their denominators,
and is known as the Kapustinskii equation. A rough approximation of it can be found with a modified form
of Coulomb's Law featuring a single distance, while a constant that is proportional to this quantity can be
determined with the Evjen method or calculated by expanding cubes, and is named for Madelung. Another
method used to determine it ends with gaseous ions in the Born-Haber cycle. For 10 points, name this
quantity, like internal energy symbolized U, defined as the amount of energy needed to completely ionize a
solid compound.
ANSWER: lattice energy
One equation that solves for this value sums the ionic radii in its denominator under their charges and is
named for Anatoli Kapustinskii. That equation does not make use of the Madelung constant, which shows
up in other equations for solving this value named for Born-Mayer and Born-Lande. This value cannot be
measured directly, but it can be estimated by using the Born-Haber cycle. The energy of crystallization is
sometimes used as the opposite of this term. For 10 points, name the type of energy released when gaseous
ions are condensed into a solid.
ANSWER: lattice energy
Bartlett used this quantity to predict the stability of xenon hexa-fluoro-platinate. One refinement to the most
common equation used to calculate this quantity includes a term symbolized by a lowercase rho that is equal
to 35 picometers for alkali metal halides. A constant associated with one way of computing it is a
summation of all of the attraction and repulsion terms, and is equal to 1.75 for sodium chloride. One
equation used to calculate theoretical values of this quantity is known as the Born-Lande equation, while
another is the Kapustinskii equation. It is proportional to the Madelung constant and is sometimes
determined using a Born-Haber cycle. For 10 points, name this quantity, the energy change for the
formation of one mol of an ionic solid from its constituent gaseous ions.
ANSWER: lattice energy or lattice enthalpy
This substance's "pillow" type is formed underwater. Another type of this substance advances as a
series of toes and lobes extruding from a cooled crust and is pahoehoe (pa-HO-ay-HO-ay). This non-solid
substance can be classified into felsic, intermediate, mafic and ultramafic. When this substance solidifies, it
forms igneous rock. For 10 points, identify this term for molten rock above the Earth's surface, which is
expelled in many volcanic eruptions.
ANSWER: lava [prompt on magma]
Gas bubbles in this material are called amygdules. Lakes of it can be found at Erta Ale in Ethopia.
This material can emerge from an underwater vent in the "pillow" variety, and it is typically
preceded by dangerous flows called (*) lahars. Several types of it are given Hawaiian names like 'A'a
(AH-AH) and pahoehoe (PAH-hoy-hoy). If this material is underneath the earth's surface, it is called
magma. For 10 points, name this molten rock which is expelled by a volcano.
ANSWER: lava [do not accept "magma"]
This material completely surrounds lands known as "kipuka." A landform called a tuya results when this
substance is found beneath a glacier. This substance interacts with water to form the "pillow" type of it.
When this substance is very liquid, it is known as pahoehoe (pa-HOY-hoy). When this material takes on a
chunky consistency, it is known as aa (AH-ah). Composite, or "strato" cones, alternate between this emitting
this material and expelling tephra and ash. For 10 points, name this type of molten rock, the above-ground
counterpart of magma.
ANSWER: lava [do not accept "magma"]
Both acruate and sinuous rilles were believed to have been created by an exotic type of this
substance, one type of which is called "blocky" because of its huge quantities of andesite. Diatremes
are an example of structures known as this material's namesake spine. This substance may create a
"roof" over its namesake channel to create its namesake tubes, which resemble (*) caves and may run
for miles. Circular, fine-grained, rocks that are underwater makeup the "pillow" form of this hardened
substance. These thixotropic liquids can be classified as aa or pahoehoe. For 10 points, name this liquid
material that is spewed from a volcano during an eruption, which eventually solidifies into rock on the
earth's crust.
ANSWER: lava [do not accept or prompt on "magma"]
This substance usually is not formed from andesite or dacite because they have a high gas content. When
released from tuyas, this substance can cause jokulhlaups (YUH-kul-huh-soyps) or glacier bursts. The
pillow type of this substance is usually produced underwater. Its namesake tubes can be formed under its
pahoehoe (PA-ho-ay-ho-ay) type, which can transform to the a'a (ah-ah) form due to flow turbulence. For
10 points, give this name for molten rock expelled from a volcano.
ANSWER: lava
Movement of this material creates a landform called kipukas. A monolith made of it called a "spine"
appeared in the Caribbean and was called "Pelee's Tower." When this material emerges from an
underwater vent, it can form "pillow" types of it. At a location named Erta Ale in Ethopia, this material
forms a lake in a caldera. Types of it that flow are called 'a'a and pahoehoe. For 10 points, name this
molten rock, which as opposed to magma, appears above the surface when expelled by a volcano.
ANSWER: lava [prompt on igneous rock]
This scientist performed an experiment in which he shone the sun's rays on a diamond, producing
carbon dioxide, which showed that diamonds are made of carbon. This author of Essays Physical and
Chemical was the first to state the law of conservation of mass, in his Elementary Treatise on
Chemistry. He also discredited the (*) phlogiston theory and named oxygen and hydrogen, as well as
compiling an early list of elements. For 10 points, name this "father of modern chemistry" who was
guillotined during the French Revolution.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier
After heading a Gunpowder Administration, this scientist worked on a commission for unifying weights
and measures. He was the first to outline the principle of the conservation of mass, and he disproved the
phlogiston theory of combustion in his analyses of the reactions of oxygen. He was guillotined during the
Reign of Terror. For 10 points, name this French founder of modern chemistry.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier
This person experimented with Pierre-Simon Laplace [luh-PLAHSS] on specific heats; they found
that animals and flames received the same amount of energy from given compounds. This person
also repeated Cavendish's and Priestley's air experiments, naming hydrogen and using the term
"azote" [AY-zote] to refer to nitrogen. He included light and caloric in his list of elements, which
appeared in a textbook that included his statement of the law of mass conservation. Name this
scientist, guillotined during the French Revolution, who disproved phlogiston [fluh-JISS-tun] theory
and became known as the Father of Modern Chemistry.
ANSWER: Antoine(-Laurent) Lavoisier
In one experiment, this man placed a guinea pig inside of a calorimeter to show that respiration
could be compared to combustion. A round bottom flask and a barometer can be seen in a portrait of
this man and his wife Marie-Anne Paulze. He provided the names for both (+) hydrogen and oxygen
during a series of experiments that debunked phlogiston (floh-JIS-ton). Later, he was tried for such
crimes as selling watered down tobacco made by his political enemy Jean Paul (*) Marat. For 10
points, name this chemist who first formulated the conservation of mass and who was guillotined during the
height of the French Revolution.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier
This scientist's paper "General Considerations on the Nature of Acids" identified the source of acidity as
a gas discovered by Henry Cavendish. This scientist named that gas, hydrogen, as well as oxygen, which he
demonstrated to be the agent of combustion, disproving phlogiston theory. For 10 points, name this French
"father of modern chemistry" who was executed during the Reign of Terror.
ANSWER: Antoine Lavoisier
This scientist rejected a theory of reactions advanced by Georg Ernst Stahl. This author of the
Elementary Treatise on Chemistry had scientific texts in other languages translated by his wife Marie
Anne. He self-financed a series of elaborate experiments designed to demonstrate his principle of the
conservation of mass. This scientist disproved the phlogiston theory of combustion, showing that
combustion proceeded via oxygenation. For 10 points, name this French chemist who was executed during
the French Revolution.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier
This scientist discovered the nature of respiration as a form of combustion, and was the first to posit the
existence of allotropes when he proved that diamond and charcoal were made of the same element. This
scientist critiqued the phlogiston theory in Reflections on Phlogiston, and his General Considerations on
the Nature of Acids promoted the view that acidity is caused by the presence of oxygen. His Elementary
Treatise on Chemistry is considered one of the first modern chemistry textbooks, and he named the
elements hydrogen and oxygen. The first to state the law of conservation of mass, for 10 points, name this
French chemist, often considered the father of modern chemistry.
ANSWER: Antoine Lavoisier
This individual disintegrated a diamond to form carbon dioxide with the same weight in carbon, thus
discovering that diamonds were an allotrope of carbon. That discovery helped him conceive of a theory of
conservation of mass. This scientist named the gas oxygen after repeating Joseph Priestly's experiments with
so-called "dephlogisticated (DEE-flaw-JIS-tick-AY-ted) air." For 10 points, name this French chemist
executed by the French Revolution, nicknamed "the father of chemistry."
ANSWER: Antoine Lavoisier ["LAH-vu-ah-SEE-eh"]
This man collaborated with Laplace on experiments that showed that respiration was essentially a
slow combustion of organic material, and he also hypothesized the existence of allotropes upon
discovering that diamond was a crystalline form of carbon. After conducting experiments with
Cavendish's "inflammable air", he coined the names (*) "hydrogen" and "oxygen," which he used to
disprove the phlogiston theory of combustion. Later in life, he was accused by Jean-Paul Marat and
guillotined during the French Revolution. For ten points, name this scientist who first discovered the law of
conservation of mass and was nicknamed the "father of modern chemistry."
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier
This scientist packed a calorimeter full of ice and observed that the combustion of carbon melted less
ice than the body heat produced by a guinea pig. In another experiment, this scientist collected the
same amount of carbon dioxide from a sample of carbon and a sample of diamonds, proving that they
were one and the same. This chemist put together a short list of elements in his Elementary Treatise
on Chemistry, considered to be the (*) first modern chemistry textbook. This scientist went a step further
than Joseph Priestley by showing that nothing new was produced after combustion, putting the final nail in
the phlogiston theory. For 10 points, name this French "father of modern chemistry" who discovered the
conservation of mass and named oxygen and hydrogen.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier
This man published a series of essays about his review of the work of Joseph Black. This man was
assisted by his wife Mary-Anne Paulze, who is depicted next to him in a Jacques-Louis David (DUH-veed)
portrait. This man synthesized water in a bell jar to prove that it wasn't an element and disproved Joseph
Priestley's theory of phlogiston. He wrote the first elementary textbook of his field, the Elementary Treatise
of Chemistry. For 10 points, name this discoverer of the law of conservation of mass, a French chemist.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier
Working with Laplace, this scientist placed a guinea pig inside an ice-filled calorimeter to measure the heat
production of respiration, concluding that respiration is basically slow combustion. He was the first to find
that air is made up of two main components, one of which he called "azote". His wife Marie-Anne created
illustrations for his publications, such as 1789's Elementary Treatise of Chemistry, which denied the
existence of phlogiston. He found that weight changes during combustion were from combining with
oxygen. Executed during the French revolution, for 10 points, name this "father of modern chemistry" who
demonstrated the conservation of mass.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier
This scientist discovered that diamonds are made from carbon. With Laplace, he used a calorimeter to
investigate the ratio of heat to carbon dioxide produced when burning different materials. This man
disproved the existence of phlogiston. He wrote Methods of Chemical Nomenclature, which developed the
basis of the nomenclature used today. This man named hydrogen and oxygen and came up with the law of
conservation of mass. For 10 points, name this French scientist, who is considered the father of modern
chemistry, and who was beheaded in the French Revolution.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier
This scientist theorized that solids combine with "caloric" to form liquids, and he also showed respiration to
be a type of combustion. He theorized that all acids must contain oxygen, and his research showed that
weight changes during combustion arise from mixing with oxygen, disproving the phlogiston theory. This
author of Elementary Treatise on Chemistry also named the element hydrogen. For 10 points, name this
French scientist who developed the law of conservation of mass, often considered the father of modern
chemistry.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier
This man found that "respirable air" could be turned into "fixed air" through respiration or combustion. He
proposed that oxygen is the source of acidity, and called another component of air "azote." He showed that
oxygen and hydrogen combine to form water. In his 1789 Elementary Treatise on Chemistry, he
demonstrated that weight changes during combustion were a result of combining with oxygen, and not
because of negative-mass phlogiston. For 10 points, name this "father of modern chemistry" who first stated
the law of conservation of mass.
ANSWER: Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier
With Portevin, this man lends his name to a stress-strain relation for dilute alloys during
deformation. With Mallard, he studied the combustion of methane after a series of coal mine disasters
in France. His attempts to synthesize ammonia in the presence of iron failed due to contamination, not
due to his namesake principle. For 10 points, name this French chemist who noted that if a system at
equilibrium is perturbed, the equilibrium will shift in an attempt to restore the original conditions.
ANSWER: Henri Louis Le Chatelier
The namesake of this statement nearly succeeded in developing the Haber process, before impurities
caused an explosion. In one case of this statement, the solubility of a salt is decreased if the solution already
contains one of the salt's ions; this is known as the common-ion effect. This principle allows one to predict
the direction of a reaction based on the ratio of the reaction quotient to the equilibrium constant. For 10
points, name this principle, stating that a system in equilibrium will react to stress in a way that counteracts
the stress, named after a French chemist.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's principle
This concept qualitatively expresses an intuition about the phenomena described quantitatively by a certain
set of equations, and it can be used to predict that increasing temperature will increase the yield of an
endothermic reaction or that decreasing pressure will push a reaction toward the side with fewer moles of
gaseous products. FTP, name this principle that states that a chemical system at equilibrium will respond in
opposition to disturbances to that equilibrium.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's Principle or Principle of Le Chatelier
This statement is the reason that water is refluxed out of condensation reactions, and this statement is the
reason that the Haber-Bosch process usually is performed at very high pressures. Adding sodium chloride
to a solution of silver chloride causes the silver chloride to precipitate out in accordance with this
statement, which is called the common-ion effect. For 10 points, name this statement that says that a
reaction's equilibrium shifts in order to oppose outside stresses.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's (LEH shah-tuh-lee-AIR) principle
This concept is sometimes named for Karl Braun, who discovered it independently. The theory of
response reactions, based on analysis of the Hessian determinant, can be used to interpret
phenomena which are in contradiction to this concept. Collision theory supports this concept, and it
can be used to explain the common ion effect. This concept states that the (*) addition of an inert noble
gas or a catalyst does not affect the equilibrium state, and that an increase in pressure will favor the side
with the fewer moles. For 10 points name this principle that states that the chemical equilibrium will shift to
counteract any change imposed on a system.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's principle
This principle was used in economics by Paul Samuelson to explain why elasticity is higher in the long run
than the short run, and in chemistry, one example of it can be seen when precipitating calcium carbonate out
of hardwater with soda ash. An analogous statement to this principle in electrodynamics is Lenz's Law. It
explains why inert gases and catalysts do not affect reaction yield and the aforementioned (*) common-ion
effect. For ten points, name this chemical principle which states that a system responds to changes in
temperature, pressure, and concentration by returning to equilibrium.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's Principle
The van't Hoff equation applies this concept to thermodynamics, which explains why raising
temperature will reduce the amount of product in the Haber process. This statement explains why
dissociating sodium acetate along with acetic acid will suppress the ionization of acetic acid and
increase the pH of the (*) buffer solution, supporting the common-ion effect. According to this principle,
adding a noble gas does not result in a shift, and this principle also explains why the addition of more
reactant will tip a reaction towards the product side. For 10 points, identify this principle which states that
an equilibrium will shift to accommodate any changes, named for a French chemist.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's principle
One result of this statement is a decrease in moles being produced in a reaction when gases are reacted at
high pressures. This statement explains why the Haber-Bosch process is operated at low temperatures and
high pressures, and it also explains why adding sodium chloride to a solution of silver chloride will cause
the silver chloride to precipitate out. That phenomenon is known as the common-ion effect, and this
statement explains why adding heat to an endothermic reaction or increasing reactant concentration will
cause an increase in products. For 10 points, name this principle which states that equilibrium will shift to
counteract any changes.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's Principle
One example of this statement is the kidney removing bicarbonate ions from the blood to generate
hydrogen ions and raise the blood's pH. In physics, Lenz's law is an analogue of this statement,
which does not apply for the addition of an inert gas. Another example of it is lowering the temperature
during the Haber process since the Haber process gives off about 90 kilojoules per mole and is therefore
exothermic. For 10 points, name this principle which states that a system in chemical equilibrium will shift
to counteract an imposed stress.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's principle
One application of this statement is the removal of water by Dean-Stark distillation in a Fischer
esterification. The van't Hoff principle explains its thermodynamic results. The solubility of a compound
can decrease as a result of the common ion effect, resulting in precipitation as predicted by this statement,
and in a thermodynamic sense, it explains why exothermic reactions produce more product when
temperature is decreased. Also explaining why more product forms when additional reactant is added at
equilibrium, for 10 points, identify this principle which states that an equilibrium will shift to accommodate
any changes, named for a French chemist.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's principle
This principle explains why precipitating out calcium carbonate from hard water by adding sodium
carbonate works, in addition to helping make soaps more soluble by adding salt. A consequence to
this principle is the common-ion effect, and this statement can also be applied to explain homeostasis.
This principle explains the [*] buffer effect, and, according to this principle, both increasing the
temperature in endothermic reactions and adding more reactant result in an increased amount of product.
For 10 points, identify this principle in chemistry that states that an equilibrium shifts to counteract an
imposed change.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's Principle [accept "common ion effect" before mentioned]
This idea was used to demonstrate that auxiliary constraints reduce elasticity in the short run in a
work by Paul Samuelson. The theory of response reactions is used to explain inherent violations of
this principle, while in commercial synthesis, it is applied to increase [*] yield, as in the case of the
Haber-Bosch process. The introduction of a noble gas into a system does not result in changes according to
it, while the common-ion effect is a corollary of this principle. For 10 points, identify this principle, which
holds that a system at equilibrium will shift to counteract a change in pressure, temperature, volume, or
concentration.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's principle
Deoxygenated blood has a greater affinity for carbon dioxide, according to the Haldane effect, which is
derived from this statement. The van 't Hoff equation calculates the effect of this statement for temperature.
Long term elasticity is higher than short term elasticity, according to the application of it by economist Paul
Samuelson. Raising the temperature in an exothermic system decreases the amount of the product, due to
this, and the common-ion effect is a consequence of it. For 10 points, name this chemical principle that
states that when a system undergoes external stress, its equilibrium shifts to counteract the stress and
minimize the change.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier-Braun Principle
The Haber process uses the concept of this principle to lower its reaction's temperature while still
trying to keep the reaction rate high. This principle explains what happens in a solution affected by
the common (*) ion effect. This principle does not apply in a situation where a reaction is sped up by a
catalyst, but it does explain why changing the pressure on gases in a reaction can change a reaction's
direction. For 10 points, name this principle that describes how changes to a system in equilibrium will
cause a shift in that system until a new equilibrium is found.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's Principle
Response reactions clear up several supposed contradictions to this law, which was independently
discovered by Karl Ferdinand Braun. This principle explains why ionization is halted in the presence of a
common-ion in solution. Applied to economics by Paul Samuelson, this principle says that adding an inert
gas and adding a catalyst both don't favor one reaction over another, in contrast to changing temperature or
removing either product or reactant. For 10 points, identify this principle that governs chemical equilibrium
in terms of forward and reverse reactions, named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's Principle
Increasing the yield of a Fischer esterification by means of a water trap relies on this statement, which also
explains why deoxygenated blood has a preference for carbon dioxide. This statement justifies the use of
low pressure environments when freeze-drying materials. If pressure is increased in a reaction with the same
number of molecules on each side, nothing will change, as predicted by this statement, which also states that
the addition of more reactant will tip a reaction towards the product side. For 10 points, identify this
principle that states that the position of any equilibrium moves to counteract a change, as proposed by its
namesake French chemist.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's principle [accept law of mass action until "pressure"]
The Haber process, which is used to produce ammonia, is carried out under high pressures to compensate
for the fact that its products are not favored at the high temperatures at which it is performed, an application
of this concept, and another application of this concept involves adding an inert gas to a system. It applies
to changes in concentration, pressure, and temperature of a system. For 10 points, name this principle that
the position of equilibrium of a solution changes in response to environmental changes, named from a
French chemist.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's Principle
The namesake of this law also wrote a thesis on hydraulic mortars and determined the composition of
plaster of Paris, while Paul Samuelson introduced an application of this chemical law to
economics. Knowing the pressure before and after is only important if either the reactants or the products
are gaseous, and, if there are the same numbers of moles of gaseous molecules on both sides, there will be
no predicted change. An example is watching the color change in a syringe of NO2 and N2O4 as it is
pulled, as NO2 is a brown gas and N2O4 is a colorless one. It is applied in the Haber process when the
ammonia that is produced is removed from the solution so that the reaction will produce more of it. FTP,
name this rule that states when a reaction is subjected to a stress it will shift to counteract that stress.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's principle
This principle explains why there is decreased solubility or ionization in a molecule through the
common ion effect. This principle does not apply after the introduction of a catalyst to a system. Stresses
on a system, such as a change in pressure, temperature, or concentration, cause the changes noted by this
principle. For 10 points, name this principle named for a Frenchman that describes how a chemical system
in equilibrium will respond to changes in order to establish a new equilibrium.
ANSWER: Le Chatelier's Principle [or Le Chatelier-Braun Principle]
The Betterton-Kroll and Betts processes are industrial methods of separating bismuth from this
element. Two of its isotopes, 214 and 210, are in the decay chain of uranium-238, both times after
alpha emission by polonium. In the body, it interferes with ALA enzymes that are important in the
formation of heme, leading to microcytic anemia, and in nature it is found in the ore galena. For 10
points, name this transition metal often used in car batteries and x-ray shielding, with an atomic number 82
and symbol Pb.
ANSWER: lead
Silver, copper, and this element are used in the Oddy test. The Betterton-Kroll process separates
alloys of bismuth and this element. It affects the release of glutamate which destroys (*)
neurotransmitters, and galena is the sulfide ore of this element. Used in acid batteries and to shield against
radiation, for 10 points, name this element with chemical symbol Pb.
ANSWER: lead (accept Pb before mentioned)
This element's tetraethyl (TET-ruh-EE-thul) form used to be used as an anti-knock agent in gasoline, and it
features with sulfuric acid in car batteries. This element's major ore is its sulfide, galena (guh-LEEN-uh).
Discoveries of this element's toxicity largely ended its presence in pipes, though it is still used in radiation
shielding, as it has the highest atomic number of any stable element. For 10 points, name this element no
longer used in paint, which has symbol Pb.
ANSWER: lead [or Pb until mentioned]
One symptom of exposure to this element is found in the gums and called the Burton line. Devon colic was
caused when this element was present in apple cider. Tests for this element in a home often involve taking
dust samples from the floor and a window sill. This element was used to control engine knocking, but its use
in gas has been eliminated due to environmental concerns. Because this causes anemia and neurological
problems, its use is now banned in plumbing and paints. Name this element once known as Plumbum.
ANSWER: lead or Pb
Ions of this element inhibit ferrocheletase and delta-ALA dehydratase. Galena is a common ore of this
element, whose tetra-ethyl version was formerly used as a gasoline additive. One isotope of this element is
the stable end-product of the decay of uranium-238, and oxyanions of this element are known as plumbates.
This element was also used in paint until it was determined to be hazardous. For 10 points, name this
poisonous element with atomic number 82 and symbol Pb.
ANSWER: Lead
The Betterton-Kroll process removes bismuth from ores of this element and, with sulfur, it is found
in the mineral galena. The tetraethyl form of this element raises octane ratings in gasoline. Oxides of
this element form (*) crystal glass, and this element and tin combine to make solder. This element can
provide shielding from radiation and was once used in pipes and paints. For 10 points, name this toxic
element with chemical symbol Pb.
ANSWER: Lead
'
The coexistence pressures of liquids modeled by this form exhibit a so-called soft sphere asymptote,
but are discontinuous at low temperatures, a problem that can be fixed by leveling this function off
after its minimum. This function can be modified to account for dipole-dipole interactions through
the addition of an anisotropic coefficient over distance cubed. The aforementioned modifications
were respectively developed by (*) Weeks, Chandler and Andersen and Stockmayer to extend the
applicability of this potential. This potential contains parameters called the well depth and effective
diameter. It respectively models long-range van der Waals attractions and short-range Pauli forces using its
distance to the minus six and distance to the minus twelve terms. For 10 points, name this mathematical
model of the interaction energy between a pair of neutral molecules, a model named after just one physicist
with a compound last name.
ANSWER: the Lennard-Jones potential [prompt on L-J potential or 6-12 potential or 12-6 potential]
One modification to this equation involves adding an embedded magnetic dipole. Kihara generalized it to
account for non-spherical bodies. Barker and Henderson used a temperature-dependent diameter term in a
perturbation theory used with this equation. In addition to the Stockmayer modification of it, another
method decomposes the model into two piecewise terms, both with a change at two to the 1/6 sigma. A
truncated version sets it to zero at 2.5 times sigma, and it is the basis of the Weeks-Chandler-Andersen
perturbation theory. This equation has a coefficient equal to four times the well depth. One of its terms is
based on the Pauli exclusion principle. For 10 points, name this potential used to model molecules, that has
a 6th power attractive and 12th power repulsive term.
ANSWER: Lennard-Jones potential
This scientist was the doctoral advisor for Urey (YUR-ee) when he discovered deuterium. Earlier, this
scientist synthesized pure deuterium oxide, or heavy water. This man names a class of compounds that
activate the Friedel-Crafts reactions and include boron trifluoride and aluminum trichloride. This man, who
coined the term "photon," devised a representation of bonds within molecules by using either lines or dots
to indicate pairs of electrons. For 10 points, name this scientist who classified acids as electron pair
acceptors.
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
After earning his PhD at Harvard, he became the Superintendent of the Bureau of Weights and Measures in
the Philippines before settling at the University of California, Berkeley in 1912. His work in photochemistry
expanded understanding of phosphorescence's triplet state and led to his coining of the term "photon,"
while his seminal paper, "The Atom and the Molecule," first established the concept of the covalent bond.
FTP, name this chemist best known for being the first to purify deuterium oxide and for his namesake acid-
base definitions and dot structures.
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
Along with Kasha, this scientist linked the triplet state to phosphorescence. This man proposed the word
photon for a quantum of electromagnetic energy. Although it is not Arrhenius, one of this man's theories is
similar to another theory based on hydrogen ions, named for Bronsted and Lowry. This chemist predicted
covalent bonding in molecules through his namesake dot diagrams. For 10 points, name this American
chemist who came up with an acid-base theory of electron pair acceptors and donors.
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
This man found that tetratomic oxygen is formed in solutions of oxygen in liquid nitrogen, and
collaborated with Merle Randall in a work titled "Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical
Substances." His photochemical experiments led him to coin the term "photons," and he was the first
person to produce a pure sample of (*) deuterium oxide. In 1916, this man wrote a paper titled "The
Atom and the Molecule," in which he presented his theories about free radicals and the covalent bond. For
ten points, name this American chemist who described compounds accepting or donating electron pairs in
his namesake acid-base theory and created his namesake dot structures.
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
He defined the term "fugacity" in one early paper, and along with his student Harold Urey he
isolated the first pure sample of heavy water. He defined the covalent bond as the sharing of
electrons between a pair of atoms in one early paper. This American chemist defined an acid as an
electron (*) acceptor and a base as an electron donor. For 10 points, name this American chemist, who
names some dot structures used to draw molecules.
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
With Randall, this man names a rule which deals with fugacity. Along with predicting tetra-atomic
oxygen and purifying heavy water, he coined the term "photon," introduced the concept of activity,
and formulated equations for ionic strength. Another of this man's contributions to chemistry was
the formulation of an (*) acid-base theory which revolves around the exchange of electron pairs. Figures
named after this man are used to classify compounds into categories such as trigonal bipyramidal and
tetrahedral. For 10 points, name this chemist whose namesake dot structures reveal the shape and the
number of lone pairs of a compound.
ANSWER: Gilbert Lewis
Raoult's Law is a generalization of a law governing fugacities named for Merle Randall and this
chemist. This chemist's suspicious death from hydrogen cyanide may have been murder committed
by his longtime rival Irving Langmuir. According to one eponymous theory of this scientist, the
highest occupied molecular orbital donates electrons to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital.
Valence bond theory heavily utilizes (*) diagrams named for this chemist. Aluminum chloride is an
example of one of his namesake acids, which are electron pair acceptors. For ten points, name this
American chemist who lends his name to some "dot" structures.
ANSWER: Gilbert Norton Lewis
Though not the namesake of any free energies, this man introduced thermodynamics into the chemistry
curriculum in the textbook Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical Substances, co-authored
with Merle Randall. Along with Irving Langmuir, he theorized that atoms either donated, accepted, or
"shared" electrons to get to a valence of eight. He also defined an acid as an electron pair acceptor and a
base as an electron pair donor. For 10 points, name this chemist who is also the namesake of electron dot
structures used to represent covalently bonded compounds.
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
When this man died in a lab filled with hydrogen cyanide, the fireman appearing on the scene allegedly
asked, "Does anyone know who this guy is?". That lab was at Berkeley, where this man, along with his
student Harold Urey, discovered deuterium. This man also coined the term "photon" and hypothesized the
covalent bond. A diagram named after this man uses lines to represent those bonds and dots to represent
free electrons. For 10 points, name this American chemist with namesake electron dot structures.
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
With Merle Randall, this man names a rule that can be used to find a mixture's fugacity. In The Atom and
the Molecule, he described the sharing of electrons, what would become a covalent bond, and described free
radicals as "odd molecules" for not sharing electrons. He also coined the term "photon" as the smallest unit
of radiant energy. For 10 points, name this American chemist who has namesake dot structures and a
concept of acids and bases.
ANSWER: Gilbert N. Lewis
With Michael Kasha, this man postulated that phosphorescing organic molecules are in a triplet
state, and one of his theories was inspired by Abegg's rule. The Drago-Wayland equation can be used
to predict the enthalpy of interactions between two types of molecules named for this man, whose
isolation of heavy water predated his student (*) Harold Urey's isolation of deuterium. The fugacity of
each species in an ideal solution can be determined using a rule named for this man and Randall. In his
article "The Atom and the Molecule," he proposed a model involving cubical atoms, which led to the
postulation of the octet rule. FTP name this scientist whose namesake acids are electron pair acceptors in a
definition developed after Arrhenius and Bronsted-Lowry.
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
This man was believed to have committed suicide after having lunch with his rival Irving Langmuir.
With RT McDonald, this man produced the first pure sample of heavy water, and he employed Glenn
Seaborg as a research assistant. This scientist defined acids as electron acceptors and bases as electron
donors. Who is this American chemist, the namesake of a type of "dot structure" for displaying electron
pairs and molecular bonding?
ANSWER: Gilbert Norton Lewis
This man's work with Michael Kasha showed that phosphorescence relied on an excited triplet state, and
Irving Langmuir extended one of his theories to create the concentric theory of atomic structure. He coined
the term "activity" in one of his papers, and he proved that the fugacity coefficient for a component of an
ideal solution is equal to the coefficient of the pure species, a rule he names with Randall. He's also famous
for a theory that superseded the Bronstead-Lowry theory, and for a method of displaying atoms in terms of
bonding electrons. FTP, name this American chemist, the namesake of a type of acid that accepts electrons
and some dot structures.
ANSWER: Gilbert Norton Lewis
This chemist studied the effect of the triplet state on organic phosphorescence, and he contributed to
chemical thermodynamics by introducing the concepts of ionic strength, the activity coefficient, and
fugacity. He coined the term "photon" to describe units of EM radiation and isolated the first sample of
deuterium oxide, or heavy water. He divided compounds into electron pair acceptors and donors with his
acid-base theory. FTP, name this American chemist whose theory of covalent bonds led to his namesake
"dot diagrams."
ANSWER: Gilbert N. Lewis
With Merle Randall, this man names a rule used to find a mixture's fugacity. He coined the word
"photon" in his paper "The Atom and the Molecule." He also formulated a theory which defined acids and
bases as electron donors and acceptors, supplanting the Bronsted-Lowry concept. This scientist also
developed a simple method to draw compounds, which uses a line for a chemical bond. For 10 points, name
this American chemist who developed a "dot structure."
ANSWER: Gilbert Lewis
This scientist's later work concerned neutron refraction and the properties of deuterium. He introduced
fugacity and the activity coefficient, and with Merle Randall, he built on the thermodynamic work of J.
Willard Gibbs in his Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical Substances. Linus Pauling
promoted this chemist's model of chemical bonding. Identify this chemist whose namesake acids accept
electron pairs, and who also developed a way to diagram molecular bonding and lone pairs, his namesake
"dot structures".
ANSWER: Gilbert Newton Lewis
Ralph Pearson classified these entities as "hard" if they contained a high-energy LUMO and "soft" if
they contained a low-energy one. These compounds include a common catalyst for the Friedel-Crafts
reactions and for halogenating benzene; other examples include (*) carbocations and the central atom in
any coordination compound. These compounds are useful for removing halogen atoms from molecules, as
they act as electrophiles in nucleophilic addition. For 10 points, name these compounds that act as electron
acceptors in a namesake American's acid-base theory.
ANSWER: Lewis acids [prompt on acids]
The change in enthalpy for a certain type of reaction involving these compounds is dependent on their
reactance by the Drago equation. Mukaiyama found that these compounds can promote the formation of
aldols from acetals and silyl enol ethers. These compounds are used to promote high selectivity of oxidation
of ketones to lactones or esters in the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation. They are necessary to remove the chlorine
atom from an alkyl or acyl halide in the first step of the Friedel-Crafts reactions. For 10 points, name these
compounds that include tin tetrachloride and boron trifluoride, which act as electron pair acceptors in their
namesake American chemist's acid-base theory.
ANSWER: Lewis acids [or Lewis bases until "aldols"; prompt on Lewis; prompt on acids]
Complexes of bisoxazolines and these species can be used to induce enantioselectivity into aldol and
Mannich-type reactions. One method to test the "strength" of these species adds a triethylphosphine oxide
probe followed by phosphorus-31 NMR analysis; that is the Gutmann-Beckett method. The addition of
these substances to acetals can influence whether acetal substitution occurs by an SN1 or SN2 mechanism.
These substances are needed to activate the carbonyl group in the Sakurai reaction. These compounds
typically catalyze an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction which alkylates or acylates an aromatic
ring. Friedel-Crafts reactions can be catalyzed by aluminum chloride or boron trifluoride, both examples of
these species. For 10 points, name these acids which accept pairs of electrons.
ANSWER: Lewis acid [prompt on "acid" before mention]
In Pearson's theory, these entities can be classified as either hard or soft, and one of these functions
as a catalyst for the Friedel-Crafts reaction. Crown ethers attract metal cations because the cations
effectively function as these. Antimony Pentafluoride is a strong one of these, and compounds such as Zinc
Chloride and electron deficient Boron compounds can also act as these. For 10 points, identify these
compounds which act as electron pair acceptors according to a theory posited by a namesake American
scientist.
ANSWER: Lewis acid (prompt on acids; accept "Lewis base" until "Friedel-Crafts" )
The CBS oxazaborolidine catalyst acts both as a chiral auxiliary and as one of these compounds. The
Alder ene reaction can be conducted at low temperatures when one of these compounds is used to
activate the enophile. These compounds complex to carbonyls, enabling them to be attacked by a silyl
enol ether in the Mukaiyama variants of the Michael addition and the aldol condensation. One of
these compounds is used to catalytically activate an acid halide so it can be nucleophilically attacked
by a benzene ring in the (*) Friedel-Crafts acylation. Common examples of these compounds include
boron trifluoride, titanium tetrachloride, and aluminum trichloride. For 10 points, name these compounds
which, according to the theory of an American chemist, accept electron pairs.
ANSWER: Lewis acids [prompt on "acids"]
The Mukaiyama reaction uses one of these, titanium tetrachloride, and asymmetric ones allow for
diastereoselective aldol formation. Their strength is generally positively correlated to charge density, and
zinc can act as either an oxygen or a carbon bound one in enolates. Carbenium, like the best known
example, is called a "Lobe-LUMO" one, and they are classified, like their counterparts, as hard or soft.
They include boron trifluoride because of its unfilled p orbital, but they also trivially include H+. FTP, name
these compounds defined as electron acceptors.
ANSWER: Lewis acid
When they are contiguous, they exhibit hapticity, and are denoted using the letter eta. Those which form
multiple bonds with organic compounds such as EDTA are called chelates, while monodentate ones can
only form one bond, usually with a metallic atom. Common examples include the thiocyanate ion and
carbon monoxide. For 10 points, identify this term used to denote atoms or molecules which donate
electrons to a central atom in a coordination complex.
ANSWER: ligand
A class of these compounds includes Tp and Tm varieties, and is so named because of its facial
binding pattern. Heteroditopic ones are found to greatly increase the reactivity of catalysts because
of their ability to form both strong and transient associations. An uncommon class of them is
comprised mainly of Lewis acids and is known as Z-type; however, they are often paired with the L-
type of these compounds to increase stability. The Tolman cone angle provides one way to classify
these molecules based on size, and was originally applied to phosphines. The (*) nephelauxetic effect
describes the covalent nature of the interaction of these molecules with metals and addresses one of the
shortcomings of crystal field theory. For 10 points, name these molecules which come in monodentate,
bidentate, and polydentate varieties, which bind to metals to form coordination complexes.
ANSWER: ligands
One of these compounds undergoes an eta-5 to eta-3 transition in the indenyl effect. The presence of
one of these compounds causes a change in interelectron repulsion as measured by the Racah
parameter in the nephelauxetic effect. The size of these compounds can be measured using bite or
cone angles. These compounds are ordered in the spectrochemical series based on the size of their (*)
crystal field splitting parameter. Cyclopentadiene acts as one of these compounds with a hapticity of 5 in
ferrocene. Polydentate examples of these compounds act as chelating agents. Tetrahedral complexes
possess 4 of these compounds. For 10 points, name these compounds which bond to a central metal atom in
a coordination complex.
ANSWER: ligands [before the words "Racah parameter," accept metallocenes or coordination complexes or coordination compounds, do not accept or prompt on them afterwards]
The binding of these molecules is described by their hapticity (hap-TIH-sih-tee). EDTA is an example of
these objects used for purifying or preserving foods due to its ability to sequester metal ions. One of these
objects may bind at several sites in a chelation (key-LAY-shun) reaction. Some examples, such as the
carbonate ion, may bind at one site or more than one site; that is, they may be polydentate or monodentate.
For 10 points, name these ions or molecules that bind to central atoms to form coordination complexes.
ANSWER: ligands
One of these is termed non-innocent if it can exist in multiple oxidation states, and Zeise's salt contains one
of these were backbonding places d electrons in a pi antibonding orbital. The concept of hapticity is used to
describe the structure of one of these in a bond, which can also be described by a "bite angle," and ones
termed labile are easily reactive. Polydentate ones form bonds over several sites and are termed chelating
[KEE-lating], an example of which is EDTA. For 10 points, give this name for an atom or molecule that
bonds to a central metal atom in a coordination complex.
ANSWER: ligand [accept chelate or chelating agent until "polydentate ones"; then prompt on it until mentioned]
One class of these molecules was labeled by Trofimenko as "scorpionate," and includes several
polyborate compounds. One of these known as FLT3 is a hematopoietic cytokine that binds to the
tyrosine kinase receptor. The Hill coefficient is derived from calculating the concentration of these
molecules. These aren't acids or bases, but they can be classified as hard or soft depending on their
polarizability. The names of these molecules are often prefaced by a number and the letter (*) eta.
That number is the hapticity of these molecules, which is the number of carbon atoms they are bonded to.
These systems may be described as polydentate when they are attached by bonds from two or more donor
atoms, and they are the basis of a namesake field theory developed from crystal field theory. FTP, name
these entities which consist of a molecule bonded to a central metal atom in a coordination complex.
ANSWER: ligands [prompt on "chelating agent"]
In one reaction with this type of catalysis, a gamma-hydrogen is abstracted from a ketone, producing
a 1,4-diradical that may cyclize to form a cyclobutane. In that reaction of this type, the Norrish
reaction, the stereochemistry of the product is determined by the degree of intersystem crossing.
Porter et al. won the 1967 Nobel Prize for developing a technique employing this type of reaction that
was the first to provide sub-millisecond spectroscopic resolution. The reactivity of activated
complexes in these reactions can be quantified by the Stern-Volmer relation. The transition states of
these reactions are called exciplexes. These reactions are often conducted in media like penta-1,3-
diene, which is a (*) triplet quencher. The synthesis of xenon fluorides and the formation of halogen
radicals from atmospheric CFCs both occur via one of these reactions. For 10 points, identify these
reactions, in which electron excitation provides the activation energy.
ANSWER: light-catalyzed reactions [or photon-catalyzed reactions; or photochemical reactions; or obvious equivalents that mention "light" or "photons"]
Lichtenberg figures appear the skin of people who are victims of this phenomenon, and the formation
of red colored sprites is due to the positive type of this phenomenon. Gamma rays produced from this
phenomenon may carry the potency of a CT scan, and this phenomenon is capable of producing (*)
St. Elmo's fire. It is categorized as IC, CC, and CG, and its ball variety is rumored to appear as spherical
plasma. They reach temperatures of five times the surface of the Sun's, and metal rods protect buildings
from being struck by them. For ten points, identify these bright flashes of electrical discharge usually seen
during a thunderstorm.
ANSWER: lightning [accept ball lightning before "Lichtenberg"]
Runaway breakdown theory proposes that these phenomena are caused by cosmic rays. High temperatures
from these phenomena can produce the glass-like fulgurite from sand. Supercells are large storms that
exhibit these phenomena. These phenomena can occur between the base and anvil of cumulonimbus clouds,
and heat produced by them creates a supersonic shock wave. For 10 points, name these discharge of
atmospheric static electricity that produce thunder.
ANSWER: lightning
The soliton hypothesis seeks to explain one variety of this phenomenon, which may be generally caused by
cosmic rays initiating runaway breakdown. ELVES are one type of it caused by nitrogen excitation, while
blue jets and red sprites are extremely short-duration forms of it. This phenomenon creates fulgurites, a type
of glass, and the Miller-Urey experiment suggested that it caused the synthesis of the first organic molecules
on primitive Earth. It occurs when the dielectric strength of air is exceeded comes in both cloud-to-cloud
and cloud-to-ground forms. For 10 points, name this meteorological phenomenon, a discharge of electricity
usually accompanied by thunder.
ANSWER: lightning [accept ball lightning until "ELVES are one type of it" is completely read]
One form of this phenomenon can be initiated by charge transfer due to collisions with particles
of graupel. Less commonly observed forms of this phenomenon include blue jets and red sprites.
That first form of this phenomenon has two steps, the step leader and the much brighter return
stroke. It occurs when the breakdown voltage of (*) air is exceeded, and is attracted to sharp points like
trees and metal poles. For 10 points, name this atmospheric electric discharge often followed by thunder.
ANSWER: lightning
An apparatus to prevent damage from this phenomenon should in fact employ blunt, rather than its original
pointed, design. Stages in this phenomenon involve the formation of a "stepped ladder" before the "return
stroke." Models for this phenomenon's cause are tripolar, emphasizing the importance of the ground
shadow and its usually positive charge. This phenomenon's electrical nature was proven by the inventor of
its namesake "rod" with a kite and a key. FTP, name this atmospheric phenomenon studied by Ben Franklin,
accompanied by thunder in storms.
ANSWER: Lightning
The Fermi satellite discovered that this phenomenon produces positrons. Sprites, elves, and blue jets are
harder-to-observe variants of this phenomenon, and the positive type of it is more energetic. The initial
stage of it is preliminary breakdown followed by the formation of a stepped ladder. Before this phenomenon
occurs, the ground sends up a positive "streamer." It is precipitated by charge separation between the
ground and a cloud. For 10 points, name this atmospheric phenomenon of electric discharge often seen in
thunderstorms.
ANSWER: lightning [accept lightning strikes or equivalents]
Heinrich Vater names a polymorph type of this rock, and the Cudgel of Hercules in Poland is a 30
meter tall monolith of this type of rock. Travertine is one example of this type found along streams,
and an incompletely cemented form of this type of rock often found in Florida is called (*) coquina.
Karst topography forms when these rocks are eroded by carbonic acid and sulfide oxidation, and dolomite
and aragonite are minerals made of this type of rocks which are made of calcium carbonate. For ten points,
name these sedimentary rocks which metamorphoses into marble and is exemplified by chalk.
ANSWER: limestone
The Solnhofen deposit of this rock in Germany has preserved many pristine fossils not found elsewhere,
most famously the archaeopterix. The Folk and Dunham classification systems may be used to precisely
categorize this type of rock. Micrite and sparite are varieties of this type of rock, as is travertine. This rock
sometimes contains high amounts of magnesium carbonate, or dolomite, but it more commonly features
high amounts of aragonite and calcite. It commonly originates from secretions and fossilization of marine
animals. For ten points, identify this common sedimentary rock which is usually composed of calcium
carbonate and which metamorphoses into marble.
ANSWER: limestone
Frequently flooded landscapes on this type of rock are called alvars. One type of this rock forms
when its constituents aggregate around oolites. The Dunham classification scheme for this rock
separates subtypes based on the amount of mud present in samples. A fibrous form of this rock that
is very similar to the water based tufa is called travertine and can form speleotherms. A namesake (*)
"pavement" formed in regions of this rock is an indicator of Karst topography and is especially vulnerable
to acid rain. Coquina, a poorly cemented collection of seashells, is one type of this rock, as is the more
common chalk. For 10 points, name this type of sedimentary rock which metamorphoses into marble and is
composed mainly of calcium carbonate, often in its mineral form calcite.
ANSWER: limestone
Less common varieties of this type of rock include oolite and coqina. Karst topography landscapes are
primarily made of this rock or a similar rock with a magnesium component, dolomite. Sinkholes form when
these rocks are eroded away by carbonic acid in underground water systems. Often formed by deposits left
behind from shelled marine organisms, orogenic (or-AH-gen-ic) events can metamorphise these rocks into
marble. For 10 points, name these sedimentary rocks made from calcite, such as chalk.
ANSWER: limestone
Tufa is a porous variety of this substance that is also known as travertine. Karst topography develops
as this substance is weathered away in water or a weak acid solution. One way it is formed is from
the crushed (*) bodies of marine creatures as they are eroded against seashores. Marble is the
metamorphosed form of, for 10 points, what sedimentary rock consisting of calcium carbonate?
ANSWER: limestone
A sorbent made of this mineral can remove sulfur dioxide from gaseous pollution, and this mineral
sometimes contains inclusions of chalcedony and chert. The deficiency of magnesium distinguishes it from
dolomite, and one type of this rock is travertine and contains aragonite. It is most commonly formed
through the deposition of the calcareous shells of mollusks and diatoms and is the most common flux
component of blast furnaces. This mineral found in Karst topography makes up stalagmites and stalactites.
For 10 points, name this sedimentary rock that often metamorphoses into marble and is mostly made up of
calcium carbonate.
ANSWER: Limestone [prompt on Calcium Carbonate or Calcite]
Coccolithophores, the primary biological sources of this rock, are believed to produce less of it due to
acidifying oceans. It's not gypsum, but speleothems such as flowstone may form from this rock as carbon
dioxide leaves solution. Travertine is a form of this rock that is deposited by hot springs and often contains
aragonite, which is a less-stable polymorph of another mineral in this rock which is birefringent. Upon
metamorphosing, this calcite-containing rock and its partially-magnesian analogue dolomite turn into
marble. For 10 points, name this sedimentary rock which reacts strongly to acid rain, forms stalagmites, and
is made mostly of calcium carbonate.
ANSWER: limestone [accept chalk; accept dolomitic limestone; accept dolomite rock; generously prompt on "calcium carbonate" and "calcite" and "aragonite" before they are read; generously prompt on "dolostone"; prompt on "lime"; prompt on "quicklime"]
One type of this rock has deposits in Mono Lake, California, and another type is found along Floridian
beaches. Tufa, coquina, and other types of this rock are classified in the Folk and Dunham systems.
Typically containing aragonite, it is used in blast furnaces to extract iron. Travertine is a type of this rock,
which is found in Karst topography and makes up stalagmites and stalactites. Containing fossilized
fragments of marine organisms, this rock metamorphoses into marble. For 10 points, name this sedimentary
rock composed of calcium carbonate.
ANSWER: limestone [prompt on "calcium carbonate" before it is mentioned]
The mineral that constitutes this rock has three polymorphs, of which vaterite is the least common.
The Trona Pinnacles in California are made of a type of this rock that precipitated when saturated
groundwater interacted with alkaline lake water. The Colosseum was built from a form of this rock
known as travertine, while coquina is a type of this rock whose name refers to the (*) shells of marine
creatures that constitute it. Precipitation of the minerals that make up this rock is driven by degassing of
carbon dioxide, resulting in the formation of speleothems in many caves. For 10 points, name this type of
rock that erodes to form karsts, metamorphoses into marble, and is primarily made of aragonite and calcite.
ANSWER: limestone
The Folk classification system classifies types of this rock based on the micrite and spar content, while
another classification system for this rock is named for Dunham. It makes up the foundation in a karst
landscape along with dolomite, and cave systems can be formed by erosion via carbonic acid from
groundwater. This rock is mostly comprised of the minerals calcite and aragonite, which means it is
comprised of calcium carbonate. For 10 points, name this whitish-gray rock, which is the basis for cement
and quicklime.
ANSWER: limestone
Travertine is one kind of this rock deposited by mineral springs, while tufa is another kind found
in columns around Lake Mono. This rock consists primarily of aragonite (ah-RAH-guh-nite) and
calcite. Karst topographies are most commonly formed from (*) dolomite or this rock, which reacts
with acid to release carbon dioxide. For 10 points, name this sedimentary rock consisting of calcium
carbonate, often from marine organisms.
ANSWER: limestone
This compound's discoverer used it in a synthesis alongside vitamin A with Isler and Zeller, and one
compound in its final mixture can be replaced by 2,2 - ethylene dithio diethynol. Its preparation
requires it to be broken up by an 8% solution of lead acetate, while an alternative to this reaction
using sodium in liquid ammonia gives the trans product. This catalyst is created by adding hydrochloric
acid, then sodium hydroxide, and then precipitated calcium carbonate to a sample of palladous chloride, and
during use it is poisoned by 5% quinoline. For 10 points, name this catalyst used to reduce alkynes to cisalkenes.
ANSWER: Lindlar's catalyst
Alternative models developed by C.S. Hanes or B.H.J. Hofstee and G.S. Eadie are preferred to this error-
prone one. The Briggs-Haldane assumption is used in the formulation of this model. Non-competitive
inhibitors decrease maximum reaction velocity but do not affect an eponymous constant, so that the slope
rises, but the x-intercept is unchanged. Competitive inhibitors bind the enzyme, increasing the Michaelis
constant, so that the slope increases, but the y-intercept is unchanged. Representing the reciprocal of
reaction rate plotted against the reciprocal of substrate concentration, name, for 10 points, this doubly
eponymous biochemical plot from enzyme kinetics that is used to graphically represent the Michaelis-
Menten equation.
ANSWER: Lineweaver-Burk plot [prompt on "double-reciprocal" plot]
In superheating, a substance remains in this phase past the usual point. On water's phase diagram, the
coexistence line with this phase to the right has a negative slope, while it is usually located to the upper
right of the triple point. This is not the initial or final phase in sublimation or deposition, and it can be
formed by condensation. For 10 points, name this phase of matter with constant volume that takes on the
shape of its container, created from solids by melting.
ANSWER: liquid
The Linde process, which makes use of Joule-Thomson cooling, is used to produce these. Some
experimental nuclear power plants use a salt or metal one, and Kamerlingh Onnes first made a
helium one. They can be used in a namesake high performance type of (*) chromatography. They are
the dispersed phase in gels and emulsions. They cannot exist beyond the critical point and they are bypassed
by sublimation. For 10 points, name this fluid state of matter.
ANSWER: liquids
This material can be characterized by an order parameter that measures deviation from the director. One
can prepare this material by placing it between etched indium tin oxide surfaces. Friedrich Reintzer studied
the first of these materials to be observed, cholesteryl benzoate. One device that uses this material places its
"twisted" form between two perpendicular polarizers. In one of its forms, its particles align in parallel, an
example of its orientational but not positional order. A theoretical question about this material concerns
phase transitions between its smectic and nematic forms. For 10 points, name this material with properties
intermediate between liquid and solid, used in computer and TV displays.
ANSWER: liquid crystals [prompt on partial]
One notable property of these materials can be described by Miezowicz geometries and store
Frank-Oseen energy. They can suffer from radial hedgehog defects. A change in their orientation by an
electric field occurs at the Fredericks transistion. The direction of the averaged orientation in these are
characterized by directors. Lipid membranes in cells are believed to have the dynamics of these. Two
classes of these are thermotropics and lyotropics. Their phases include columnar, smectic, and nematic.
These have orientational, but not long range order. For 10 points, name these fluid materials with
intermediate organizational properties that are used in TV and computer displays.
ANSWER: liquid crystals [prompt on nematic material before lipid membranes]
The interaction of these materials was explained by Maier and Saupe in a mean field theory. One example
of these materials is 5CB, which is a cyano-bi-phenyl. The hard-rod model of these anisotropic materials
can be used to predict transitions for the lyotropic type. These materials, which can be classified by their
ordering, exist in nematic and smectic varieties, and they are an intermediate phase between solids and
liquids. For 10 points, name these materials that are the namesake of the displays used in some computer
monitors and television screens.
ANSWER: liquid crystals [prompt on "LC"]
A countercurrent version of this technique is performed in a Craig apparatus or a mixer-settler. This
technique can be used alongside a quaternary ammonium salt in a form of catalysis. A version of this
technique using isoamyl alcohol and phenol-chloroform is used on proteins and DNA. It's not
titration, but a funnel with a stopcock on the bottom is commonly used to perform this technique.
This technique, which is commonly done as part of the (*) workup of a microscale reaction, relies on a
substance having a decent partition coefficient between an aqueous phase and an organic phase, which layer
on top of one another. For 10 points, name this technique in which a mixture is separated based on its
differential solubility between two non-mixing liquids.
ANSWER: liquid-liquid extraction [prompt on separation]
The presence of this element is used to test whether a star is a brown dwarf. A form of this element with
carbonate appears to limit the release of some neurotransmitters, and is thus often given to sufferers of
bipolar disorders. During Big Bang nucleosynthesis (new-klee-oh-SIN-theh-sis), helium and beryllium
were produced along with this element. Its large electrochemical potential makes it a common choice for
anodes in batteries. It has the smallest atomic number of its group, which includes sodium and potassium.
For 10 points, name this alkali metal.
ANSWER: lithium
This element, often admixtured with TMEDA, is a necessary part of the strongest metalating agents.
One such metalator is a mixture of potassium alkoxide and this element bound to an alkyl group,
called the Schlosser-Lochmann superbase. Reactions operating via an SET mechanism can use as a
reagent this element bound to ditert-butylbiphenylide, which also catalyzes a modification of the
Birch reduction. Alkyl reagents containing this element are typically prepared by a rapid and
irreversible exchange reaction with alkyl iodides. A reagent containing this element catalyzes the
decomposition of tosylhydrazone in a reaction named for (*) Shapiro. This element has a diagonal
relationship with magnesium, and so exhibits umpolung reactivity, in which its bonds with carbon make
carbon nucleophilic. The aluminum hydride of this metal is a common reducing agent, and For 10 points,
name this lightest alkali metal.
ANSWER: lithium
This element's bromide salt is used to contain samples in infrared spectroscopy. An ion of this element, with
a porous carbon material at the cathode (KATH-ode), is a component of rechargeable batteries. Its salts are
administered as mood-stabilizing drugs, particularly for depression. For 10 points, name this lightest alkali
metal, with atomic number three.
ANSWER: lithium [or Li]
Above eight hundred degrees Celsius, this element serves as the primary coolant in nuclear reactors, and its
deuteride compound forms the fusion fuel in a Teller-Ulam bomb. This element is the main catalyst in
synthetic rubber manufacturing, and it is the only element within its group that can form a salt with gaseous
nitrogen. Tritium is produced by bombarding this element's second most abundant isotope with neutrons,
and three-volt batteries typically use this metal as the anode. Also used as a treatment for bipolar disorder,
name this alkali metal with atomic number three and symbol Li.
ANSWER: lithium [accept Li before the end]
Its transmutation to tritium was the first man-made form of nuclear fusion. Chile has become the world's top
producer of this element by developing its rich salt-flats in the Atacama Desert, though Bolivia has the
world's largest deposit. Salts of this element were used to treat gout in the 19th century, and today its salts
are used as mood stabilizers. It has the highest specific heat capacity of all solids and is the least reactive of
the alkalis. For 10 points, identify this element, often used in batteries, the lightest metal found on earth with
atomic number 3 and symbol Li?
ANSWER: lithium
This element is used to decrease the melting temperature of glass, and to improve melting of
aluminum oxide in the Hall-Heroult process. It was also used with tritium as the first ever
anthropogenic nuclear fusion. Use of this element, the first one to have a (*) 2s subshell, in batteries,
especially hybrid or electric car batteries has surged since 2000. This element can also be used to treat gout,
depression, mania, and bipolar disorder. This element, named after the Greek word for "stone", has the
atomic number 3, and is the first alkali metal. For ten points, name this element with the atomic symbol Li.
ANSWER: Lithium
A more reactive source of nucleophilic carbon than a Grignard reagent is the alkylated or arylated form of
this element, and this element is currently under inspection as a potential generator of tritium in the
commercialization of d-t fusion. It is the heaviest stable element to form during Big Bang nucleosynthesis.
Older stars are poor in this element while younger ones are unexpectedly rich in it. The deuteride of its
isotope with mass number 6 is sometimes used as fuel for thermonuclear weapons, and the monovalent ion
of this element is used to treat bipolar disorder. For 10 points, name this element which is the first of the
alkali metals and has atomic number 3.
ANSWER: lithium
Complexes containing this metallic element are used to facilitate the ring closure of an R group in an
ortho position to an aryl bromide in the Parham cyclization. The 12-crown-4 and 14-crown-4 ethers
are highly selective for this element, and a class of reagents containing this element and dimethyl
copper is named for Henry Gilman. The di-iso-propyl-amide salt of this element is commonly used as a
strong base which lacks nucleophilicity, while a hydride containing it and aluminum is a strong reducing
agent. The carbonate salt of this element is used to tread depression. For 10 points, identify this element,
the lightest alkali metal with atomic number 3.
ANSWER: Lithium
Butyl groups combine with this element in a compound which, when mixed with potassium butoxide,
produce a very basic mixture that is used in the production of E-alkenes. That method is the
Schlosser modification of the Wittig reaction. The chloride and bromide salts of this metal are
extremely (*) hygroscopic, making them useful in the absorption refrigeration cycle as a safer alternative to
ammonia-based systems. The ion of this element is better than potassium or sodium for releasing serotonin
in the brain, so its salts are sometimes prescribed for regulating mood. Some batteries use this metal as the
anode, but rechargeable ones use it as a cathode and are named after its "ion". With a 6 isotope used to
produce tritium, for 10 points, name this lightest metal.
ANSWER: Lithium
Actinium metal is produced by reacting actinium fluoride with this element at 1200 degrees Celsius. GSK-3
is inhibited by this substance. This element has been proposed as a component of fusion reactors because it
is both a heat transfer medium and a tritium breeder. This element is combined with butane to create a
strong base and another base is formed by combining this element with diisopropylamide. This metal is
found with copper in Gilman reagents. An isotope of this element is created in boron neutron capture
therapy. This element has one electron in its outer 2s subshell. For 10 points, name this element with atomic
number three whose ions are found in batteries that power many laptops and phones.
ANSWER: Lithium
TMEDA has a high affinity for this element's ions. Its aluminum hydride can reduce esters into primary
alcohols. The 2009 death of UCLA researcher Sheharbano Sangji was caused by this element's flammable
tert-butyl compound, which is a very strong base. Like strontium, it gives a crimson flame test, and it has
the highest 2nd ionization energy of all the elements. Bombarding this element's lightest isotope with
neutrons produces tritium and helium, and its carbonate salt is used to treat bipolar disorder. For 10 points,
name this lightest alkali metal with atomic number 3 and symbol Li.
ANSWER: lithium
This element, whose main source is from spodumene (SPAHD-yoo-meen), has a hydroxide salt used to
purify air by absorbing carbon dioxide. At room temperature it is the only metal that will react with nitrogen
gas and citrate and carbonate salts of this element are used to treat bipolar disorder. This element, which has
a diagonal relationship with magnesium, is placed at the top of the metal reactivity series, explaining its
usage in high power rechargeable batteries. For 10 points, name this alkali metal with atomic number 3 and
chemical symbol Li.
ANSWER: lithium [accept Li before it is read]
This function of the vapor pressure is given by "A minus B over T plus C" in Antoine's equation. The
derivative of this function of the equilibrium constant with respect to temperature is related to the enthalpy
of reaction by the Van't Hoff equation. This function is applied to the reaction quotient, then multiplied by
RT over nF, in the Nernst equation. pKa can be calculated as the negative of this function of the acid
dissociation constant, and analogously, pH is the negative of this function of hydronium ion concentration.
For 10 points, name this function, the inverse of exponentiation.
ANSWER: logarithm [or common logarithm; or natural logarithm; or ln]
The Tang-Toennies model provides a damping function for this interaction. The original derived
potential of this interaction includes a term for negative three-halves times the geometric mean of
two ionization energies. The potential energy of this interaction is proportional to distance raised to
the negative sixth power and is negative in the Lennard-Jones potential. Its strength is roughly
proportional to the (*) polarizability. This interaction explains why bromine is liquid at room temperature
but chlorine is a gas, because it is stronger for compounds with larger electron clouds. For 10 points, name
this interaction which forms due to induced dipoles in uncharged compounds, a class of van der Waals
forces.
ANSWER: London dispersion forces [or London dispersion forces; prompt on van der Waals forces before it is read]
These forces between molecules were predicted to exist by Lennard and Jones in 1924 and interaction
energies vary by a (1/r)^6 dependency with distance r in the most common formulations. The weakest type
of van der Waals forces, these forces constitute the main part of the total interaction force in condensed
matter. Although present in all molecules, these are main mode of attraction between atoms of Noble Gases
and nonpolar molecules like Benzene, Hexane, or Ethyl Acetate. For ten points, name these intermolecular
forces, which exist between two induced dipoles, discovered by a German-American physicist in 1930.
ANSWER: London dispersion forces
These interactions are responsible for the sixth power term in the Lennard-Jones potential, and
using a multipole expansion followed by the Unsold approximation allows the introduction of
ionization potentials to explain it. The strength of these interactions is proportional to the product of
the polarizability volumes, and these interactions are the reason that heavier halogens are liquids and
solids and lighter ones are (*) gases. The strength of these interactions increases with the size of the atoms
involved because larger electron clouds can form dipoles more easily. For 10 points, name this weak
intermolecular force, a subset of van Der Waals forces between instantaneous dipoles.
ANSWER: London dispersion forces [accept van Der Waals forces until "liquids", prompt after]
The formation of one of these entities in an organic reaction mechanism is indicated by a double-
barbed "curly" arrow pointing from a bond to an atom. Twice the number of these is subtracted
from the number of valence electrons in the calculation of formal charge. Coordinate covalent bonds
are formed from the (*) sharing of these entities. Their number is given by the E value in AXE theory.
VSEPR [ves-per] theory gives the geometry of both bonds and these around a central atom. The two of
these possessed by the oxygen atom in water give the molecule a bent geometry. Two dots represent, for 10
points, what pairs of unbonded electrons?
ANSWER: lone electron pairs (accept unbonded electron pairs before end of question; before end of question, prompt on "electrons" or "electron pairs")
These differ in their S-character between carbanions formed from cubane and cyclopropane,
explaining the differing kinetic acidity of those molecules. These can form dative bonds, causing
molecules with these to be Lewis bases, and N S Two examples can be inert, explaining the oxidation
states found in certain heavy post-transition elements. These cause the (*) hydrogen bonding observed
in water, and VSEPR predicts that these will take up more space than a covalent bonds, leading to trigonal
pyramidal and bent molecular geometries. For 10 points, name this group of two valence electrons not
involved in molecular bonding.
ANSWER: Lone Pairs [prompt on "non-bonding electrons" before giveaway]
Divalent lead and tin ions of ns2 configuration can exhibit atypical examples of these objects. Lead
poisoning results from the presence of these structures inducing ligand rearrangement in calcium-binding
proteins. These objects can form dative bonds, and in VSEPR theory, the presence of one of these in
phosphorous trichloride gives the molecule its trigonal pyramidal shape. MO theory shows that water has
two with different energies. For 10 points, name these sets of valence electrons that do not participate in
bonding interactions.
ANSWER: lone pairs
This physical property depends on the object's orientation in pleochroic materials, and it is
altered in the Schiller Effect. Orientations of thin plates lead to aventurescence, a type of this
physical property that features entities which resemble tiny dots. Impurities alter this property in
asteriated minerals, which leads to the appearance of a star shape. Adjectives that are used to
describe this property include (*) resinous - which applies to amber, greasy - which applies to opal, and
metallic - which applies to fool's gold. Like cleavage and streak, it is a useful property in the process of
identifying minerals. For 10 points, name this property, a qualitative measure of how light is reflected.
ANSWER: luster [prompt on "color"]
This material differentiates or changes chemical composition through convective mixing and
assimilation of the surrounding wall. The progression in which crystals materialize out of this substance is
called Bowen's reaction series. Plutons are formed by the cooling of intrusions of this substance. This
material can be found in namesake chambers, and can be ejected explosively as tephra. For 10 points, name
this melted rock inside the Earth that, after erupting, is called lava.
ANSWER: magma [do not accept "lava"]
The lunar material known as KREEP is hypothesized to be a remnant of a body of this material, whose
interactions with surface water are also believed to be the source of Martian features called paterae. The
formation of this material releases trapped argon, resulting in the resetting of the potassium-argon dating
clock. This material is categorized into three main series, characterized by the presence of tholeiites,
andesite, and alkali basalt. This material represents a partial melt of the basalt source region. The term
"xenoliths" refers to pieces of the mantle found in this material as it progresses upward. Manifesting itself
as lava when expelled from volcanoes and cooling to form igneous rocks, for 10 points, identify this
material formed by the melting of rock underneath the surface of the earth.
ANSWER: magmas [do not accept "lava" at any point]
This element is used in a process to create nodules of graphite, which are essential to forming ductile
iron alloys. One type of compound containing this element participates in a form of equilibrium
named for Schlenk, and this element is used to reduce titanium tetrachloride in a process named for
(*) Kroll. The sulfate of this element can be used to treat seizures and eclampsia. Grignard reagents contain
this metal, and it is found at the center of a porphyrin ring in chlorophyll. For 10 points, name this element
with atomic number 12 and symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium [accept Mg before mention]
The chemical formula for spinel consists of four oxygens, two aluminums, and one of this element.
The anhydrous sulfate of this element is used as a drying agent, but when hydrated, is called Epsom
salt. This element can insert itself into a carbon-bromine bond to form a (*) Grignard reagent. The
hydroxide of this element, due to its white appearance, is called the "milk" of this element. The most
common porphyrin ring that coordinates its cation is chlorophyll. For 10 points, name this second member
of the alkaline earth metals, with atomic number 12 and symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium
This element is bound to a halogen to form substances that convert carbonyl groups to alcohols,
called Grignard [GRIN-yard] reagents [ree-"agents"]. Its sulfate is used as bath salts, and it is also
found in many (*) laxatives. An atom of this element is found at the center of chlorophyll's ring. In a
common lab demonstration, a "ribbon" of this metal is ignited, producing an extremely intense white flame.
For 10 points, name this silvery metal whose symbol is Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium (prompt on Mg)
Seas of calcite predominate during times of low concentration of this element. The NIMS probe discovered
that Ganymede has a sulfate of this element, which is also used to treat eclampsia. Its molten form is used to
make metallic titanium in the Kroll process. The active site of rubisco contains a carbamylated lysine
attached to an ion of this element. Its cationic form is used to stabilize the product of PCR, and it is also
prevalent in certain reagents in a Schlenck equilibrium. It is found in Grignard reagents as well as
coordinated to the porphyrin ring of chlorophyll. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 12
and symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium [accept Mg before said]
This element is oxidized in the titanium-producing Kroll process. Reagents containing this element
participate in reactions which transform nitriles into ketones and aldehydes or ketones into alcohols; these
are (*) Grignard reagents. It can be used to remove sulfur from steel, and when used in benchtop reactions,
this element is usually in the form of a ribbon. When this element is burned, a bright white flare is
produced. Located in the porphyrin ring of chlorophyll, this element has a hydroxide whose aqueous
solution is commonly known as a "milk," as well as a sulfate known as Epsom salt. For 10 points, identity
this alkaline earth metal with atomic number 12 and chemical symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium (accept Mg before mention)
One alloy of this element is called Elektron and is used in aerospace engineering due to its low
specific gravity. Grignard reagants are composed of alkyl or aryl halides of this element, and ductile
iron is most often created by using this element as a nodulizing element. This element's sulfate is
combined with seven water molecules to create epsom salt and, with calcium, this element is the most
common source of water hardness. This element can burn while encased in a block of dry ice or
submerged in water, and the milk of this element is a suspension of its hydroxide. For 10 points, name this
element that burns with a characteristic blinding white flare.
ANSWER: Magnesium [prompt on Mg before it is read]
By synthetically combining with sulfate, this element can be used for cement and fertilizers when sold as
Epsom salt. This metal is also found in chlorophyll. ATP, RNA and DNA are all stabilized because they are
bound to this metal. Water is typically considered "hard" if it has high levels of calcium ions and ions of
this element. When combined with hydroxide and placed in water, this element form its namesake laxative
milk. For 10 points, name this element with chemical symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium
This element reacts with titanium tetrachloride in the Kroll process. Certain compounds containing it exist
in a Schlenk equilibrium; those compounds consist of this element and an alkyl or aryl halide, Grignard
reagents. Active ATP molecules must be bound to this metal's 2+ ion. It is able to burn even when encased
in dry ice, and when burning in air it produces a brilliant white light. Its hydroxide has a milky-white
appearance and is used as an antacid, while its sulfate is called Epsom salt. For 10 points, name this alkaline
earth metal with symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium [prompt on Mg before mentioned]
The adult human body contains, on average, twenty four grams of this element, with about sixty percent of
that total residing in the skeleton. Among commercially useful minerals both talc and dolomite contain high
concentrations of this element, and Grignard reagents are formed when alkyl halides react with them. Atoms
of it are at the centers of Porphyrin rings in Chlorophyll, and when its hydroxides are put in a suspension
with water it finds use as an antacid and a laxative. For ten points name this alkaline earth metal, with
atomic number 12.
ANSWER: magnesium
Eclampsia is treated with this element's sulfate, and the bioluminescence reaction in fireflies utilizes ions of
this element. Liquid titanium tetrachloride is dropped on this element's molten form to make metallic
titanium in the Kroll process. Its blockage of NMDA receptors allows for sodium and potassium ion flux in
cells, and this element is commonly found in certain chemical reagents existing in a Schlenck equilibrium.
In its divalent cationic form, it acts to stabilize the grooves of DNA, and its sulfate form is also known as
Epsom salt. This cation is also found coordinated to the porphyrin ring of chlorophyll. For 10 points, name
this metal with symbol Mg.
ANSWER: magnesium [or Mg before mentioned]
This event did not occur at all during a 40-million-year period during the Cretaceous, known as the
Cretaceous Superchron. A similar phenomenon occurs in the sun with greater periodicity than on Earth, and
is largely responsible for the sunspot cycle. If one of these events were to occur today, modern society
could be destroyed by the effect of CMEs on electronics. These events are believed to be the result of
irregularities in iron convection in the outer core. A test proposed by Vine, Matthews, and Morley based on
the existence of this phenomenon provides the most convincing evidence for Hess's hypothesis of seafloor
spreading, since a certain property that changes each time one of these events occurs is crystallized in
seafloor igneous rocks at the time of their solidification. The most recent of these events occurred 780,000
years ago, and was named for Brunhes and Matsuyama. For 10 points, identify these events wherein the
polarity of a certain global field interchanges North and South over the course of thousands of years.
ANSWER: geomagnetic reversals [or reversals of Earth's magnetic field; or reasonable equivalents]
Together with greigite, this mineral is produced by a class of organisms known as MTB, and the Verwey
transition was discovered in this mineral, which undergoes that transtition at about 118 K. A buffer often
used in geochemistry is formed from a grouping of this mineral with quartz and fayalite, and peptization of
this mineral in acidic and alkaline media is accomplished via the Massart process. Unlike a more common
ore of the same element, this mineral typically possesses a high Konigsberger ratio, and that more common
ore can form a pseudomorph over this mineral, resulting in martite. Studies of this mineral often focus on
measuring such parameters as the remanence acquired by this mineral by cooling through its Curie point.
Having the chemical formula Fe3O4, for ten points, identify this mineral which together with hematite is
one of the major sources of iron.
ANSWER: magnetite
Zinc only has this quality between 100 and 150 degrees Celsius, which is one of several examples of
materials that can transition between having this property and being brittle. The element lead has this
property, which describes how materials react to compressive stress. These materials can be hammered or
put through rollers without breaking, especially elements such as gold and aluminum that can be made into
foils. Name this property of metals that is similar to ductility.
ANSWER: malleability or malleable
Arginase, an enzyme used in the final step of the urea cycle, contains this metal. A certain compound
containing both potassium and this metal is known as Condy's crystal and in organic chemistry is used as
an alternative to osmium tetroxide in a basic solution to convert an alkene to a 1,2-diol, or as an alternative
to chromium-based complexes to react an alcohol to a carboxylic acid. The oxygen evolving complex in
chloroplasts has a center with calcium and this metal. In the body, this metal is paired with iron in a class of
superoxide dismutase found in the mitochondria. This metal is central to the testing of alkenes in Baeyer's
reagent, which involves the reduction of its +7 oxidation state to its +2 oxidation state. For 10 points, name
this transition metal with chemical symbol Mn.
ANSWER: manganese
This element is found at the center of arginase, and four atoms of it and one calcium atom are found
at the center of the oxygen-evolving complex. This element is bound to a salen ligand in the catalyst
for the Jacobsen epoxidation. This element is present along with iron in the active site of one form of
superoxide dismutase. This element's dioxide is used to selectively oxidize allylic and benzylic
alcohols to aldehydes. It's not osmium, but a polyatomic ion containing this element and oxygen can
be used to oxidize alkenes to (*) vicinal diols. That polyatomic ion possesses a notable intense purple
color and contains this element in a +7 oxidation state. For 10 points, name this element with atomic
number 25 and symbol Mn.
ANSWER: manganese [be sure they are not saying "magnesium," prompt on "Mn"]
The product of this reaction can also be formed in the reaction of Eschenmoser salts with enolates.
Copper-bis-oxazolines and proline are enantioselective catalysts for this reaction. This reaction
occurs between an enolizable carbonyl containing compound and an iminium ion and produces
aminomethylated products, this reaction's namesake (*) bases. It can be employed in the biomimetic
synthesis of nitrogen containing alkaloid derivatives such as tropinone and pheromones. For 10 points,
name this organic condensation reaction used to alkylate aldehydes and ketones.
ANSWER: Mannich reaction
This region contains both a low-velocity and an ultra low-velocity zone. Peridotite is a major rock type
in the upper part of this region. The bottom of this region is the D double prime layer. A shadow zone is
created as a result of S waves traveling through this region, but not the region below it. The highly viscous
upper part of this region is the asthenosphere, which is separated from the lithosphere by the Moho. For 10
points, identify this layer of the Earth found below the crust.
ANSWER: Earth's mantle
On Venus, this region constantly heats up except for periods every hundred million years which release that
heat. The bottom part of this layer on Earth contains post-perovskite and is sometimes denoted D double
prime. The upper part generally contains the same rocks as Gros Morne National Park such as peridotite,
and much of it contains olivine [OL-uh-veen]. The upper part contains the asthenosphere, and its upper
boundary-located by a Croatian scientist tracking seismic waves-is the Mohorovicic [moh-khor-oh-VIHchik] 
discontinuity, or Moho. Containing most of the Earth's volume, name this region between the core and the crust.
ANSWER: mantle
The Chikyu Hakken mission is attempting to explore this region. This region contains such
polymorphs of rocks as wadsleyite and ringwoodite, as well as the perovskite-structured pyroxene
enstatite. The D'' [D double prime] region is found in its homogeneous lower portion, while a Low
Velocity Zone extends several kilometers in this layer. A sudden increase in velocity occurs at the top of
this region, known as the Moho discontinuity. For 10 points, name this layer of the Earth above the
outer core and below the crust.
ANSWER: mantle
The upper portion of this region is primarily made up of olivine and pyroxene. In the deepest part of this
region, perovskite is compressed into post-perovskite. During earthquakes, seismic reflections occur when
waves bounce off the upper boundary of this region. This layer is bounded on either side by the Gutenberg
discontinuity and the Mohorovicic (MOE-huh-roe-VITCH-itch) discontinuity. For 10 points, identify this
layer of the earth that lies between the outer core and the crust.
ANSWER: mantle
Japan's Chikyu Hakken is trying to reach this region, and n-waves travel along its upper boundary. Post-
perovskite forms in the bottommost part of this region, the D double prime layer. P-waves slow down and
S-waves disappear past the bottom of this region, and its top features a P-wave velocity jump from
approximately seven to approximately eight kilometers per second. The low velocity zone of the
asthenosphere is found in the upper part of this region. It is sandwiched between the Gutenburg
discontinuity and the Moho, and this layer's namesake plumes form hotspots. For 10 points, name this layer
of the earth between the crust and the core.
ANSWER: mantle
Near this body's lower boundary is the D-double prime layer. Rocks found in this layer are typically
peridotite and olivine, and magnesium silicates and oxides are common here. The Gutenberg discontinuity
separates this layer from the one below it, while the Mohorovicic discontinuity separates this layer from the
one above it. This layer includes the lower part of the lithosphere as well as the asthenosphere, and it
undergoes convection. For 10 points, name this layer of the Earth, which lies between the crust and the
core.
ANSWER: mantle
Rustad and Yin studied the distribution of iron isotopes in the lower portion of this region. Wadsleyite and
ringwoodite are likely found in its transition zones. Its lowest portions likely contain post-perovskite, and its
upper portion likely consists of peridotite, a rock composed of the silicate minerals olivine and pyroxene.
The bottom portion of this layer is home to the D double prime region, and upwellings of magma are its
namesake plumes. This layer is separated from the liquid outer core by the Gutenberg discontinuity and
from the crust by the Mohorovicic discontinuity. For 10 points, name this layer of Earth's interior.
ANSWER: mantle
Eclogites (ECK-log-ites) are found in this layer of the earth, whose main constituent is olivine. The
lowest part of this layer is the D double prime layer, while its uppermost part abuts the Moho discontinuity.
This layer is home to unusually hot namesake "plumes." This layer includes the asthenosphere
(as-THEE-noh-sphere) and the lower part of the lithosphere. For 10 points, name this layer of the earth
above the outer core and below the crust.
ANSWER: mantle
Ferropericlase as well as magnesium silicate, or post-perovskite, are both thought to be components
of the D'' (D double prime) section of this region, and in 1959, Beno Gutenberg noticed that seismic
waves travel more slowly in a part of this region called the low-velocity zone. Its boundary with the
outer core is hypothesized to be the source of its namesake plumes, while the Mohorovicic discontinuity
separates the crust and, for ten points, what layer of the Earth below the crust and above the Core?
ANSWER: Mantle
Exposed remnants of this region can be seen at the "Tablelands" region in Canada. Its lower boundary is
marked by the "D double-prime" layer, which also contains a seismic velocity discontinuity named for
Beno Gutenberg. The upper portion of this layer includes the viscous asthenosphere, and it is separated
from the layer above it by the Mohorovicic (mo-ho-ree-vick) discontinuity. Its namesake plumes lead to
"hot spot volcanism." For 10 points, name this layer of the earth between the crust and the outer core.
ANSWER: the mantle [or lithosphere until "lower boundary"]
One portion of this region is dominated by a mixture containing significant portions of clinopyroxene and
orthopyroxene called lherzolite, and this region's lowest portion is called the D double-prime layer. This
region rich in olivine exhibits an increase in S-wave and P-wave velocities at the Hales discontinuity and
has a lower boundary defined by the Gutenberg discontinuity. This region's upper boundary is the Moho
discontinuity, and it contains the asthenosphere and the lower portion of the lithosphere. Located between
the outer core and the crust, For 10 points, name this layer of the Earth.
ANSWER: The Mantle
The object of the Chikyu Hakken mission was to explore this region, and its most common rocks are
eclogite, peridotite, and kimberlite. The Gutenberg Discontinuity lies beneath this region, and its upper
boundary was first theorized by a Croatian seismologist in 1909. This layer of the earth's crust has a large
magnesium-to-iron ratio. The asthenosphere and lithosphere comprise its upper portion, and the
Mohorovicic Discontinuity defines its border with the crust. FTP, convection currents occur in this thickest
layer of the earth which surrounds the earth's core.
ANSWER: mantle
Komatiites are rocks derived from this layer during the early part of the Earth's history. The
bottom of an ophiolite is made of material from this layer. Its upper regions is dominated by
peridotite and olivine, but the lower part of this layer is dominated by magnesium silicate perovskite.
Upwellings of high temperature rock from this region are called its namesake (*) plumes. The
asthenosphere is located withing this layer and its upper boundary is the Moho. For 10 points, name this
layer of the Earth between the crust and upper core.
ANSWER: mantle
Magnesium oxide is the second-most abundant compound in this region. Convection in this region,
which includes the asthenosphere, causes seafloor spreading, and it is believed to be the site of plumes
that cause (*) volcanic hotspots. This region, which lies under the Moho discontinuity, makes up eighty-
four percent of the Earth's volume. For 10 points, name this plastic solid region of the inner Earth below the
crust.
ANSWER: (upper or lower) mantle (prompt on asthenosphere before mentioned)
The lower portion of this layer contains many low-velocity zones. The boundary between this layer and the
one below it is the Gutenberg discontinuity, which lies at the bottom of its D'' (D-double-prime) section.
Rock types found within this layer include olivine and peridotite, and its upper limit is marked by the Moho.
This layer's upper portion contains the asthenosphere, which is subject to convection. Namesake plumes
from this layer can reach the surface at hot spots. For 10 points, name this layer of the Earth found above
the outer core and below the crust.
ANSWER: mantle
Ringwoodite, wadsleyite and ferropericlase are all found in this structure. Scientists believe that a
high pressure form of magnesium silicate called post perovskite exists in part of this structure, which
contains an outer region home to the asthenosphere and lithosphere. The lower layer of this region,
sometimes referred to as the D double prime layer, contains an area called the Gutenberg discontinuity
while the top part of this region is called the Moho discontinuity. An ejection of hot rocks from this region
is known as its namesake "plume". For 10 points, name this middle layer of the Earth that is between the
crust and the core.
ANSWER: mantle (do not accept "inner mantle" or "outer mantle", the first clue is about minerals found in different parts of the mantle)
One area of this region contains ferropericlase and silicate perovskite, which form that area's main mineral
phases. The R.S.S. James Cook and the Japanese probe Chikyu Hakken are trying to retrieve samples from
this region, and the low-velocity zone of this region is bounded by the Lehmann discontinuity, which refers
to an abrupt change of P- and S-wave velocities. The upper part of this region contains the asthenosphere,
and it is bounded by the Gutenberg and Moho discontinuities. For 10 points, name this layer that makes up
about 84% of the earth's volume, a region above the core and below the crust.
ANSWER: Mantle
Megacryst studies by Kyle and Kirsch suggest that this region under the Erebus province of Antarctica may
contain unusually low amounts of iron oxide. The Chikyu Hakken probe aims to study this region, which
can be measured by the Bullen parameter. An unexplained alteration in seismic velocity that occurs about
230 km into this region is called the Lehmann discontinuity, and this region's highest levels are rich in
olivine. The D double-prime layer of this region lies above the Gutenberg discontinuity, which separates it
from the outer core. For 10 points, name this layer of the earth whose upper bound is defined by the Moho
discontinuity, which lies below the crust.
ANSWER: mantle
The Chikyu and Kola projects have attempted to reach this entity, but more famous is an attempt by
the ship CUSS I. This entity is bounded on the bottom by the Gutenberg Discontinuity, which is
where its D double-prime layer is found, and it contains the (*) asthenosphere. Convection currents
within this body drive tectonic processes and it takes up the most space of any layer of the Earth. Bounded
by the Moho on the top, this is, for ten points, what layer of the Earth, sandwiched between the outer core
and the crust?
ANSWER: Mantle
Schilling's ridge-sink model describes phenomena here, and convection cells here exhibit "soft
turbulence." The carrot shape of kimberlite pipes owes to their origin in this region. Studies of midocean-
ridge basalts suggest its convection occurs only in two layers. This structure may contain a post-
perovskite phase where P-waves attenuate in its D-double-prime layer. A velocity discontinuity in this
region is named for Inge Lehmann. Its upper limit is named for Mohorovicic [moh-oh-ROH-vee-chihch],
which separates its uppermost layer, the asthenosphere, from the crust. For 10 points, name this plastic layer
of the earth's interior between crust and core.
ANSWER: mantle
Entering this region is the ultimate goal of the Chikyu Hakken (CHEE-kew HAWK-ken) project. The
lowermost section of this region is known as the D double-prime layer. Its upper boundary is a
discontinuity commonly known as the Moho. Its upper section contains the asthenosphere and shares the
lithosphere with the region above it. For 10 points, name this layer of the Earth between the core and the
crust.
ANSWER: mantle
A team of scientists aboard the RRS James Cook explored it in March of 2007, midway between the
Cape Verde Islands and the Caribbean Sea, where it lies exposed. It is about 46% silicon dioxide and
38% magnesium oxide, much different from the (*) iron and nickel below it, from which it is separated
by a boundary named after Beno Gutenberg. It composes about 84% of the Earth's volume and is
predominately solid. However, it can undergo slow deformation over millions of years, allowing the
formation of plate tectonic boundaries. For ten points, name this layer of the earth's interior that is just
below the crust.
ANSWER: mantle
The MORB reservoir is believed to lie somewhere within this region, and one model of its evolution
involves the cooling of melt zones and the transfer of KREEP. Ringwood proposed that this region was
initially composed of pyrolite, and the homogeneity of this region is measured either through the derivative
of bulk modulus with respect to pressure or through the Bullen parameter. The Lehman discontinuity
appears about 230 kilometers into this region, which also features the low velocity zone, and its lowest 200
kilometers are known as the D-double-prime layer. The boundary between this region and the crust is
known as the Mohorovicic discontinuity, and this general region extends to the Gutenberg discontinuity.
The source of volcanic magma, for ten points, identify this region of the earth's interior located between the
lithosphere and the outer core.
ANSWER: mantle
Post-perovskite is hypothesized to exist in this area, whose upper region features a large quantity of
olivine. The lowest two hundred meters of it is known as "D double prime," after which the
Gutenberg discontinuity is found, and the Mohorovicic (mo-ho-RO-vitch-itch) discontinuity lies
above this area. Including the (*) asthenosphere and consisting of highly plastic, mostly solid rock, name
this layer of the Earth, found between the outer core and the crust.
ANSWER: Mantle
Isostatic adjustment occurs on top of this structure, the upper part of which consists mostly of
ultramafic rock. The D-double prime layer is located in the lower part of this layer of the Earth. The interior
of this structure contains the low-velocity zone, or asthenosphere. Separated from a higher layer by the
Moho, it begins about seven kilometers below the Earth's surface in oceanic regions. For 10 points, name
this layer of the Earth located between the crust and the core.
ANSWER: mantle
To explain the observed convective regime in this structure, the Adams-Williamson equation is modified to
include a tau-alpha corrective term that models a superadiabatic thermal gradient between it and the
structure below it. The boundary between it and the region below it is home to ultra-low velocity zones and
sees a remarkable drop off in S-wave activity, while radioactive decay and accretion heat lead to upwellings
in this region whose lower bound is the D'' (dee double-prime) layer. Convection currents in this layer of
the earth cause its namesake plumes and its fluidity is the reason for plate tectonics. For 10 points, name this
largest layer of the earth that sits below the crust.
ANSWER: mantle [accept core-mantle boundary for the first sentence]
One place this kind of rock is taken from is the Murphy Belt near the Great Smoky Mountains and going
south into Georgia. The yule type notable for its pure color is taken from a town named after this in
Colorado. A metamorphic rock, it usually comes from limestone or dolomite, and like chalk it is a source of
calcium carbonate. Carrara, a town in Tuscany, was a major source of this rock for sculptors. Name this
rock that often has streaks of bluish color but is generally white.
ANSWER: marble
The relative abundance of different types of this substance is affected by the CCD. A prominent
example of this substance in the deep ocean is red from oxidized iron. The inclusion of this substance
defines turbidity currents. In the neritic zone, ice rafting is a significant contributor to this substance.
Manganese nodules are a small but significant portion of this substance. This substance can be classified as
hydrogenous, lithogenous or biogenous; the latter constitutes the majority of it and is usually derived from
radiolarans, foraminifera, coccolithophores, and diatoms. For 10 points, identify this substance that
undergoes lithification to form a namesake type of rock.
ANSWER: marine sediment [or ooze; or reasonable equivalents; prompt on abyssal clay; do not accept or prompt on "earth"]
Its formulator extended it by citing work that he had performed under Kolbe, while Henry's independent
discovery of this statement led to another generalization by its formulator. Hornback explained it in terms of
positively-charged intermediates, and this statement is notably abrogated in a procedure sometimes named
for Herbert Brown. Often paired with a similar rule that governs eliminations, Zaitsev's rule, this rule is
violated in reactions using peroxides and in hydroboration reactions due to steric hindrance. FTP, name this
rule from organic chemistry that states that when a halide adds to an alkene, the more substituted carbon
attaches the halide, named for a Russian chemist.
ANSWER: Markovnikov's Rule
It can be used to solve for the reaction quotient, which, together with another constant associated with this
principle, can be used to determine spontaneity. Name this chemical law formulated by Goldberg and
Waage that uses thermodynamics rather than kinetics to determine the result of a reaction by examining
relative concentrations.
ANSWER: law of mass action
Important advancements in this technique include the use of the reflectron to improve resolution in the
MALDI version, which uses an ultraviolet laser with wavelength between 330 and 360 nm. Another
version of this technique begins with the formation a Taylor Cone and won John Fenn a Nobel Prize in
Chemistry; that version is known as Electrospray Ionization. Once the sample is ionized, the next step is
usually either gas or liquid chromatography, and the final readout contains the base peak and molecular ion
peak. For 10 points, name this technique of organic chemistry that breaks a compound into smaller ions and
measures their mass-to-charge ratio.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry
One form of this technique based off the cyclotron is FT-ICR. A reflectron is a variant on a common
analyzer used in this technique which works by accelerating all analyte particles to the same kinetic
energy, then passing them through a drift tube to measure their time-of-flight. The first step in the
tandem version of this technique often employs "soft" techniques such as field desorption. Electron
impact is a simple way of prepping samples for this technique which induces (*) fragmentation. A
typical graph generated by using this technique on an unbranched alkane consists of series of large peaks
spaced 14 units apart with a few small peaks in between representing isotope substitution. For 10 points,
name this technique in which a molecule is ionized and a detector is used to calculate its m/z, or mass-tocharge ratio.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [accept MS or mass spectroscopy]
A tandem version of this technique uses collision-induced dissociation to find the sequence of a
peptide. One version of this technique equalizes the kinetic energy of the analyte fragments and
measures their time-of-flight to distinguish them. An ionization process like MALDI or ESI is used to
prepare samples undergoing this technique, and basic versions of these devices use perpendicular
electric and magnetic fields to select particles by their (*) velocity. This technique's output is a series of
peaks, each of which corresponds to a fragment of the compound being analyzed. For 10 points, identify
this technique, which identifies compounds in a sample by analyzing their mass-to-charge ratios.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [accept mass spectroscopy]
A geometry named for Mattauch and Herzog can be used in this technique. In a method to prepare samples
for it, analytes are passed through a needle that disperses the solution into micro-droplets. A gamma-
hydrogen is required for the McLafferty rearrangement to occur during this process, which can be applied to
macromolecules with the aid of a light-absorbing matrix in the MALDI method. In this technique, a base
peak results after ions are separated by their m/z ratio. For 10 points, name this technique used to determine
molecular weight.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [or MS]
When using this technique, the ten percent valley criterion can be used to define a ratio measuring
differences in a central quantity. The Nier-Johnson geometry is an example of a double-focused
arrangement of sector instruments to perform it, while Fourier transforms are applied when using either
orbitrap or cyclotron resonance setups. Plots of data from it use the base peak to normalize intensities, and
the desire to avoid fragmentation of macromolecules has lead to the use of techniques like MALDI to
produce the required ions. For 10 points, name this technique of using electromagnetic fields to measure the
ratio of the namesake quantity to the charge.
ANSWER: Mass Spectrometry
A device used in this technique consists of an RF ring electrode and two other hyperbolic electrodes, and is
sometimes named for Wolfgang Paul. A collision cell is used in the QqQ form of this technique. Sinapinic
acid and DHB are common reagents for it. This technique occurs in series, or in "tandem", in order to
sequence proteins. Tropylium cations form in this technique from benzyl compounds. Frequently, this
process is combined with liquid or gas chromatography. The output of this process has a peak labelled
M+1, originating from isotopes in the molecular ion, while the most common fragment is called the base
peak. High-energy electrons cause fragmentation during its first step. For 10 points, name this technique
which measures the ratio of a namesake property to charge.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [or mass spectroscopy; or MALDI or matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization; or quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometry]
A method of preparing samples for this technique without significantly altering their environment is DART.
Samples are usually prepared either via adding a sample to a crystal and then firing a laser at it, or by
dispersion in aerosol form and subsequent evaporation. Most analyzers in this technique can rely on a
quadrupole ion trap or use a reflectron to measure the time of flight. A tandem version of it is commonly
used to sequence proteins, and the aforementioned techniques are used to ionize the sample before it is
fragmented. It is often preceded by gas or liquid chromatography. For 10 points, name this technique in
which a sample is separated into pieces and analyzed via their mass to charge ratio.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [or mass spectroscopy; or MS]
Although not it's related to microwaves, Guan and Marshall compared the Bloch equations to the
switching between cyclotron and magnetron motion in one form of this technique. That technique
uses an image current and subtracts the cyclotron and magnetron frequencies and applies Fourier
transforms to get the cyclotron frequencies of the component particles. Soft laser desorption assists in
preparing proteins for this technique, though a better known way uses electricity to disperse
aerosols. The effect of electromagnetic fields on (*) charged particles in this technique is described by
the combination of the Lorentz force with the centripetal force. Electrospray ionization is one way to create
the ions needed for this and the most abundant particle type is denoted by the base peak. For 10 points,
name this technique that separates ions to find the ratio between charge and its namesake property.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [accept mass spectroscopy]
Two instruments that conduct this technique are separated by collision cells, and analytes of this
technique are separated by quadrupole filters. Radical cations of the samples are generated prior to
being subjected to this technique. The intensities of peaks in this technique's readouts are reported
as proportions of the base (*) peak. Instruments to conduct this technique are often attached to upstream
gas chromatographs. The presence of an "M+2" peak which is a third as high as the "M+" peak on this
technique's spectrum indicates the presence of chlorine, because chlorine 37 is less abundant than chlorine
35. For 10 points, name this technique in which is used to determine molecular weights.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [accept MS]
This process can be combined with a DART source, and that type uses Ultramark 1621 to
calibrate. During one stage of this procedure, compounds with a gamma hydrogen will rearrange to
form an enol radical, and compounds can also undergo retro-Diels-Alder reactions while undergoing
it. This procedure follows gas chromatography in many setups. The first stage of this procedure
creates a radical cation called the (*) molecular ion, which fragments into the base peak. In this
procedure, if the m-over-z ratio is odd, then the molecule usually has an odd number of nitrogen atoms. In
this process, ions are deflected by an external magnetic field into the detector. For 10 points, name this
method of spectrometry which measures the namesake quantity's ratio to charge.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [or MS]
This method is used to look at labelled protein samples in SILAC and ICAT proteomics. Rhenium
filaments are used in thermal approaches to this. One way of preparing samples for this technique involves
small volumes of electrically conductive liquid exposed to an electric field. That can result in cones and
involves charged particles in aerosol. Analyzers used in this technique include time of flight and
quadrapole ion traps. While preparation with MALDI and electrospray ionization is useful, this technique
generally involves the Lorentz and centripetal force and the most abundant particle is the base peak. For 10
points, name this technique that separates ions based on their ratio of charge to its namesake property.
ANSWER: mass spectroscopy
In one form of this technique, Sinapinic acid and CCA form a matrix in which the analytes are embedded
after zip tipping. That form sees a laser fire a beam at the matrix, after which the sample vaporizes and
picks up a proton. In another form, the analytes are passed through volatile compounds like acetonitrile, and
a high voltage causes the solution to form fine droplets. The former technique is the MALDI variant, while
the latter technique is called electrospray ionization. The peak with the highest intensity is called the "base
peak" and the early methods of performing it involved firing electrons at the sample. For 10 points, identify
this technique which gives information about the ratio of a namesake quantity to charge.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [accept mass spec]
One type of this process uses a magnet to bend particles toward a group of Faraday cups where
impact is converted into electric signals. An atom probe works by combining field ion microscopy
and the time-of-flight form of this process. One form of this process injects particles into a (*) Penning
trap before performing a Fourier transform on the result. In addition to the Isotope Ratio form of this, one
form of this uses four perfectly parallel rods. Devices used to complete this process include Quadrupole ion
traps, Orbitraps, and FTMS's. This process works by ionizing a sample and accelerating through a magnetic
field to discover a mass to charge ratio. For 10 points, name this process used to discover the elemental
make up of a sample.
ANSWER: Mass Spectrometry
A Penning trap is used in the Fourier transform ion cyclotron to perform this technique. The tandem
one of this technique, which often occurs in a triple quadropole include "parent" and "daughter"
scans and may include an induced dissociation. In experiments using this technique, MALDI or
Electrospray can be used to ionize fragile substances such as biomolecules, whereas more generally,
electron impact can be used. This technique can use time-of-flight data for measurements as the same
voltage is given to particles so mass can be determined through kinetic energy. For ten points, identify this
technique that measures the mass to charge ratio to determine the identity of a substance.
ANSWER: Mass Spectrometry
One arrangement for a device used to perform this technique achieves a pi over 4 root 2 radian deflection.
That Mattauch-Herzog geometry is used by a device that performs this technique using static electric and
magnetic fields. For a substance with known cyclotron frequency, this technique yields the free induction
decay, a signal that undergoes a Fourier transform. During this technique, ketones may undergo a beta-
cleavage in concert with gamma hydrogen acquisition in the McLafferty rearrangement. In this technique,
Penning and quadrupole traps are used to hold ions as they are separated into fragments based on the ratio
of the namesake property to charge. For 10 points, name this technique that can identify compounds,
including those with isotopes, based on their size.
ANSWER: mass spectrometry [prompt on "MS"]
This quantity is lower for a eutectic mixture than it is for the individual components. Due to its
zero-point energy, at one atmosphere, helium doesn't possess one of these. The transition that occurs
at this point is also called fusion. Supercooling can occur below this temperature in the absence of
nucleation sites. Dissolved solutes will (*) "depress" this quantity, which is why salt is sprinkled on the
road in winter. For 10 points, name this quantity which equals 0 degrees Celsius for water at one
atmosphere, the temperature at which solids turn to liquids.
ANSWER: melting point [or freezing point; or liquefaction point]
The Mpemba effect asserts that hot water can attain this property more quickly than cold water. A mixture
of two components is called eutectic if it has a lower value of this property than any other combination of
them, and a high value of it is correlated with high molecular symmetry in Carnelley's rule. Although the
Gibbs free energy change of this value's namesake process is zero, its enthalpy change is termed that of(*)
fusion. A change in this property for a solution is observed when adding solutes and is called its
"depression." For ten points, name this colligative property of a substance, the temperature at which a solid
changes into a liquid or vice versa.
ANSWER: freezing point or melting point
Using Lindemann's criterion to calculate this quantity gives a value proportional to the atomic spacing
squared times the Debye frequency squared. For nanoparticles or small crystals, this property is dependent
on size, per the Gibbs-Thomson equation. This property is higher for neopentane than for n-pentane or
isopentane. When measuring this value, which can be done with a Thiele tube or a Fisher-Johns apparatus,
more impure compounds will exhibit a larger range. A mixture with the lowest possible value for this
measure is eutectic. For a solution, the depression of this value upon increase in concentration is a
colligative property. For gallium, it's slightly above room temperature and for water it is 0 degrees Celsius.
For 10 points, name this temperature at which solids become liquid.
ANSWER: melting point [accept freezing point]
Svante Arrhenius convinced the Nobel Prize committee not to award the prize to this scientist because he
claimed that man's invention was too old. A proponent of the abiogenic theory of petroleum, this scientist
also invented a gunpowder substitute, pyrocollodion, for his country's navy using nitrocellulose. He used
Sanskrit preffixes in naming eight undiscovered elements, as in (*) ekasilicon, which was later renamed
germanium. His most famous invention was improved by Henry Mosley who used atomic number instead of
atomic weight. For ten points, name this Russian chemist who invented the periodic table of the elements.
ANSWER: Dmitri Mendeleev
Legend has it that in his doctoral thesis, "On the Combinations of Water with Alcohol," this man cracked
the chemical code of vodka. Thomas Gold re-popularized a theory that this man argued for, the abiogenic
origin of petroleum. Anticipating the problems in his most famous discovery, he gave elements the prefixes
aka-, dvi-, and tri- because he was fascinated by Panini. That discovery was vindicated when gallium and
germanium were found to fit perfectly into two missing spaces he had reserved for undiscovered elements.
Name this chemist who created his own periodic table based upon the masses of each element.
ANSWER: Dmitri Mendeleev
This man's lesser known developments include a smokeless powder for the military and a uniform system
of weights and measures within his country. He recorded most of his work in his frequently revised book
The Principles of Chemistry. Using his most famous accomplishment, he accurately predicted the
properties of such elements as Scandium, Gallium, and Germanium. FTP, name this Russian chemist
known as the father of the periodic table.
ANSWER: Dmitri Mendeleev
To explain aether, this scientist predicted the existence of two elements lighter than hydrogen, one of
which he named coronium. This man also described and predicted the properties of "ekaaluminum"
and "ekaboron", (*) elements known today as gallium and scandium. This man's most famous discovery
was described in his book, Principles of Chemistry, and attempted to classify the elements by their chemical
properties. For ten points, name this Russian chemist credited with creating the first Periodic Table.
ANSWER: Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev
He postulated a noble gas lighter than helium that would be responsible for radioactivity, identified
coronium as the element responsible for an unknown spectral line in the sun's corona, and insisted that the
atomic weight of tellurium must be lower than that of iodine. While he was wrong about these things, his
theory correctly predicted properties of ekaaluminum and ekasilicon which were named gallium and
germanium when later discovered. This theory was developed while writing his Principles of Chemistry as
he tried to classify the weights and valences of elements. For 10 points, name this Russian chemist who
developed the Periodic Table of the Elements.
ANSWER: Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev
This man's major accomplishment was published shortly before a similar work by Lothar Meyer.
He invented a nitrocellulose-derived smokeless powder called pyrocollodion
(PIE-row-co-LOW-dee-on). His major work was later revised by Henry (+) Moseley and expanded
by Glenn Seaborg, and used the Sanskrit prefix "eka" to indicate blank spaces. He determined the
ideal proportions of water and alcohol in (*) vodka, but is more famous for a construct that initally
lacked the noble gases. For 10 points, name this Russian formulator of the periodic table.
ANSWER: Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev
This scientist attempted to explain the existence of the ether by proposing two elements smaller than
hydrogen. This man theorized elements which he called eka-boron and eka-silicon based on the chemical
properties of boron and silicon. He predicted the properties of the undiscovered elements of gallium and
scandium based upon their theorized atomic weights, which were arranged in a diagram later organized by
atomic number. For 10 points, name this Russian chemist who developed an early version of the periodic
table.
ANSWER: Dmitri [Ivanovich] Mendeleev
A tube containing a gas of this element was used in an experiment that proved Niels Bohr's energy
quantization theory. In addition to being used in the Franck-Hertz experiment, this element is the cathode in
the Castner-Kellnar process. An acetate of this element is bonded onto two carbon atoms in an intermediate
step that is followed by the addition of sodium hydride in a reaction that converts alkenes to alcohols. This
element usually forms a diatomic molecule when it has an oxidation number of +1, and this element is
bonded to sulfur in cinnabar. For 10 points, name this metal that is the only one that is a liquid at room
temperature, and which has chemical symbol Hg.
ANSWER: Mercury [or Hg until mentioned]
Most UV fluorescent lamps pass a current through this element. This element's plus-one oxidation state is
dimeric and divalent. It forms a convex meniscus in a glass tube because it preferentially exhibits adhesion,
not cohesion. This element dissolves gold to form an amalgam. 760 millimeters of this element is equivalent
to one atmosphere of pressure, as it is commonly used in manometers. It is bonded to sulfur in a compound
used as a preservative in vaccines, and foolishly blamed for autism, thiomersal. Like bromine, it is a liquid
at room temperature. For 10 points, name this metal with atomic number 80 and symbol Hg.
ANSWER: mercury [or Hg before mention]
Exposure to this element can lead to a type of social phobia known as erethism, and this element often
enters the environment from its use in small-scale gold mines. This causes neurological problems
sometimes known as Minamata disease, and this is found with sulfur in cinnabar. Spills of this element
should not be cleaned with a broom, mop, or vacuum cleaner, and there have been controversies
about whether the presence of this element in vaccine preservatives or fluorescent light bulbs is a health
hazard. Name this element often ingested by eating seafood and often used in thermometers.
ANSWER: mercury or Hg
A mixture of potassium hydroxide and this element's tetra-iodo form is used in a reagent used to
detect ammonia, named for Nessler. A chloride of this element is the primary component of the
saturated calomel electrode. A compound of this element and zinc is used in a gentle acid-medium
reduction commonly applied after a Friedel-Crafts acylation. This element's dimethyl form was
formerly used as an (*) NMR standard, and is known for seeping through the latex glove of Karen
Wetterhan. The acetate of this element is used in a reaction to add an alcohol to an alkene in a Markovnikov
fashion. This element, which is extracted from the ore cinnabar, is widely used in the preservative
thimerosal. For 10 points, name this element formerly known as quicksilver, which is highly poisonous.
ANSWER: mercury [or Hg]
This element is added and removed from an alkene to add a hydroxyl group in a namesake
anti-Markovnikov addition. This element's plus one oxidation state is always found in a diatomic cation
with a plus two charge. Vermillion pigment is produced from this element's ore, cinnabar. When mixed
with other metals, this element forms amalgams, and it is also a component of the preservative thimerosal.
Manometers typically use this element to measure relative pressures. Like bromine, this element is liquid at
room temperature. For 10 points, name this element once used in thermometers with symbol Hg.
ANSWER: mercury [or Hg until it is read]
This is the heaviest element found in an iodine-containing reagent that is used to detect ammonia in
aqueous solution; that reagent is named for Nessler. In a now-disfavored variant of the chloralkali
process, this element was floated beneath a brine solution, and an alloy of it with sodium was yielded
as a byproduct. The acetate of this element in a plus-2 oxidation state is a reagent in an electrophilic
anti-addition that converts an alkene (*) into an alcohol, and that reaction is typically followed by a
sodium borohydride reduction which removes this element. This transition metal's dimethyl is a ridiculously
potent neurotoxin that was responsible for the death of Karen Wetterhahn. Alloys containing this element
are called amalgams. For 10 points, name this element, the only metal that is liquid at room temperature.
ANSWER: mercury (or Hg)
This element is bonded to two acetate groups in a reaction in which an alkene forms an alcohol in a
Markovnikov process that is free of rearrangements. This element is combined with zinc in a reaction that
reduces a ketone to an alkane, an acidic alternative to the Wolff-Kishner reaction called the Clemmensen
reduction. An alternative name for thiols reflects their ability to bond strongly to this element. Old vaccines
were preserved with a compound of this element called thimerosal. This element is mined mainly in the
form of cinnabar. For 10 points, name this metallic element that is liquid at room temperature and can be
used in thermometers.
ANSWER: mercury
The discovery of oxygen by Carl Scheele [SHAY-luh] and Joseph Priestley was accomplished by heating
the oxide of this element. This compound was used with salt and copper sulfate to extract silver in the patio
process. This is combined with silver, tin, and copper to make dental fillings known as amalgams, though its
use is controversial because of its high toxicity. Similar concerns have decreased its use in vaccines and
thermometers. Name this element formerly known as quicksilver, a metal that is liquid at room temperature
ANSWER: mercury or Hg
Toxicity of this substance can result in Minamata disease or acrodynia, which is also called "pink disease."
The ore of this metal is a birefringent mineral called cinnabar. Common uses for this element include
cathode formation to produce chlorine and in liquid mirror scopes, although it is decreasingly used in
thermometers. For 10 points, name this element, a metal that is liquid at room temperature, symbolized Hg.
ANSWER: mercury [or Hg before it is read]
The Franck-Hertz experiment used a tube filled with this element in a gaseous state, and various
isotopes of this element were used to change in the critical temperature of superconductors due to the
isotope effect. Found together with chlorine in calomel and sulfur in vermilion, it can be obtained from
cinnabar, and forms alloys with other metals called amalgams. For 10 points, name this only element this is
liquid at room temperatures, whose symbol is Hg.
ANSWER: mercury [accept Hg before it is read]
The Castner-Kellner process uses this element as a cathode to convert alkali halides to alkali hydroxides.
This element and a solution of its chloride salt are used in the SCE, or saturated calomel electrode. A vapor
of this element was used to confirm the existence of quantized energy states in the Franck-Hertz experiment.
A compound of this element with acetate reacts with alkenes to give alcohols with regioselectivity obeying
Markovnikov's rule. The reduction of carbonyl groups to alkanes can be achieved using a compound of this
element with zinc, known as zinc amalgam, in the Clemmensen reaction. For 10 points, name this element
whose sulfide ore is cinnabar, a metallic liquid that is found in old-school thermometers.
ANSWER: mercury or Hg
The use of this element to mine silver in the patio process destroyed the environment around Potosi,
Bolivia. This element binds sulfur in a common preservative in vaccines. The interferometer in the
Michelson-Morley experiment floated on this element. This metal is found in thiomersal, and its high
coefficient of thermal expansion made it the element of choice for Daniel Fahrenheit. For ten points, name
this toxic element once found in thermometers.
ANSWER: mercury [or Hg]
A nitrate of this element is used to create picric [PIK-rik] acid in the Wolffenstein-Boters reaction,
and the previous name used for thiols ["THIGH"-awlz] came about because of their ability to bond
with this element. This is the cause of Minamata disease, and the use of this element to make a
vaccine preservative called Thiomersal ["thigh"-o-MER-sul] is now in decline because of rumored
health effects. Because this element has a high boiling point and a high coefficient of expansion in
addition to being a dense liquid, it has traditionally been used in barometers and thermometers.
Name this element formerly known as quicksilver whose chemical symbol is Hg.
ANSWER: mercury [prompt on Hg]
Due to a combination of horizontal and vertical fissures, two of these objects in Utah are named Crazy
Quilt and Checkerboard. Escarpments and these objects are covered by the same type of layer, called
a caprock. Sedona can be seen from the Brins and Airport examples of these objects. The largest
of these objects is located near Grand Junction, Colorado and is named Grand. When these objects
become very eroded, the remainder may be a butte [byoot]. These geological structures are similar
to, but much smaller than, plateaus. Name these flat-topped structures whose name is Spanish for
"table".
ANSWER: mesas [prompt on flat-topped mountains or tablelands]
NASA launched a spacecraft in 2007 to study the "Aeronomy [ai-RON-uh-mee] of Ice" in this layer of the
atmosphere, which is home to nocti-lucent clouds. Its upper portion includes a three mile thick layer of
sodium, which is caused by meteors burning up while passing through this layer. Extending thirty to fifty-
five miles above Earth's surface, this layer features a rapid decrease in temperature with height, and has the
lowest temperatures in the atmosphere. For 10 points, name this part of the atmosphere located in between
the stratosphere and the thermosphere.
ANSWER: mesosphere
A 5 km thick layer of nonionized sodium exists in this layer, which creates a night glow through
D-line emissions. Collapse of internal gravity waves in this layer is a primary driving force of global
circulation. Near the poles, ice crystals condense to form bluish noctilucent clouds in this layer.
Sounding rockets are the primary means of studying this layer, which is inaccessible to planes or
satellites. This layer reverses the temperature inversion of the layer beneath, meaning that its
temperature (*) decreases with increasing height. In addition to being the coldest layer of the atmosphere,
this layer is also where meteors burn up. For 10 points, name this layer of the atmosphere which is located
between the stratosphere and thermosphere.
ANSWER: mesosphere
This layer of the atmosphere contains noctilucent clouds. The D layer of the ionosphere is located
in this layer of the atmosphere. Its upper boundary lies near the turbopause. Temperature in this
layer of the atmosphere (*) decreases with height; its boundary with the layer above it is the coldest part
of the atmosphere. For 10 points, identify this atmospheric layer that lies above the stratosphere and below
the thermosphere.
ANSWER: mesosphere
Ligands bind to an element of this type to form coordination complexes. Bonds between atoms of
elements of this type are explained by the electron sea model, in which the electrons are delocalized.
One group of these elements is defined by having an incompletely filled d orbital. Malleability and
ductility are properties of many elements in this class. Groups of these elements include (*) alkali and
alkaline earth. For 10 points, identify these elements which include potassium and iron.
ANSWER: metals [or transition metals; or akali metals; or alkaline earth metals]
Manuel Lemos created a programming language based on XML with this name in 2001. In stars, the level
of these is what determines a star's label as Population I, II, or II, with every element which is not hydrogen
or helium being considered one of these. "Base" ones of these oxidize easily, and they usually form cations.
A mixture of two or more elements with the main component being these is known as an alloy. Magnesium
is known as the alkaline earth variety of this. Name this type of substance that conducts both heat and
electricity, the transition ones of which inhabit the d-block.
ANSWER: metal
The Goldhammer-Herzfeld ratio of these substances is nearly one. The oxides of these elements are
used in glassmaking, and these elements are used to dope semiconductors. As it is lustrous yet brittle,
(*) selenium is sometimes considered in this group, which includes germanium, boron and silicon along the
staircase of the periodic table. For 10 points, give this term for elements with both metal and non-metal
properties.
ANSWER: metalloids (accept semimetals)
Slowinksi and Masterton generally characterized these elements by properties which included
ionization energy and electronegativity. One early use of this name was to describe elements that
floated on water. These elements are (*) brittle solids and are considered good conductors with a lustrous
appearance. In contrast with two other classes of elements, these elements do not form alloys or form ionic
compounds when mixed with metals. For 10 points, name this group of elements which forms a staircase on
the periodic table, examples of which include boron, silicon, and arsenic.
ANSWER: metalloids
Examples of these entities common in the Alps include hornfels. The texture of these entities are classified
according to foliation, and the processes that form them are broadly classified as "contact" and "regional"
processes. One example of this rock type can form via multiple pathways, including from shale through
slate and phyllite as well as from granite. For 10 points, name this form of rock, which forms following the
application of extreme heat and pressure to sedimentary and igneous rocks.
ANSWER: metamorphic rocks
Eclogite is an unusual one of these objects that may be important in driving convection. These objects
can be formed due to a process named after Barrovian. Those that have layers are called foliated while the
non-foliated type includes hornfels, which is formed in these objects' namesake contact process. They
include schist, gneiss, and marble and are formed through extreme heat and pressure. For 10 points, name
this class of rocks, which are so named due to having undergone a transformation.
ANSWER: metamorphic rocks
The Barrovian sequence is used to classify types of this class of rocks by comparing them to index minerals.
Andalusite and staurolite are common minerals found in them, an unusually dense type of which is found in
subduction zones and called eclogite. Layering caused by shear on these rocks is known as foliation. Their
"regional" form is formed by tectonic movement, while the "contact" type forms around magma intrusions.
The precursor of one of these types of rocks is called the protolith, and slate is a type of it derived from
shale. For 10 points, name this class of rocks formed after igneous or sedimentary rocks are exposed to
extreme heat and pressure.
ANSWER: metamorphic rocks
Isograds separate zones of these rocks, which are based on the presence of an index mineral. One
process that creates these rocks is restricted to an aureole and is the contact type. One property of
these rocks can be a result of alternating felsic and mafic layers, forming light and dark bands. That
property can also be due to the sheets in sheet silicates orienting themselves perpendicular to the
direction of maximum (*) stress. That property of these rocks results in cleavage along parallel planes and
is known as foliation. They include hornfels and gneiss. For 10 points, name these rocks formed under high
pressure and temperature from igneous or sedimentary rocks.
ANSWER: metamorphic rocks
A major form of this process, the contact form, can occur in an area called an aureole near a cooling
pluton. This process is distinct from diagenesis, which occurs at lower temperatures. The other major type
of this process is regional, which often results in the products of this process being foliated. For 10 points,
identify this process that transform sedimentary or igneous rocks at high temperatures or pressures.
ANSWER: metamorphism
Objects that undergo this process under similar conditions are grouped into "facies"
(FAH-sheez). George Barrow defined the chlorite and sillimanite zones at opposite ends of a grading
system for this process. Black smokers trigger the hydrothermal variety of this process on the (*)
ocean floor. Contact and regional are more common types of this process, which results in gneiss (NICE),
schist (SHIST), and slate, when shale, clays, and muds are subject to high temperature and pressure. For 10
points, name this process that transforms limestone, a sedimentary rock, into marble.
ANSWER: metamorphism [or word forms]
Polymerization techniques based on one of these reactions include ROMP and RCM, and in these reactions
free alcohols are far more reactive than similar ethers. Another one using a tungsten catalyst can dimerize
terminal alkynes. Though nothing combusts, one inorganic class of these reactions produces carbon dioxide
and water, because they can produce carbonic acid. Its most famous incarnation uses a catalyst like
Grubbs's or Schrock; those compounds are metallocarbenes which shortly form a metallocyclobutane. In
inorganic contexts often used as a synonym for double-replacement reactions, for 10 points, identify this
sort of reaction, well known for an olefin one.
ANSWER: metathesis [accept olefin metathesis]
One originator of this reaction initially used it in the synthesis of Sch 38516, an antifungal compound,
and one variation of this reaction was used repeatedly in the total synthesis of ciguatoxin because it
can create difficult 7 or 8 member rings. One catalyst for this reaction was modified to place an
isopropoxy group in place of a phosphine ligand, and said catalyst also contains an imidazolidine
group. This reaction, which occurs through a metallocyclobutane intermediate, proceeds through a
traditionally (*) symmetry-forbidden 2+2 addition. Catalysts for this reaction include Grubbs ruthenium
and Schrock carbenes. For 10 points, name this reaction which earned the 2005 Nobel Prize in Chemistry,
in which a pair of alkenes trades the groups attached to their double bonds.
ANSWER: olefin metathesis
In these objects, FUN effects can be observed, which are a fractionation class of refractory inclusions or
CAI. Oxygen isotope levels in the Allende one were used to discriminate between different models of the
solar system's formation. The largest class of these are chondrites, which is a subclass of the stony type of
them. One called ALH 84001 that was found in Antarctica was part of a 1990's argument for life on Mars.
For 10 points, name these rocks that fall from outer space and survive the collision.
ANSWER: meteorites
Clues about the conditions of the early Solar System can be gleaned from calcium-aluminum-rich
inclusions in these objects. Chondrites constitute the majority of these objects found on Earth. Amino
acids were found on the Murchison example of these objects. One of these found in (*) Antarctica was
believed to have microscopic fossils of Martian bacteria. For 10 points, name these objects that survive the
fall to Earth from outer space and can be the remnants of shooting stars.
ANSWER: meteorites
Eruptions of mud volcanoes are almost always accompanied by release of this gas. Plants that live in anoxic
soils have developed aerenchyma to transport this gas from the soil to the atmosphere. Terrence Aym's
ridiculous claim that the Deepwater Horizon rig would release a "twenty-mile-wide" doomsday "megabubble" of this gas was based on Gregory Ryskin's hypothesis that its release from oceanic clathrate
hydrates caused a mass extinction during the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum. In the stratosphere, this
gas is broken down in a radical reaction that converts chlorine gas to gaseous hydrogen chloride, while in
the troposphere, it is consumed by reacting with a hydroxyl radical. For 10 points, name this greenhouse
gas, a simple hydrocarbon that is the main component in natural gas.
ANSWER: methane [or CH4]
A di-iodo derivative of this compound is reacted with a zinc-copper couple and cyclohexane to yield a
cyclopropoane in the Simmons-Smith reaction. This molecule can be produced from olivine along with
serpentine and magnetite in a specific serpentinization reaction. Aluminum carbide reacts with water to
form this compound. This gas produces the most heat per mass unit of any hydrocarbon. This compound is
being released in the Arctic as permafrost thaws. Cows release around 100 kilograms of this compound per
year through flatulence. Name this simplest alkane, with formula CH4, that is notorious for its odor.
ANSWER: methane [accept CH4 until mention]
Reacting aluminum carbide with water produces this substance, as does heating a mixture of sodium
acetate with sodium hydroxide. Under repeated free radical halogenation, this compound can be turned into
chloroform. This molecule is found inside clathrate hydrates. This gas is made by a certain type of Archaea
(arr-KAY-uh) bacteria. Rains of its liquid form occur on Titan. Since it has no odor, odorants must be
added to it as a safety precaution when it us used for fuel. For 10 points, name this compound that is the
simplest alkane, has the formula CH4, and is found in natural gas.
ANSWER: methane [accept CH4 before it is read]
Large amounts of water clathrates trap this compound in solid form at the bottom of the ocean. The
combustion of this compound forms one molecule of carbon dioxide and two molecules of water. Since this
gas is odorless, a sulfur compound is added to it to alert nearby people by smell if there is a leak. It is the
primary constituent of natural gas. For 10 points, name this simplest alkane with formula CH4.
ANSWER: methane [or CH4 until it is read; prompt on natural gas]
This compound names a reaction discovered by Zimmerman in which 1,4-dienes are rearranged to cyclopropanes. 
This compound and water are formed in the Sabatier reaction. The visible clouds on Uranus are
composed of this compound. Climate change during the Quaternary period was caused by the release of this
compound according to the clathrate gun hypothesis. This compound, along with water, ammonia, and
hydrogen, were used in the Miller-Urey experiment. This simplest alkane is also the simplest compound
with tetrahedral geometry in VSEPR theory. For 10 points, name this main constituent of natural gas that
has formula CH4.
ANSWER: methane [accept CH4 or marsh gas before mentioned]
Arndt-Eistert Synthesis reacts activated carboxylic acids with the diazo- variety of this molecule. This
compound binds to a halogen radical in a common example of a free radical chain reaction. When its
analogous functional group bonds to benzene, the result is toluene, and chloroform results in three
chlorine atoms replacing three of its hydrogen atoms. For 10 points, name this prominent component
of natural gas, the simplest alkane with a chemical formula of CH4.
ANSWER: methane [accept CH4 before read]
Like water, this molecule is a product of the Sabatier process. Another method of producing this molecule is
extraction from coal beds. Like carbon dioxide, this molecule absorbs infrared radiation, making it a
greenhouse gas, although it is over twenty times more potent as a greenhouse gas. Much of the
concentration of this molecule in the atmosphere comes from anaerobic decay of feces, as well as livestock.
Name this principal component of natural gas, the simplest hydrocarbon with formula CH4.
ANSWER: methane (accept CH4 until mentioned)
The mine phenomenon known as firedamp consists mainly of this compound, and it is usually an unwanted
product of the Fischer-Tropsch process. Clathrate deposits beneath the ocean floor are a significant biogenic
reservoir of this compound, and it is a byproduct of archaeans (ar-KAY-unz) performing anaerobic
digestion. As a pollutant, more than one-third of this compound is generated by livestock, and because it has
no smell, odorants are added before it is used as a fuel. Over 20 times more effective than carbon dioxide at
trapping heat in the atmosphere, name this compound, the chief component of natural gas, with formula
CH4 ("C H 4").
ANSWER: methane [accept CH4 early]
This chemical is synthesized by heating sodium acetate with sodium hydroxide and by reacting aluminum
carbide with water. Most pathways for the synthesis of this compound involve acetic acid or carbon dioxide
as an electron acceptor. This chemical is trapped by hydrogen bonded water molecules in clathrate
complexes, and these two hydrates form below 300 Kelvin, which often happens when this gas is pumped
underseas or stored in large deposits such as the one under the Black Sea. It is over twenty times more
effective at trapping heat than carbondioxide and it is released by microorganisms in wetlands as well as
termites, cows, and coal mining. For 10 points, identify compound, the principal component of natural gas,
with formula CH4.
ANSWER: Methane [Accept CH4 before mentioned]
This compound is released from ocean floor clathrates. When this compound is added to excess chlorine
gas, it can be triply halogenated to form chloroform. It reacts with water to form a mixture of carbon
monoxide and hydrogen gas called syngas (SIN-gas). This is the simplest compound with an
sp3-hybridized carbon and tetrahedral geometry. This greenhouse gas is the simplest alkane. For 10 points,
name this compound which makes up natural gas, with formula CH4.
ANSWER: methane [or CH4 until it is read]
In the laboratory, this substance is used to pre-wet PVDF membranes for western blotting,
and the transfer buffer for that procedure is 20% this substance. The product of the reaction
between this compound and hydrogen iodide is bound to an iridium-containing catalyst in the
first step of the Cativa process, which carbonylates this compound. Reacting this compound with
isobutylene creates the anti-knock agent MBTE, and it is also used to trans-esterify triglycerides
to form biodiesel. Ingesting this compound can cause high anion-gap acidosis and blindness,
which is prevented by inhibiting ALDH. This compound can be oxidized twice to create formic
acid or once to create formaldehyde. It was originally distilled form wood by Robert Boyle. For
10 points, name this simplest alcohol with formula CH2OH.
ANSWER: methanol
This operation can be accomplished using a bis-iodozincio compound in the absence of metal salts in
an ionic liquid as a single substitution, or via the reaction of formaldehyde to a malonic ester in the
presence of an amine, a reaction named for Knoevenagel. Using a compound with two
cyclopentadiene ligands, a titanium carbenoid, this operation occurs as a single substitution at a carbonyl
in the Tebbe olefination. The group added in this reaction is named for how it would appear following
homolytic cleavage, a neutral one-carbon species with two unpaired electrons; that group is the simplest
carbene. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in which a CH2 group is attached.
ANSWER: methylenation [accept equivalents like adding a methylene group; accept adding a CH2 group before "CH2" and prompt on it afterwards; prompt on making a terminal olefin; prompt on alkylation]
One type is a main source of rubidium and cesium, and an important source of lithium. Their typical
composition is of many T-O-T layers sandwiched between interlayers of cations such as potassium and
calcium. The "black" type has a magnesium-to-iron ratio of less than 2 to 1, and is used in potassium-argon
dating. Another type, known as isinglass, is colorless and was used in window panes. Occuring in
pegmatites, some lesser-known varieties include zinwaldite, phlogopite, and lepidolite. A class of
phyllosilitcates, they have perfect basal cleavage, allowing them to be split into very thin laminae, or sheets.
For 10 points, name this class of minerals containing biotite and muscovite.
ANSWER: mica (prompt on "silicate", "sheet silicate", "phyllosilicate", "minerals", etc. until mentioned)
Phyllite is a type of schist that contains very small grains of this mineral. Along with quartz and feldspar,
this type of mineral is commonly found in pegmatites, where tourmaline content is a good indicator of a
high content of this mineral. The end window of a Geiger-Muller tube is often made of this mineral. Bunsen
and Kirchoff discovered rubidium in lepidolite, a type of this silicate mineral, which along with talc and
graphite exhibits perfect basal cleavage. Examples of this mineral include glauconite, biotite, and
muscovite. For 10 points, name this kind of mineral known for its ability to easily fragment into sheets and
flakes.
ANSWER: mica
Glauconite is a mineral of this type, though it lacks a characteristic property, and the "windows"
which allow weak forms of radiation to pass through Geiger counters are usually made of these
minerals. "Bird's eye" patterns are exhibited by two of these minerals when placed under crosspolarized light. One type of these minerals is a lithium source, lepidolite, and another has a chromiumrich variant called fuchsite and gets its name because of its use in Russian glass. Containing such minerals
as biotites and muscovites, for 10 points, identify these phyllosilicate minerals, many of which exhibit
perfect basal cleavage.
ANSWER: micas
The weathering of one example of this group of minerals yields the clay vermiculite. Although not
carbonates, a characteristic of these minerals is parallel extinction under cross-polarized light, which has a
"mottled" or "bird's eye" appearance. Like its mother group, this group of minerals can be split based on
whether they are dioctahedral and trioctahedral, which gives them colors of white and black, respectively.
These minerals are the main components of schist and contribute to its namesake foliation. These minerals
can be cut into thin lamellae because they easily split parallel to their bases and many exhibit perfect basal
cleavage. For 10 points, name this class of phyllosilicate minerals that includes lepidolite, muscovite and
biotite.
ANSWER: micas [prompt on phyllosilicate or sheet silicate minerals]
A popular method of assembling block copolymers involves them forming the multi-compartment form of
these substances. Emulsion polymerization relies on the formation of these structures around an initiator
molecule, and an important characteristic of these structures is measured using a decrease in the
fluorescence peak wavelength of pyrene-3-carboxaldehyde. These structures form only above a point at
which the third derivative of a linear function of their concentration and their monomers, with respect to the
total concentration, equals zero; that point is their namesake critical concentration. Liposomes are a doublewalled analogue of these structures, which phospholipids form in solution by pointing their heads out and
tails in. For 10 points, name these single-layered roughly spherical particles, which form from amphipathic
surfactant molecules.
ANSWER: micelle
The mesoporous material MCM-41 is created using a template of rod-like ones of these structures.
They are treated as a "microphase" in Tanford's phase-separation model. PS-P4VP in toluene forms
an inverse, "hairy" form of these structures. The number of carbon atoms in the constituents of these
structure is related by the Sauff-Klevens equation to a parameter key to their formation. CTAB
forms these structures in one form of DNA extraction, and they are formed around denatured
proteins by (*) SDS. Their constituents tend to hang out at the air-water interface until they reach their
namesake critical concentration. They can only form above the Krafft temperature, and their substituents are
typically amphiphilic, like detergents, or phospholipids. For 10 points, name these roughly spherical
particles that form in solutions of surfactant molecules.
ANSWER: micelle [prompt on "detergents" or "surfactants" until they are read]
This reaction is combined with an aldol condensation to produce cyclohexenones in a process named for
Robinson, and a variation of this uses silyl ethers and titanium tetrachloride, in a reaction named also for
Mukaiyama. In a process analogous to this reaction, performed with simple ketones, the equilbrium is
shifted towards the reagents, unlike in the Claisen and aldol condensations, necessitating the use of an
enolate in conjugate addition to produce the 1,4-addition. For 10 points, what is this reaction named for an
American chemist, which consists of the addition of a carbanion to an alpha, beta unsaturated carbonyl?
ANSWER: Michael reaction [accept Michael addition]
In biology, the antifungal agent FMDP works by undergoing this reaction. Angular triquinanes can be
produced through an intramolecular form of this reaction. Another variant of this reaction uses trityl salts as
catalysts when followed by aldol condensation. That reaction typically uses either a Lewis acid or fluoride
ion source as a catalyst and is named after Mukaiyama, while the entire sequence is known as Robinson
annulation. It is often performed in the presence of strong lithium-containing bases. For 10 points, name this
conjugation between an enolate and a conjugation enone, used to form a new carbon-carbon bond and a
typically 1,4-dicarbonyl, named after its American discoverer.
ANSWER: Michael addition/reaction/etc
A report released in 2004 suggests that P-BEMP is a recyclable organocatalyst for this reaction. A
titanium tetrachloride catalyst and silyl ether are involved in a variant of this reaction also named
for Mukaiyama. Chiral phase transfer catalysis using compounds from cinchona alkaloids is one
method for expanding the scope of asymmetric forms of this reaction, whose (*) donors are usually
beta-keto esters. Followed by an aldol condensation in the Robinson annulations, it ends with proton
abstraction by the enolate. For 10 points, name this reaction which adds a carbanion to an alpha-beta
unsaturated carbonyl compound, named for its American formulator.
ANSWER: Michael addition [or reaction]
With Cobb, the namesake of this reaction characterized the reaction of quinone and hydrochloric acid, and
cyclopentenone undergoes this reaction with thiols and GSH in biological systems. Ochiai and Tada
developed a tandem version of it with a carbene rearrangement, and a more famous variation uses a silyl
enol ether and is named for Mukaiyama. Chiral ammonium salts are used to force the reaction to favor the
"Syn" product produced by this reaction, known as its asymmetric version. This reaction is combined with
an intramolecular aldol reaction to create a six-membered ring in the Robinson annulation. FTP, name this
reaction which adds a namesake donor to an alpha-beta unsaturated ketone, named for an American.
ANSWER: Michael addition
Using electrostatic interactions known as Circe effects, systems modeled by this equation that exhibit
"kinetic perfection" can overcome diffusion-based limitations. When this equation is applied empirically to
microbial growth, it is known as the Monod equation. It can be derived either by assuming that the reactants
immediately equilibrate to form the intermediate complex which decays irreversibly into product, or
equivalently by applying a steady-state approximation to that intermediate's concentration. The reactant
concentration at which the reaction rate is half of V-max is given by this equation's constant, K-sub-m; both
V-max and K-sub-m can be read off of a Lineweaver-Burke plot. For 10 points, name this equation named
for two scientists, that describes the rate of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction.
ANSWER: Michaelis-Menten equation
The slowest of these is the Gakkel. The youngest magnetic stripe anomalies are found closest to these
features. These features create MORB. The slab-pull from subduction zones helps form these features.
These features form the longest continuous chain of volcanoes on Earth. They are the most common place
to find black smokers, a type of hydrothermal vent. For 10 points, identify these underwater mountain
systems formed at divergent plate boundaries.
ANSWER: mid-oceanic ridges [prompt on spreading ridges; prompt on divergent plate boundaries until it is read]
Devals are hypothesized to be caused by discontinuities in magma chambers near these entities.
Potassium, strontium, uranium and other incompatible elements are notably absent in these features'
namesake basalts. Black smokers occur mainly at these locations. Basaltic magmas extruded here
form pillow lavas. Striping that was discovered parallel to one of these locations showed evidence of
(*) magnetic reversals. Along with slab pull, forces generated at these locations are hypothesized to drive
tectonic plate motion.These systems, which are also known as spreading centers, are broken by transform
faults known as fracture zones. For 10 points, name this type of underwater mountain range which
surrounds divergent plate boundaries, examples of which include the East Pacific Rise and one in the center
of the Atlantic.
ANSWER: Mid-Ocean ridges
Devised to test Alexander Oparin's 1924 hypothesis, experiments similar to this one were performed by
Wilde and MacNevin. A purely aqueous variation used hydrogen cyanide to produce adenine, and was
performed by Joan Oro. A 2008 reanalysis of the solutions in this experiment found that the "volcanic"
version of the experiment produced far more compounds than previously realized-not five, but twenty-two
amino acids. Using an electrical spark to simulate lightning and producing organic compounds from
hydrogen, ammonia, water, and methane, name this 1952 experiment which demonstrated the feasibility of
abiogenesis on an early Earth.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey experiment [or Urey-Miller experiment]
Both the Butlerov reaction and the Strecker synthesis can explain the mechanism by which this experiment
worked. A modification by Jeff Bada introduced iron and carbonates to negate the effects of nitrite
intermediates, which likely degraded much of the amino acid product in the original experiment, though 11
of the 20 amino acids were still produced. Performed by heating water in one chamber while mixing gases
in another linked to electrodes, for 10 points, name this doubly eponymous experiment in which the
sparking of methane, water, ammonia, and hydrogen produced important organic compounds in an attempt
to simulate the primitive atmosphere.
ANSWER: Urey-Miller [accept either order of names]
One outcome of this experiment was a racemic mix of certain monomers resulting in
a disproportionately high amount of D-enantiomers. Important chemical reactions
during this experiment include the formation of sugars from Butlerov's reaction,
and this experiment was inspired by the work of Alexander Oparin. Electric sparks
represented (*) lightning in this experiment, which contained mixtures of gases such as
ammonia and hydrogen in one chamber. Conducted at the University of Chicago by its two
namesake scientists, for ten points, name this experiment which simulated the synthesis of organic
from inorganic compounds fundamental for early life on Earth.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey Experiment
Cairns-Smith proposed an alternative synthetic approach involving supposed crystal genes which could take
advantage of the crystallization and the irregularities in clay for structural replication. Designed to test
Oparin and Haldane's hypothesis, it was similar to experiments conducted by Joan Oro and K.A. Wilde.
The experimental apparatus contained heated water vapor which was passed through a chamber containing
CH4, NH3, H2CO2 and other gasses, and exposed to electricity. The water vapor was then condensed and
sampled. This allowed the simulation of lightning in an atmosphere similar in composition to early Earth,
and the resultant water contained trace amounts of 9 amino acids. For 10 points, name this 1953 experiment
on the origin of organic compounds performed by two namesake University of Chicago biochemists.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey Experiment [or Urey-Miller Experiment]
Joan Oro showed that hydrogen cyanide would be a good precursor to this to validate John
Haldrane's and Alexander Oparin's hypothesis. It involved heating water to become water vapor, an
electrode to simulate lightning strikes, and hydrogen gas, ammonia and methane becoming amino acids,
showing evidence for chemical evolution. For ten points, name this doubly-eponymous experiment which
tried to simulate primordial earth's atmospheric conditions.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey Experiment or Urey-Miller Experiment
This experiment's results were indicated by a pink stain on the cold water trap. In this experiment,
the Strecker synthesis caused the formation of a racemic mixture rather than exclusively left-handed
products. Designed in part as a response to Darwin's (+) "warm little pond" theory, this
experiment's apparatus used sparks, as well as methane, (*) ammonia, hydrogen, and water, to simulate
early Earth. For 10 points, name this 1952 experiment conducted by two biologists in which amino acids
were synthesized from inorganic materials.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey experiment [or Urey-Miller experiment]
One predecessor to it produced "resinous solids" that were noted by William MacNevin as being "too
complex for analysis." The lack of precipitation of uranium in it is commonly cited by opponents of it,
and the electricity it produced is often thought to be an overestimation. Joan Oro developed a similar
experiment to this one, which tested Oparin and Haldane's hypothesis. Apparently, nitrites destroy the
fruits of this experiment at the same speed as those compounds form. For 10 points, name this
experiment modeling the early Earth's atmosphere.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey experiment
A 2008 analysis of unpublished results from this experiment found that use of a tapered aspirator to increase
airflow to the main vessel improved the results. The experimental setup contained an oxygen-free closed
loop of sterile glassware, with one flask connected to a pair of electrodes applying a continuous electric
current. This experiment was designed to test the hypothesis of Alexander Oparin and John Haldane. This
experiment produced a racemic mixture from the reaction of water, methane, ammonia, and hydrogen
together over a one-week period. Showing the spontaneous production of amino acids from inorganic
compounds, for 10 points, name this experiment on the chemical origins of life.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey experiment [accept names in either order]
Johnson and Pratt re-analyzed the original samples from this experiment and found hydroxylated
products. This experiment immediately preceded Sydney Fox's experimental discovery of proteinoid
microspheres, and Roscoe Stribling repeated this experiment with one of the original scientists.
Originally designed to test a hypothesis of Oparin and Haldane, the apparatus contained a heated flask
of water linked in series to a trap containing a sampling probe, a vacuum pump, and a chamber containing
two electrodes. The chamber contained a mixture of water, methane, ammonia, and hydrogen cyanide, and
this experiment was successful in creating sugars and amino acids. For 10 points, name this experiment that
was used to show that a pre-biotic Earth can create the precursors of life.
ANSWER: Urey-Miller experiment
Leslie Orgel replicated the results of this study at freezing temperatures, while Michael Robertson's version
gave evidence for the RNA world hypothesis. A variation conducted by Joan (hoh-AHN) Oro produced
adenine when hydrogen cyanide (SAI-uh-naid) was included as a starting material, and criticism of this
experiment points to its disregard of UV radiation and lack of volcanic sulfur compounds in the air. A
recent analysis of the results found more than four times the amino acid products than originally reported.
Using an electric spark to simulate lightning on a heated mixture of water, hydrogen, ammonia, and
methane, name this experiment that showed abiotic (ay-bai-AH-tic) synthesis of organic molecules was
possible in Earth's early atmosphere.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey experiment [or Urey-Miller experiment]
This experiment prompted another, performed by Juan Oro, which involved the creation of Adenine from
Ammonia and Hydrogen Cyanide. It supported the Haldane-Oparin hypothesis, which stated that enzymes,
amino acids, and other macromolecules were created from inorganic chemicals in reactions. However, there
have been doubts that carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide were more common in the early atmosphere
than ammonia and methane. FTP, name this 1953 experiment, which ignited a group of gases in a flask with
electricity simulating lightning storms and produced amino acids.
ANSWER: Miller-Urey Experiment
The reaction of these things to stressful forces is called tenacity. Adding a drop of hydrochloric acid
and seeing whether these things fizz can be used to test whether they contain carbonate. The color these
things display in a powdered form is called streak. Their crystal lattice determines their properties of
parting, fracture, and cleavage. The vast majority of Earth's crust is made up of the silicate type of these
things. Name these constituents of rocks.
ANSWER: minerals [prompt on crystals until "crystal lattice" is read]
When these entities are found in the same series, they are called isomorphs, and they have fourteen
basic lattice arrangements of atoms in three dimensions, called the "Bravais lattices". One way of
classifying these entities uses adjectives like adamantine or vitreous to describe the way light is
reflected off of their surfaces, and another involves rubbing one of these entities on an (*) unglazed
porcelain plate. Luster and streak, along with crystal structure and cleavage, can be used to describe, for ten
points , what naturally occurring solids with highly ordered atomic structure, members of which are ranked
on the Mohs Hardness Scale and include calcite and quartz?
ANSWER: Minerals (accept crystal before "unglazed,", prompt afterwards, do NOT accept or prompt on "rock")
Foliation is caused by the preferred orientation of these things. The most common group of them has a
silicon-oxygen tetrahedra for a building block and is the silicates. Although not rocks, when important
metals are found in them, they are called ore. Common examples include plagioclase and orthoclase
feldspar and quartz. Their properties include fracture, cleavage, luster and streak. For 10 points, identify
these naturally occurring inorganic solids that possess a definite chemical structure.
ANSWER: minerals [prompt on crystals]
In Flory-Huggins theory, the enthalpy change associated with this phenomenon is proportional to the
interaction parameter chi times kT times the lattice volume fraction phi-sub-2. This phenomenon will occur
as concentration increases beyond the Plait point, and does not occur inside the dome on a ternary phase
diagram. A paradox named for this process is related to the Gibbs paradox. The increase in entropy due to
this process is equal to negative the number of moles times R, times the sum over components of mole
fraction times log of mole fraction. A magnetized bar does this process within lab glassware. In an ideal
solution, this process evolves no heat. For 10 points, name this process which is used to make a liquid's
concentration more homogeneous, by adding an impeller or stirrer.
ANSWER: mixing [accept stirring until "stirrer" is read; anti-prompt on "dissolving" or "solvation"]
Fossilized examples of a specific type of this region can be seen in ophiolites, where gabbro and
peridotite may surround this region. In 1961, a project named after this region failed to reach this
region with CUSS I. That project was led by Walter Munk and organized by the American
Miscellaneous Society. More recent attempts to reach this region have used the (*) Chikyu. The Soviet
tried to study this region in the Kola Peninsula by drilling the world's deepest hole. This region only
reaches the asthenosphere near mid-ocean ridges. Data from a 1909 earthquake led to the discovery of a
difference in the speed of P-waves that traveled above and below this region. For 10 point, name this region
of the Earth that separates the crust and mantle, named for a Croatian geologist.
ANSWER: Mohorovicic Discontinuity [prompt on mantle]
The theory responsible for the existence of this location was formulated following the study of the
Kulpa Valley earthquake of 1909, and P-waves increase in velocity when they reach this location.
Located about 75 km beneath the (*) Tibetan plateau, it is closer to the surface beneath the ocean, where
it
is only about 7 km deep. Project Mohole attempted to drill to this location, which is is named for the
Croatian seismologist that discovered it. For 10 points, identify this boundary between the mantle and the
Earth's crust.
ANSWER: Mohorovicic Discontinuity
This region is deepest beneath the Tibetan plateau. One American proposal in the 1950s that involved
drilling through the ocean floor to reach this area fizzled out, while the Kola Institute drilled to a depth of
12,260 meters in a different aborted attempt. It is unverified by direct means and is an area containing
mostly peridotite, similar to the Weichert-Gutenberg one. Velocity of P-Waves abruptly increases in this
area first discovered after a 1908 earthquake in Zagreb. Lying mostly within the lithosphere 5 km under the
ocean floor and 35 km under most continents, FTP, name this region between the crust and the mantle.
ANSWER: Mohorovicic discontinuity or Moho discontinuity (NOT Mohorovic, accept logical equivalents like border)
The logarithm of viscosity is linearly related to the logarithm of this quantity in the
Mark-Houwink-Sakurada equation. Osmometry experiments measure the number-average form of
this quantity. The polydispersity index measures the variance of this quantity in a polymer. This
quantity is empirically calculated as the cryoscopic constant times mass fraction divided by the
change in temperature. The rate of (*) effusion is inversely proportional to the square root of this
quantity according to Graham's Law. For an ideal gas, it equals the density times RT over the pressure. For
carbon dioxide, it's 44. For 10 points, name this quantity, the sum of the atomic masses in a molecule.
ANSWER: molar mass [or molecular mass; or molecular weight; or formula weight; prompt on mass or weight]
In the Elliott-Suresh-Donohue equation of state, this quantity can be calculated by multiplying the
characteristic size parameter by the universal gas constant and dividing by the quantity Boltzmann's
constant times the reduced number density. It's not compressibility, but the Van der Waals and
Redlich-Kwong equations of state are called cubic equations of state because they are cubic functions
of this quantity. (*) For crystalline solids, this quantity can be found by multiplying the unit cell volume by
Avogadro's number and dividing by the number of formula units. In ideal gases, this quantity is equal to the
temperature of the gas times the universal gas constant divided by the pressure, and can be found by
dividing the molar mass by density. For 10 points, name this quantity often measured in cubic meters per
mole.
ANSWER: specific molar volume (prompt on "volume" or "specific volume")
When applied to salts, it is more accurate to express this measurement in a unit called the formal. The prefix
OS- is attached to a version of this measurement that accounts for ion dissociation, while in acid-base
chemistry, this measurement has largely supplanted normality. Reaction rates are generally found by raising
this measurement to the power of the coefficient, and in many chemistry equations it is symbolized by a
lowercase C. Calculated as amount of solute over volume of solution, name this measure of solution
concentration expressed as moles per liter.
ANSWER: molarity [accept molar concentration before it is mentioned; prompt on concentration; do not accept "molality"]
The normality of an acid equals this value times the number of acidic protons. For pure water at
room temperature, it equals 55.3, and unlike similar quantities, it decreases when water is heated due
to thermal expansion. Osmotic pressure is equal to the product of van't Hoff factor, gas constant,
temperature, and this quantity. The law of mass action relates this (*) quantity for each species in
chemical equilibrium and usually represents it with square brackets. pH is the negative logarithm of this
quantity for hydronium ions in solution. For ten points, name this measure of a solution's concentration,
equal to moles of solute over liters of solution.
ANSWER: molarity (or molar concentration; prompt on concentration, accept molality until "expansion", but afterwards, do NOT accept or prompt on it)
A logarithmic relationship between the transmissivity of light and the product of a solution's
absorptivity and this property is illustrated by Beer's law. This property of a solution is controlled
by preparing the solution in a volumetric flask. Unlike its counterpart, the (*) mass of the solvent does
not affect the calculation of this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity calculated as the number of
moles of solute over the volume of the solution, contrasted with molality.
ANSWER: molarity [or molar concentration]
The innermost of these entities are assumed to be completely filled in the frozen core approximation.
The changes in their energies due to changes in geometry are depicted in Walsh diagrams. In certain
cases, their energies can be approximated in terms of exchange, Coulomb, and overlap integrals. The
conservation of their symmetry is the basis of the Woodward-Hoffman rules. According to (*) Fukui,
who developed their namesake "frontier" theory, chemical reactivity only depends on the highest occupied
and lowest unoccupied examples of them. They always come in pairs, with the higher-energy one marked
with a star and designated as "antibonding." For 10 points, name these functions that can be calculated as
linear combinations of atomic orbitals.
ANSWER: molecular orbitals [or MOs, prompt on "orbitals," I guess prompt on "wavefunctions" until "frontier"]
The Hartree-Fock and ab initio methods are generally used to find important orbital coefficients in this
theory. One of the basic tenents of this theory is the LCAO method. The conjugated pi systems of benzene
and polyenes in organic chemistry has been evaluated through this theory, which proposes the existence of
bonding orbitals with lesser numbers of nodes, and antibonding orbitals with more nodes. Founded through
the efforts of Mulliken, Slater, and Lennard-Jones, for ten points name this theory which was the main
competitor to Valence Bond theory in the 1930s and which proposed that orbitals are delocalized over
entire molecules.
ANSWER: Molecular Orbital Theory
These entities are treated in Huckel theory as linear combinations of a similar construct. The secular
determinant can be used to solve for their energies. The theory of these entities can be used to explain why
diatomic oxygen is paramagnetic and why diatomic helium does not exist. One type of these things is
denoted by a superscript star and has zero electron density. The most common types of these orbitals are
bonding and antibonding. For 10 points, name this type of orbital, contrasted with atomic orbitals.
ANSWER: molecular orbitals [prompt on partial answer]
These constructs can be omitted in Density Functional Theories in a uniqueness result named for
Hohenberg and Kohn. Woodward and Hoffman used these constructs to predict stereo- and regioselectivity of pericyclic reactions. Koopmans' theorem relates the energy of these constructs to
ionization energy. In Hartree-Fock theory these are the (*) eigenfunctions of the Fock operator, and are
linear combination of Gaussian functions. They can also be calculated by Self-Consistent Field theories.
They can be used to calculate bond order, and these predict the paramagnetism of gaseous oxygen and the
stability of radicals like nitric oxide. Their antibonding variety is usually denoted with an asterisk. For 10
points, name this extension of Lewis and VSEPR theory to multi-atom systems
ANSWER: Molecular Orbital Theory [prompt on MO, prompt on electron "orbital" until mentioned]
The Roothan equations are an alternative to the most common method of describing these entities using a
non-orthonormal basis. They are eigenvalues of the Fock operator in the Hartree-Fock method for
determining them. A way of mathematically describing these entities is by linearly combining their
substituent atomic parts in the LCAO method, and they are often visualized by van der Waals surfaces.
Coming in bonding and anti-bonding forms, for 10 points, identify these constructs specifying regions of
electron density in combinations of atoms, the namesakes of the primary alternative to VSEPR (VES-per)
theory.
ANSWER: molecular orbital theory [accept atomic orbitals before "Fock"; prompt on MO or orbitals]
One of the triumphs of this theory is the correct prediction of the stereoselectivity in the Diels-Alder
reaction, and its greatest success might be its correct prediction of paramagnetism in molecular oxygen. Its
formulation was part of the reason for the awarding of the 1966 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. However, it
becomes increasingly inaccurate as atomic spacing increases, due to decreased delocalization of electrons.
It was used by Huckel to explain aromatic stability and the 4n + 2 rule is derived from it. Constructed from
linear combinations of atomic orbitals with similar energies, this is, for 10 points, what theory that describes
bonding in terms of sigma and pi bonds, partially formulated by Robert Mulliken?
ANSWER: molecular orbital theory [prompt on "MO Theory"]
The change in the energy of these entities with respect to molecular geometry is depicted on Walsh
diagrams. The Woodward-Hoffmann Rules were derived from the concept of the conservation of symmetry
of these entities, and were based on Fukui's theory of "frontier" ones. Lewis acid-base reactions can be
thought of as having the highest occupied one in one molecule donate electrons to the lowest unoccupied
one of another molecule. Antibonding ones are denoted with asterisks, and the most common examples of
these are designated using either sigma or pi. For 10 points, name these delocalized electron clouds, formed
from the linear combination of atomic orbitals.
ANSWER: molecular orbitals [or MOs; prompt on electron orbitals]
They can be approximated mathematically by the Hartree-Fock method, as they are solutions to
Schrodinger's Equation. First introduced by Hund and Mulliken, they are represented graphically by LCAO
diagrams. These entities can be described in terms of bonding, non-bonding and antibonding kinds. Their
presence explains why liquid oxygen is paramagnetic and it is the MO in the acronyms HOMO and LUMO.
For 10 points, identify these regions wherein electrons travel between the several atoms of a namesake
construct.
ANSWER: molecular orbital theory
Woodward-Hoffman rules state that pericyclic reactions can only happen if the symmetries of these
objects are the same in both the reactants and products. The LCAO approximation allows one to
diagram these objects; in those diagrams, an asterisk denotes the "antibonding" type. They are
mathematically expressed in the (*) Hartree-Fock equation, and are denoted by the Greek letters phi,
delta, pi, and omega, which correspond to the f, d, p, and s atomic orbitals. For 10 points, name these
regions in which electrons are likely to be found when shared between two atoms.
ANSWER: molecular orbitals [prompt on orbitals; do not accept "atomic orbitals"]
These entities are modeled by the STO-nG and the Pople sets, and by more complicated functions denoted
with zeta notation. One model for describing them sets Coulomb integral equal to alpha and the resonance
integral equal to beta and was developed by Erich Huckel. A good rule of thumb is that diagrams of them
for cyclic conjugated pi system always takes the shape of the ring involved, with one vertex pointing down.
They are created in pairs, with the higher-energy one being marked with a star. The chemical reactivity of
species often depends on the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied, or "frontier," examples of the these
entities, which can be described as bonding or antibonding. One of the simplest ways to calculate them is as
a linear combination of their atomic counterparts. For 10 points, name these functions that describe the
locations of electrons in a molecule.
ANSWER: molecular orbitals [prompt on orbital; accept atomic orbitals before "alpha" and D NOT accept or prompt afterwards]
Modern methods to compute them include Coupled cluster methods and Moller-Plasset perturbation theory,
which includes correlation functions. John Pople's work on them used primitive Gaussians as basis sets,
and they are the eigenfunctions of the Fock operator in Hartree-Fock theory. Easily derived via the LCAO
method, these entities are the solutions of the Schrodinger equation for a multi-body electronic Hamiltonian.
They can be used to explain why dihydrogen can exist but dihelium cannot, and they come in bonding and
antibonding varieties. FTP, name these regions of space around a molecule where electrons hang out.
ANSWER: Molecular orbitals (prompt on partial)
One useful approximation in this theory uses variationally minimized matrix elements that act as
coefficients in a linear combination of orthonormal basis functions due to single atoms. Its namesake
constructs are the eigenfunctions of the Fock operator, and the square moduli of the entities it concerns give
the distribution of electrons due to more than one nucleus. Its namesake entities can be determined by the
aforementioned LCAO approximation, can be visualized by hybridizations such as sp3, and come in
bonding and anti-bonding varieties. For 10 points, name this theory of electron distribution in chemical
compounds that is more realistic than VSEPR theory.
ANSWER: molecular orbital theory [prompt on orbitals]
This theory describes how liquid oxygen has both a double bond and is paramagnetic. It can be
used to explain why dihelium (dye-"HELIUM") does not exist but the dihelium plus one ion can
theoretically exist. It uses an approximation called LCAO, and when applied to a heteronuclear
molecule, places the more electronegative atom at a lower (*) energy level. When applied to dioxygen,
it contains energy levels denoted sigma and pi, and sigma star and pi star. For 10 points, name this theory
which places electrons into bonding and anti-bonding energy levels.
ANSWER: molecular orbital theory [or MO theory]
It's not molecular weight, but for a colloid solution, the distribution of this property is
commonly assayed using dynamic light scattering. It's not the activity coefficient, but in the
Debye-Huckel equation, the variable "a" encodes this quantity, and this parameter notably does
not appear in the Davies equation. A method of chromatography that is used to separate
molecules by this property commonly uses a Sephacryl resin and is either referred to as gelpermeation
chromatography or named for the exclusion of this property. For an ideal gas, this
quantity is usually assumed to be significantly smaller than the distance between the molecules
or the space occupied by the container. For 10 points, name this quantity which is accounted for
by the "b" term of the van Der Waals equation, which is how much space a molecule takes up.
ANSWER: molecular size [or molecular radius; or molecular diameter; or molecular volume; accept any answer which talks about how big a molecule is or how much space it takes up until it is read; or particle in place of molecular]
The ratio of two bulk forms of this quantity is given by the polydispersity index, which describes the width
of the distribution of this property for certain compounds. In size exclusion chromatography, a negative
relationship is obtained between the logarithm of this quantity and the elution volume, while in gel
electrophoresis, "ladder molecules" with known values for this property are used as reference compounds.
The highest peak corresponding to this property is possessed by monoisotopic particles in mass spec. For 10
points, identify this quantity which is usually expressed in Daltons for biological molecules, and which
describes the total number of AMUs present in a compound.
ANSWER: molecular weight [or molecular mass; accept molar mass]
These compounds can change their stereochemistry through a process called
mutarotation [MYOO-tuh-"rotation"], where they switch between their alpha and beta
anomers [AAN-oh-murz]. These compounds isomerize ["eye"-SAH-mur-"eyes"] between an open
chain and a cyclic form; that cyclic form can be depicted by a Haworth projection. Nucleotides
consist of a phosphate and a nitrogenous [ny-TRAH-juh-nuss] base bound to a fivevcarbon compound
of this type. These substances are the fundamental units that make up compounds such as cellulose
and glycogen, and their names tend to end with "-ose". Name these compounds that include fructose
and glucose, the building blocks of carbohydrates.
ANSWER: monosaccharides [accept sugars; accept carbohydrates before "fundamental units" and prompt thereon thereafter; prompt on saccharides]
Attempts to understand this weather phenomenon in North America have been called SWAMP and NAME,
taking place in part in Sonora and Chihuahua and caused in part by the Gulf of California and Mexican
Plateau. Defined as a change in air circulation based on the seasons, it affects the trade winds in Africa and
brings rain to Sudan. The change in altitude between both the Arabian Sea and Bay of Bengal on the one
hand and the Himalayas on the other results in the strongest example of this phenomenon. Name this
weather system exemplified by a very rainy season in India.
ANSWER: monsoon
A formation-based classification of these entities is due to Lucas and Howarth. One type of them with
high sand concentration in Sweden is called Veiki, and another class of these structures is named for
De Geer. Flow over a sandur is channelized when the snout has retreated from one type of this
structure. Large, rippled ridges characterize the Rogen type. Irregularities in a glacier's retreat lead to
the "recessional" type. Norway's Giant's Wall is an example of the "terminal" type, while side basin
shearing gives lateral ones. They are composed of an undifferentiated mix of rock and soil called till. For 10
points, name these rock deposits left by glaciers.
ANSWER: moraines
Andrews and Smithson categorized these into four types based on dip patterns and fabric strengths, and
these may have caused the pattern of Clarion and Webster soils in central Iowa. A Rogen variety may be
caused by velocity gradients, and a push variety of this feature can be recognized by rocks disturbed from
their original orientation. Kettle lakes may form when water is trapped behind one of these. The recessional
variety is a retreating example of the terminal variety and reveals climate history, while lateral ones are
found along the sides of their generating features. Drumlins can be formed from the ground variety of these
by streamlining by overriding ice. For 10 points, name this accumulation of till and debris carried or
deposited by a glacier.
ANSWER: moraine
A ribbed one of these structures is found near Lake Rogen, where that subtype gets its name. Veiki
ones form irregular plateaued landscapes and are a subtype of Hummocky ones, and ribbon lakes
can be created when they trap water, as occurred at Lake Zurich. The Giant's Wall in Norway is
another example of these, and is of a subtype that marks the advancement of the structures
responsible for creating them, known as terminal ones. Frost shattering can create lateral ones, while
rolling hears can create ground ones, which can be formed into drumlins. For 10 points, name these physical
features which are created by debris from glaciers as they advance.
ANSWER: Moraine
One of the two types of these named after regions in Sweden are also called ribbed because of their
appearance. The minor type are sometimes referred to as corrugated or washboard because of their
appearance. Consisting of unsorted till, other types of these include lateral, ground, and terminal. An
example of this in Wisconsin is named Kettle. Name these stones and earth sometimes on a glacier but often
left behind when the glacier melts.
ANSWER: moraines
Klingelhoffer miniaturized the apparatus used in this technique in the MINOS apparatus, and one effect
measured in this experiment is the splitting of spin states by a quadropole moment, which is used to
characterize spin states. Other quantities calculated include the magnetic splitting and the isomer shift,
which can be used to measure covalency and electronegativity. The apparatus is typically kept cold by
liquid nitrogen, and is typically calibrated using the electron capture of Cobalt-57 to Iron-57, which gives a
line at 14.4 kev. The sample and source are moved relative to each other by a linear track, and the
absorption of the sample is measured at various velocities. For 10 points, name this form of spectroscopy
that relies on the recoil-free emission or absorption of gamma rays by a sample, based on an effect named
for a German.
ANSWER: Mossbauer spectroscopy
A variation of this technique for thick samples records the emission of conversion electrons. Spectra
obtained via this technique are characterized by the amount of isomer shift, quadrupole splitting and
hyperfine splitting. This technique uses the Doppler effect to introduce miniscule variations in energy, and
cobalt-57, which decays to the isotope iron-57, is commonly used as a source. This technique relies on
energy decay not occurring via phonons, leading to the mass of the entire lattice being considered in
calculations. The effect behind this technique was used in the Pound-Rebka experiment. For 10 points,
identify this resonant, recoil-free absorption of gamma radiation.
ANSWER: Mossbauer spectroscopy [or Mossbauer effect]
Some underwater forms of these structures are called guyots. The Taconic, Acadian and Alleghenian
(AL-uh-gain-eean) orogenies formed a notable one of these structures. The lee side of these structures may
be very dry due to the creation of a "rain shadow." The fold type of these structures are the most common
and are formed by the head-on collision of two tectonic plates. For 10 points, name these geologic
structures which include the Himalayas.
ANSWER: mountains [or mountain ranges; prompt on plateau before "Taconic"]
Underwater examples of these structures include guyots (GEE-ohs). Biomes associated with these
structures parallel what one would expect from increasing latitude. These structures cause air to condensate
and precipitate, thus forming a "rain shadow" on their lee side. These structures are formed in orogenies,
which can happen when two plates collide. For 10 points, name these landforms that stretch above the
surrounding area and whose largest example on Earth is Everest.
ANSWER: mountain ranges
Decollement (DAY-cole-mohn) creates foreland basins adjacent to these structures, in which molasse is
deposited. Biomes associated with these structures follow patterns of increasing latitudes and are termed
"orobiomes." Little rain is received on the lee side of these structures due to the rain shadow effect. These
structures can form over hot-spots. For 10 points, name these elevated regions that form peaks, examples of
which include the Himalayas.
ANSWER: mountain ranges [or mountains]
In chromophores, electrons in lone pairs are symbolized by this letter, and are forbidden to
transition to pi star states. A quantity symbolized by this letter equals molarity times the number of
acidic protons in a strong acid. This letter designates doped semiconductors with more electrons than
holes. The difference between the reciprocal-squares of two values symbolized by this letter gives the
energy of an electronic transition in the (*) Rydberg formula. This letter is often used before the names
of straight-chain alkanes. The principal quantum number is symbolized by this letter. For 10 points, name
this letter which designates number of moles in the ideal gas law, and is the atomic symbol of the gas
making up most of our atmosphere.
ANSWER: n
The processes that gave rise to the Laramide orogeny can be studied using this present-day
plate because it is unusually undergoing flat-slab, or shallow angle, subduction. A very unusual
triple junction arises due to the fact that this plate is diverging from the Antarctic plate, forming a
mid-ocean ridge that is being subducted. This plate's northern border with the Cocos plate, with
which it is part of a triple junction, includes a mysterious "gore" in which the Galapagos Islands
lie. Its subduction is responsible for the Andean orogeny. For 10 points, name this eastern Pacific
plate that is being subducted by the South American plate and is named for a region in Peru.
ANSWER: Nazca plate
The deflection of this element's ionized particles provided J. J. Thomson with evidence of atomic
isotopes. This element can be produced by reacting oxygen and helium in the alpha process, and it is
the lightest element whose neutral atom has a filled p shell. Although it is the fifth most abundant
element in the universe, it is rarely found on Earth due to its chemical (*) inertness. It is mixed with
helium to form a laser that produces red light, and it is commonly used in bright advertising signs. For ten
points, identify this noble gas with atomic number 10 and symbol Ne.
ANSWER: neon (accept Ne before read)
The monomer for this compound was originally produced through the combination of vinyl acetylene with
hydrogen chloride in the presence of cuprous chloride, though presently, a three-step process involving
chlorination, isomerization, and dehydrochlorination results in the desired 2-chloro-1,3-butadiene product.
Unlike the natural analog that it emulates, this compound is noninflammable and chemically inert, thus
finding industrial uses in gaskets, electrical insulation, hoses, and pipes. It can be foamed with nitrogen gas
to provide exposure protection, and its thermoplastic rubber properties can be enhanced through
combination with Spandex. For 10 points, name this DuPont-discovered compound most commonly known
for its use in laptop sleeves and wetsuits.
ANSWER: Neoprene [or polychloroprene]
Though he is not Thomas Edison, this man developed what would become the Neo-Bechstein Flugel
electric piano and an electric lamp that did not use a tungsten filament. This man's "New Heat Theorem" is
a restatement of the Third Law of Thermodynamics. An equation after this man contains a constant
multiplied by temperature and the natural log of the reaction quotient. For 10 points, name this German
chemist, who won the 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry and whose equation can find the electromotive force
or Gibbs free energy for an electric half-cell.
ANSWER: Walther Hermann Nernst
After reading Svante (suh-VON-tay) Arrhenius's work on the greenhouse effect, this inventor of an
electric piano proposed setting coal mines on fire to increase global temperatures. Though not Jewish, the
Nazis forced him into retirement because his three daughters all had Jewish husbands. His observations on
approaching absolute zero became the third law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, identify this scientist
whose namesake equation is used to calculate the reduction potential of an electrochemical half-cell.
ANSWER: Walter Nernst
The relation named after this person and Einstein, which is simpler than the Stokes-Einstein equation,
shows the direct variation between particle mobility and the diffusion coefficient. The coefficient named
after him equals the ratio of an electric field divided by a perpendicular magnetic field divided by the
temperature gradient. He also determined that it is impossible to reach absolute zero, which is the Third
Law of Thermodynamics. Name this scientist whose namesake equation uses the log of the reaction quotient
to calculate the reduction potential in an electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: Walther Nernst
This man names a linear distribution of the amount of tracer and carrier in coprecipitation
reactions; that distribution is sometimes named with Berthelot. This scientist proposed that a single
quanta of light begins a photochemical chain reaction in hydrogen gas and chlorine gas to make
hydrochloric acid. One form of a statement due to this scientist is that it is impossible to cool a system
to absolute zero in a finite number of steps, (*) but his formulation says that at absolute zero, chemical
reactions do not cause a change in entropy. This man's equation says that reaction potential is shifted by R T
over z F times the log of the reaction quotient. For 10 points, name this German chemist who developed the
third law of thermodynamics and names an equation that calculates the reduction potential of an
electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: Walther Nernst
This equation is used to derive the values for the y-axis of a Pourbaix diagram. One generalization of this
equation uses a coefficient of 61.5 when assuming a body temperature of 37 degrees C, and another generalization
simplifies to the Tafel equation at a high overpotential; those equations are Goldman and Butler-Volmer
equations. At STP, this equation can be approximated using a coefficient of 0.059 volts. This equation
states that the standard voltage minus RT over nF times the reaction quotient equals the new voltage. Name
this equation which gives the potential of an electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation can be generalized to a simplification of the Tafel equation when in the high
overpotential region. That equation is called the Butler-Volmer equation; another generalization of
this equation describes the equilibrium potential across a cell's membrane using all the ions that pass
through and is named after [*] Goldman. In this equation, the ideal gas constant is multiplied by
temperature and divided by the moles of electrons and the Faraday constant, and that ratio is multiplied by
the natural log of Q. For 10 points, name this equation from electrochemistry which calculates the
reduction potential of a cell, named after a German chemist.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
A general form of this equation used for multiple component systems is derived by taking terms for StokesEinstein relations and Fick's law of diffusion. This equation, which explains the power of concentration
cells, can be derived by noting that the change in Gibbs free energy is equal to the negative product of
charge and potential, then substituting the product of number of electrons and Faraday's constant for
charge, giving an equation which at room temperature has a term equal to about zero point zero five nine.
Modified by the Goldman equation, for 10 points, name this equation of electrochemistry used to calculate
the potential of a half cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
One term in the chord-conductance equation comes from this equation, which can be used to map Pourbaix
diagrams. The Butler-Volmer equation can be reduced to this when "I equals zero," and it is a special case
of the Goldman equation for one ion. It can be used to predict the behavior of a concentration cell. When
the system is not in equilibrium, this equation accounts for the extra term of "negative R T over n F" times
the natural log of the reaction quotient, where F is the Faraday constant, the total charge of a mole of
electrons. For 10 points, name this equation that predicts the voltage of an electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This statement can be derived from the statistical definition of entropy or by using Boltzmann factors for a
redox reaction. One version of it uses the electron charge and Boltzmann's constant to account for molecular
quantities. When this equation is used at STP, the ideal gas and Faraday's constants are normally replaced
by a factor that accounts for the quotient of the two constants. For 10 points, identify this equation, stated as
E equals E naught minus RT over nF times the natural log of Q, that calculates voltage at nonstandard
conditions of an electrochemical cell and is named for a German scientist.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
A modification of this equation gives the resting potential of cell membranes, and because electrons loosely
pair up in concentrated solution, this law becomes invalid at high ionic concentrations. It can be derived by
taking the Gibbs free energy equation for equilibrium systems and substituting for charge. The main term in
this equation is R T over n F, times the natural log of Q. Name this equation that relates the standard
electrode potential to the actual cell potential of a voltaic cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
Deviations from this equation are modeled by an equation which includes a term proportional to the log of
the current density, and when that deviation is low, the Stern Geary equation modifies this equation.
Another modification of this equation predicts that current will increase exponentially with applied voltage,
and this equation corrects for the fact that the concentrations of reactants are seldom at one molar. This
equation is modified by the Tafel and the Butler-Volmer equations. This equation calculates the change in
potential as RT over nF times the ln of the reaction quotient. For 10 points, name this equation that
calculates the reduction or oxidation potential of one half cell.
ANSWER: Nernst Equation [accept Butler-Volmer equation until mentioned]
With Max Planck, the namesake of this equation also created one describing the flux of ions under
the influence of an ionic concentration gradient and an electric field. A similar equation that accounts
for the overpotential is known as the Tafel equation. An exponential form of this equation is named
for Butler and Volmer, and the Goldman equation is used instead of this one when multiple (*) ion
species are present. This equation relates a certain quantity to Faraday's constant and the natural log of the
reaction quotient. For 10 points, identify this equation that calculates the electric potential of an
electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation is used in the limit of low overpotential. This equation can be used to find the
potential of an ion on either side of a membrane, and a generalization of it named for Goldman,
Hodgkins, and Katz is used to find the membrane potential. It states that RT over z times the (*)
Faraday constant times the natural logarithm of the reaction quotient will give the half-cell potential. For 10
points, name this equation used in electrochemistry.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation is a special case of the Goldman equation for one ion. It can be derived from the negative
change in Gibbs free energy divided by n times F. This equation subtracts the ideal gas constant times
temperature divided by moles of electrons times the Faraday constant, all times the natural log of the
reaction quotient from a reference potential. For 10 points, name this equation that can be used to determine
the reduction potential of an electrochemical cell, named for a German scientist.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
Pourbaix diagrams were first created using this equation and pH values. A modification of it used for
biological membranes is the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation. At twenty-five degrees Celsius, the term
"RT over F" in this equation can be replaced by twenty-five milli-volts. This equation is named for the
German chemist who also developed the third law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this equation
that relates the voltage of an electrochemical cell to the concentration of the reactant and products.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
A modification made to this equation focusing on the concentrations of potassium, sodium, and chlorine
ions is named for Goldman, Hodgkin, and Katz. This equation can be rewritten to include a log base ten
multiplied by 0.0592 instead of a natural log when a system is kept at twenty-five degrees Celsius. That
0.0592 in this equation comes from multiplying the temperature by the ideal gas constant and Faraday's
constant. For 10 points, name this equation that uses the log of a system's reaction quotient to discover the
value of E, the potential of an electrochemical cell in volts.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
In the Hodgkin-Huxley model for a squid axon, this equation's namesake quantity is subtracted from
the resting potential, which can be calculated using a modification of this equation, the GHK
equation. This equation's general form can be derived using the formula for Gibbs free energy and
its relation to (*) electromotive force. One term of this equation contains the ideal gas constant multiplied
by temperature and divided by the product of Faraday's constant and the number of electrons transferred.
For ten points, name this equation, which can be used to calculate the potential of an electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: Nernst Equation
This equation calculates the power of a concentration cell. One term in it is typically written as .059
divided by the number of electrons. It involves a coefficient of the ideal gas constant times absolute
temperature divided by Faraday's constant times moles of electrons. It shows that when the reaction
quotient is one, the potential equals the standard potential. For 10 points, name this equation of
electrochemistry that gives the reduction potential of a half-cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
Along with Planck, this equation's namesake denotes a molar flux equation, which reduces to this equation
if the net flux is zero. In the chord-conductance equation, the term subtracted from the electric field is
obtained using this equation. It can be derived by relating the chemical potential to a ratio written in terms
of Boltzmann factors, as well as by noting the relation between Gibbs free energy, entropy, and cell
potential. For 10 points, name this equation, which can be used to find the equilibrium reduction potential
for a half cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
A quantity not accounted for in this fundamental equation but considered in the Tafel equation is
overpotential, and assuming equilibrium yields an exponential form of this equation named for Butler and
Volmer. The ionic flux carried by ionic species across a cell membrane is described in the GoldmanHodgkin-Katz equation, which accurately describes electrodiffusion in this equation. It essentially states
that potential is shifted by a term equal to RT over nF times the natural log of the reaction quotient. For 10
points, name this equation which determines the equilibrium reduction or oxidation potential of a half-cell
in an electrochemical cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation [accept Butler-Volmer equation before "Butler"]
This equation's namesake scientist and Planck developed an equation that describes the flux of ions in
solution inuenced by an electric field and ionic gradient. This equation can be used along with the solubility
product of mercury-one chloride to calculate the solution's pH with digital pH meters. It can be derived by
substituting an expression containing Faraday's constant into another equation involving Gibb's free energy,
and in it the (*) natural log of the reaction quotient is divided by the number of electrons exchanged in a
redox reaction. For ten points, name this electrochemical equation that relates the standard electrode
potential to the current electrode potential, named after a German chemist.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation is used to provide corrections to the Butler-Volmer equation, from a special case of
which it can be derived, and it appears in most models of solid oxide fuel cells. Katz and Keynes used
this equation in their studies of a squid axon, and Goldman modified this equation to account for all
ions. For a single ion, the ratio of the ideal gas constant to Faraday's constant is multiplied by
temperature and the natural log of the reaction quotient in, for 10 points, what equation that yields the
emf of an electrochemical cell?
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation does not account for Hofmeister effects, an objection voiced by Bostrom. Tafel
equation constants appear in a transformation of this equation called the Butler-Volmer equation. In
situations in which multiple ion species are present or in which ions are not in equilibrium on either
side of a membrane, this equation is generalized as the (*) Goldman equation. This equation states that
RT over nF time the natural log of the reaction quotient, subtracted from a reference value, gives the
voltage of a cell. For 10 points, name this fundamental equation of electrochemistry.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
One extension of this equation is used to model diffusion through soil and is named for Planck. If a
significant current density is present, the resulting overpotential deviation from the value predicted by this
equation can be calculated using the Tafel equation. In the limit of low ion concentration, this equation
predicts an infinite voltage drop, and it can be used to calculate the electrical potential of a cell membrane;
the modification used to do so is named for Goldman. It calculates change in potential as R T over n F times
the natural log of the reaction quotient. For 10 points, name this equation that gives the electromotive force
for a chemical cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
The chord conductance equation contains a term that can be calculated using this equation. Along with
Planck, this equation's namesake names a molar flux equation and a similar current density equation. A
generalization of this equation is used in cell membrane physiology. It is a special case of the GHK
equation for one ion. Its terms include R, the universal gas constant, and E-nought, the standard electrode
potential. Stated in terms of Faraday's constant and derived from entropy and Gibbs free energy, it is used
to find the cell potential of a half-cell. Describing redox systems in batteries, for 10 points, name this
electrochemical equation named for a German chemist.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
The natural log of the reaction quotient Q in this equation is multiplied by the negative of the gas
constant times temperature over the product of the Faraday constant and the number of moles transferred in
the redox reaction. When using this equation, the half reactions are identified and used with a table
containing standard cathode potentials. For 10 points, identify this equation key to electrochemistry that
relates the reduction potential of a cell to the concentration of its reactants.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
A modification of this equation takes into account the presence of multiple ions by the natural log of
outside ions over inside ions. That equation takes into account the permeability of a cell's membrane,
and is named for Goldman, Hodgkin, and Katz. The namesake of this equation also posited that the
entropy of a crystal approached zero as temperature approaches zero, which is the (*) third law of
thermodynamics. In this equation the ratio of the oxidation/reduction couple is represented by Q, or the
reaction quotient, while F stands for the Faraday constant. For 10 points, name this equation that calculates
the potential voltage of a cell, named for a German.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation's namesake also names the "Heat Theorem," an alternative to the Third Law of
Thermodynamics. This equation can be generalized to a simplification of the Tafel equation, known as the
Butler-Volmer equation, and it can be generalized through an equation used to determine the reversal
potential across a cell membrane, the Goldman Equation. In this equation, the gas constant times
temperature over n times Faraday's Constant is multiplied by the natural log of Q. For 10 points, identify
this fundamental equation of electrochemistry, named after a German chemist.
ANSWER: Nernst Equation
This fundamental equation does not include a term that accounts for the ohmic loss caused by current flow,
and that term appears in the Butler-Volmer equation. One equation often used in conjunction with this
statement accounts for the flux of ions moving across a membrane. That modification calculates membrane
potentials of living cells and is named for Goldman. This equation states that the product of RT over NF
and the natural log of a reaction quotient yields the change in a cell's electric potential. For 10 points, name
this equation that can be used to calculate equilibrium reduction potential of electrochemical half cells.
ANSWER: Nernst Equation
The Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz variation of this equation can be used for multiple ions at a non-equilibrium
steady state, while some pH meters reverse its most common usage by utilizing measured voltage to
determine hydrogen ion concentration. In one form, it can be stated as "delta G equals delta G naught plus
R times T times the natural log of Q," though at standard temperature and pressure, the equation converts to
a Faraday constant-containing form relating the electrical potential of a cell to a standard potential. FTP,
name this central electrochemistry equation named after the 1920 Nobel Laureate in Chemistry.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
The potential of the outer Helmholtz plane is important to a modified version of this equation. That
equation requires there be no surface states when considering semiconductors in solutions, and
predicts that the gradient of transfer is half of that for metals in the overpotential limit. The Tafel
equation comes from this equation, as does another equation that involves electrode surface area. Yet
another equation derived from this one is applied to (*) cell membranes. On one side of this equation,
the natural gas constant is multiplied by temperature times natural logarithm reaction quotient divided by
Faraday's constant. Its variants include the Butler-Volmer and Goldman equation and it is used to determine
the reduction potential of an electrochemical cell. For 10 points, name this equation central to
electrochemistry.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
One generalization of this equation can be applied across the Stern layer after applying the
Frumkin correction. Combined with activities, this equation is used to derive the boundary lines
found in Pourbaix diagrams. At equilibrium, this equation can be derived by setting the reaction rate
to zero in the Butler-Volmer equation. One generalization of this equation multiplies each term with
a permeability and is used to find the (*) resting potential across a cell membrane. The coefficient of this
equation is RT over zF, which at 25 degrees Celsius reduces to 0.0592 over z volts. This equation is used to
find the reduction potential of a half-cell. For 10 points, name this basic equation of electrochemistry.
ANSWER: Nernst equation [accept Butler-Volmer equation before mention]
This statement can be derived by taking the natural log of a one-electron redox reaction written using
Boltzmann factors. This equation can be generalized by considering multiple ions flowing across a cell
membrane, a situation described by Hodgkin, Katz and Goldman. A term containing the gas constant times
temperature over Faraday's constant is subtracted from the standard half-cell reduction potential in this
equation. Typically applied to Galvanic cells, it is named for a German chemist. For 10 points, name this
electrochemical equation which determines the equilibrium reduction potential of a half-cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation [do not accept "Nernst-Planck equation"]
This equation is very similar to the equation relating the Fermi level of an n-type semiconductor and
the standard dopant energy level. This equation is used to relate the partial pressure and the sensor
response of a CHEMFET or a Kelvin probe. This equation is used to delineate different areas of a
Pourbaix diagram. One modification of this equation adds a series of permeability coefficients and
usually has a coefficient of (*) 60 mV, and is used to calculate the membrane potential of a cell. This
equation, which at STP has a coefficient of 2.303, can be applied to either a half cell or a full cell. The
coefficient of this equation is RT divided by zF. For 10 points, name this equation used to find reduction
potentials, named for a German chemist.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation can be used to describe the boundaries between different sections of a Pourbaix
(poor-BAY) diagram. This equation was generalized to multiple ion species by Goldman. A factor of
temperature times the ideal gas constant divided by (*) Faraday's constant times the number of
electrons transferred appears in this equation, where it is multiplied by the natural logarithm of the reaction
quotient. For 10 points, name this equation used to determine the reduction potential of a half-cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation can be used to map out a Pourbaix and Frost diagram. It is used when studying cell
membranes in an equation similar to Fick's law. Since one term in it is equal to zero at equilibrium, it is
often used to calculate the equilibrium constant and it can be derived using a formula equal to the negative
change in Gibbs Free Energy. It explains why certain net reactions can occur in a concentration cell, and it
is the basic principle behind pH electrodes. At 25 degrees Celsius, it includes a term equal to about .059;
this term includes the Faraday constant. FTP, identify this equation in electrochemistry that allows for the
calculation of the potential for a galvanic cell.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
The Pourbaix diagrams plot a quantity that appears in this equation as a function of pH, while a
generalized form of it which includes a charge transfer coefficient is named for Butler and Volmer.
An extension of this equation to various ion species, the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation, and this
equation relates Gibbs free energy to the electromotive force in a Galvanic cell. Often used to calculate the
resting potential across neurons, this is, for 10 points, which equation used to calculate the reduction
potential in electrochemistry, named for the German winner of the 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry?
ANSWER: Nernst equation
This equation is inapplicable until the system is poised, and when not dependent on pH it represents a
horizontal line on a Pourbaix diagram. The appearance of ion pairs reduces the accuracy of this
equation at high concentrations, while its first term is zero when used for quantitative analysis in a
concentration (*) cell. This equation gives a quantity equal to nonstandard Gibbs energy change per mole
of electrons, explaining why a galvanic cell's voltage decreases to zero at equilibrium. Written as E equals
E-standard minus R T over n F times the natural log of Q, for 10 points, identify this fundamental equation
of electrochemistry, named for a German chemist.
ANSWER: Nernst equation
When the Butler-Volmer equation is used to describe the charge transfer reaction rate, this equation is used
to describe the open circuit potential, except in the case of intercalation electrodes, for which it does not
hold. One variant of this equation calculates membrane potential provided membrane permeability and ion
concentration, the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation. The change in Gibbs free energy is directly
proportional to this equation, which is used to find a cell's electric potential. For 10 points, identify this
equation, named for a German chemist, which allows one to find either the electromotive force or standard
electrode potential, provided the reaction quotient is known.
ANSWER: Nernst Equation
One term in this equation is defined by the ratio of the initial concentrations in the reaction. This equation,
which can be modified to analyze a membrane that is permeable to multiple ions, contains a term
symbolized Q that is called the reaction quotient. The Goldman equation is a modification of this equation,
which is often demonstrated by the use of a salt bridge connecting a cathode and an anode in solution. For
10 points, name this equation that calculates the potential of an electrochemical cell, named for a German.
ANSWER: Nernst equation [accept Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation before "Goldman"]
The rating of lubricant oils by degree of oxidative degradation employs this type of reaction, while another
reaction of this type follows the alkaline hydrolysis step in sulfonamide production. The precipitation of
yellow cake uranium relies on magnesia in this type of reaction, and a solution is often said to be at half-this
if it is buffered. One product of this reaction is always an addition compound according to the Lewis theory,
and a rare endothermic example is the reaction between baking soda and vinegar. Occurring in the common
type of titration, identify this chemical reaction in which an acid and base combine to form a salt and water.
ANSWER: neutralization reaction [prompt on acid-base reaction]
In environmental chemistry, this type of reaction is performed on the fish poison rotenone by adding
potassium permanganate. Reactions of this type that employ a strongly reducing metal often involve
hydrogen gas. This type of reaction is carried out precisely to the equivalence point to determine an
unknown concentration in a titration. For 10 points, name this class of reactions, which typically see an acid
and a base react to form water and a salt.
ANSWER: neutralization [prompt on "titration"]
This element can be isolated from garnierite. The Orford process is used to purify this element's sulfide
from copper sulfide, while a process employed to extract it passes carbon monoxide gas to create a volatile
tetracarbonyl complex, which is subsequently reduced to yield this metal; that latter process is the Mond
process. Sodium hydroxide is used to activate an alloy of this metal and aluminum, which produces a
substance commonly used to hydrogenate unsaturated hydrocarbons and was created by Murray Raney. It is
also commonly used in rechargeable batteries along with Cadmium. For 10 points, identify this element
with symbol Ni.
ANSWER: nickel [accept Ni until mentioned]
A crystalline target made of this element was used in the Davisson-Germer experiment. An oxide of
this element is reacted with syngas in the first step of the Mond process, which is used to purify this metal.
This element is used with cadmium in rechargeable batteries. Like cobalt and iron, this element is
ferromagnetic at room temperature. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 28 and atomic
symbol Ni.
ANSWER: nickel [or Ni until it is read]
Electrons were fired at a crystalline target of this element in the Davisson-Germer experiment.
Carbon monoxide is reacted with this element's carbonyl to give a pure form of this element in the
Mond process. Along with chromium, this element is responsible for the corrosion resistance of
austensitic (OSS-ten-SIT-ick) (*) stainless steel, which is primarily formed of an alloy of iron and this
compound. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number twenty-eight and symbol Ni.
ANSWER: nickel [or Ni before mentioned]
The Nozicki-Hiyama-Kishi reaction uses organometallic compounds featuring chromium or this
element. It can be extracted from its oxide ore through heating in the presence of a mixture of
hydrogen gas and carbon monoxide to yield a tetracarbonyl intermediate, which decomposes to yield
four carbon monoxides in a process named for Mond. The diffraction pattern resulting from x rays fired
at a crystal of this element provided evidence for the wave-particle duality in the Davisson-Germer
experiment. A catalyst used to hydrogenate alkenes contains this element and aluminum, and is named for
Raney. For 10 points, name this element with atomic symbol Ni.
ANSWER: nickel [or Ni until mentioned]
This element has a doubly magic 48 isotope, and an aluminum alloy of this metal is heated in the presence
of sodium hydroxide to obtain a catalyst that can reduce almost anything with double bonds. This metal is
extracted in a process where its ore reacts with carbon monoxide and hydrogen to produces a tetracarbonyl
intermediate, called the Mond process. Electrons were fired at a target made of this element in an
experiment which confirmed the wave-particle duality, performed by Davisson and Germer. Coming in a
Raney variety, for 10 points, identify this element usually found as its namesake metal hydride in
electrochemical cells.
ANSWER: nickel
A complex of this element and phosphine catalyzes the first step of the Shell higher olefin process.
Impurities of this element in Ziegler-Natta catalyst solutions cause early termination. In one process that
generates this element, it is purified in a reaction with carbon monoxide that forms its tetracarbonyl. An
porous alloy of this element and aluminum is used to desulfurize thioacetals. One device using this element
has electrodes composed of this element's oxyhydroxide and a hydrogen-absorbing alloy. That device is
this element's metal hydride cell. This metal can be extracted by reacting its oxide with hydrogen in the
Mond process. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 28 and symbol Ni.
ANSWER: nickel
In the process used to generate this element, the poisonous tetracarbonyl compound of this element, dubbed
"Liquid Death", is vaporized and then condensed and heated to remove Carbon Monoxide. This is the
Mond process. In a solid alloy with aluminum, the "Raney" form of this metal is generally used as a catalyst
in hydrogenation reactions, which convert alkynes and alkenes to alkanes. Only generally found in its +2
oxidation state, along with Cadmium, the oxide of this element is used as an electrode in a common battery.
For ten points, name this d-block metal with atomic number 28 and symbol Ni.
ANSWER: Nickel
This metal is used with aluminum in a namesake catalyst for hydrogenating vegetable oils. That catalyst
is named for Raney. The decay of the 56 isotope of this element into the 56 isotope of cobalt releases lots
of energy in a type I supernova. This metal is processed by the Mond process. This metal is alloyed with
iron in maraging (muh-RAGING) steel. This metal is used in conjunction with cadmium or hydrides in
various batteries. This element has atomic number 28. For 10 points, name this metal with symbol Ni.
ANSWER: nickel [or Ni before it is read]
Possessing the largest magnetic penetration depth of all elements, it is an elemental Type II
superconductor alongside Technetium and Vanadium. Found in the minerals pylochore and (*)
columbite, it was initially named Columbium by Charles Hatchett in 1801: IUPAC did not systematize its
name until 1949, when a name coined by Heinrich Rose was adopted. Produced mainly in Brazil, it is
sometimes used in jewelry and is found in some Austrian Euro coins alloyed with silver to create colour
changes. This transition metal very similar to Tantalum is hypoallergenic and is commonly found in
pacemakers, and as a microalloy in steel. For 10 points name this element, number 41 with symbol Nb.
ANSWER: Niobium (accept Nb or columbium until mentioned)
A concentrated form of this compound is added to proteins and heated in the xanthoproteic reaction. When
mercury is dissolved in this compound and subsequently diluted with water, one can detect the presence of
tyrosine with Millon's test. This compound was purified using fractional distillation in the early BirkelandEyde process. When this acid is in concentrations above 16 molar, it is referred to as fuming. The most
common way to form this compound is by oxidizing the product of the Haber process with a platinumruthenium catalyst; that method is known as the Ostwald process. Name this strong acid with chemical
formula HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid [accept HNO3 until mentioned]
Rosenheim and Callow developed a test in which a mixture of this compound and metal acetates are
used to detect the presence of sterols. Millon's reagent is a solution of mercury in this substance and a
similar substance, which turns red in the presence of phenolic compounds and is useful in detecting
tyrosine residues. The commercial production of this compound begins with the combustion of ammonia
using a platinum-rhodium catalyst; that process is the Ostwald process. For 10 points, identify this acid
which is found with hydrochloric acid in aqua regia, and has chemical formula HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid [accept HNO3 until mentioned]
This substance comes in "white fuming" and "red fuming" varieties at 16 molar concentration. It
is commonly mixed with water at 68% concentration, at which it forms an azeotrope. Modern
methods of producing pure forms of this strong oxidizing agent involve dehydrating the product with
sulfuric acid and bubbling the reactant through hydrogen peroxide instead of water. Its large-scale
production is done by mixing five equivalents of diatomic oxygen with four equivalents of (*)
ammonia in the presence of a platinum/rhodium catalyst in the Ostwald process. Its pKa is approximately
negative 1, and mixing it with hydrochloric acid gives aqua regia. For 10 points, name this compound with
formula HNO3, a very strong acid.
ANSWER: nitric acid [accept HNO3 or nitrate before mention; prompt after]
A paper co-authored by GKS Prakash showed that this acid in combination with chlorotrimethylsilane could
be used to for oxidative chlorination of thiols. The reaction of this acid with tyrosine allows one to measure
protein concentration by measuring changes at 358 nm. The deprotonated component of this acid can be
attached to benzene using a mixture of this acid and sulfuric acid. High concentrations of this acid are
referred to as fuming. This acid tends to stain human skin yellow. Along with hydrochloric acid, it is found
in aqua regia, and it is produced by the Ostwald process. For 10 points, name this acid with formula HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid [or HNO3 before mentioned]
Mixtures containing this compound and proteins with aromatic rings turn yellow upon heating, an
observation used in the xanthoproteic test. This substance, which comes in red fuming and white
fuming varieties, can be used to synthesize aniline by addition followed by reduction. One inefficient
process for producing this compound using an electrical arc was named for (*) Birkeland and Eyde,
but a more widely used process makes use of a platinum-rhodium catalyst. That process provides raw
material for the production of fertilizer and is named for Ostwald. This compound is found along with
hydrochloric acid in a mixture that can dissolve gold. For 10 points, name this compound found in aqua
regia, a strong acid with formula HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid
When this compound is added to proteins with aromatic rings, they turn yellow; that test makes use
of the xanthoproteic reaction. This compound reacts with cotton to form a smokeless powder once
used in movie film. One extremely energy intensive method for producing this compound with a
plasma arc was named for Birkeland and Eyde, though that method has since been replaced by
process that makes uses of a platinum-(*)-rhodium catalyst. That industrial process works by oxidizing
the product of the Haber cycle over several steps; that process using ammonia is named for Wilhelm
Ostwald. Along with hydrochloric acid, this compound is found in a mixture that can dissolve gold, aqua
regia. For 10 points, name this strong acid and strong oxidizing agent with formula HNO3.
ANSWER: Nitric Acid [accept aqua fortis or spirit of nitre, accept HNO3 until mentioned]
The "colored clouds and mist" reported by certain Gulf War veterans were probably caused by
exposure to the Inhibited Red version of this compound used as a rocket fuel oxidizer by the Iraqis.
When solid morphine is added to this substance, it becomes yellowish red. It is useful in detecting
alkaloids when combined with sulfuric acid in Erdmann's reagent. Combining a carboxylic acid with
an ethanolic solution of silver nitrate yields this compound as one of its products. Its synthesis is
rapid and can occur with or without palladium added to the basic 90% platinum 10% rhodium
catalyst. Its dilute form is used with silver (*) nitrate in a test for larger halides and it has a fuming form.
It is mostly used to make fertilizers and combines with hydrochloric acid to form aqua regia. For 10 points,
name this compound synthesized from ammonia via the Ostwald process, a strong acid symbolized HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid [accept HNO3 before mention; accept aqua fortis]
This compound reacts with tryptophan and tyrosine to form a yellow or orange color in the
xanthoproteic test. Since this compound is a strong oxidizing agent, it has seen usage in explosives and in
rocket fuel, where it combines with kerosene or hydrazine. One process for synthesizing this compound
uses a platinum-rhodium catalyst. Solutions with extremely high concentrations of this compound are
known as its red and white fuming varieties. Called aqua fortis in antiquity, this acid is combined with
hydrochloric acid to form aqua reqia. It is synthesized from ammonia in the Ostwald process. For 10 points,
name this strong acid with formula HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid [or HNO3 before mention]
This compound forms yellow products with proteins in the xanthoproteic reaction. A solution of this
compound and alcohol, Nital, is used to etch metals. When it is over 86% concentrated, or 16 molar, it is
referred to as the fuming variety. This chemical is produced by the Ostwald process, and with hydrochloric
acid, this chemical is used to make aqua regia. Older samples of this acid looks yellow due to the formation
of nitrogen dioxide in solution. For 10 points, identify this strong acid with formula H-N-O-3.
ANSWER: nitric acid or HNO3 before it is mentioned
A compound used to test for tyrosine, Millon's reagent, is made of this compound and its mercury salt. In
an electrophilic aromatic substitution, it can be protonated using sulfuric acid into a nitronium ion. Adding
small amounts of hydrogen fluoride to concentrated solutions of it prevents it from being corrosive, and this
compound usually exists in "red fuming" and "white fuming" varieties. It is mixed with hydrochloric acid to
form aqua regia. For 10 points, identify this common acid with formula HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid (accept early: HNO3)
This compound's pKa is -1.64, which is actually slightly greater than hydronium's pKa. Once produced
in the Birkeland-Eyde process, this compound is industrially synthesized today with a rhodium catalyst
from ammonia. When mixed with hydrochloric acid, this compound forms a substance which can dissolve
gold, aqua regia. This strong oxidizing agent is produced on an industrial scale by the Ostwald process. For
10 points, name this strong acid with formula HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid [or HNO3 until it is read]
Addition of this compound to solutions tests for proteins in the xathoproteic test. A common laboratory
demonstration shows the oxidation of copper when placed in a solution of this molecule. This molecule is
made in the Ostwald process, which oxidizes ammonia and then reacts it with water. It combines with
hydrochloric acid to make aqua regia. For 10 points, name this acid with chemical formula HNO3.
ANSWER: nitric acid [or HNO3 before mentioned]
Aromatic versions of these compounds can be produced from aryl halides in the Rosenmund-von Braun
reaction, and a variation of the Friedel-Crafts reaction that uses one of them as a reagent is the HobenHoesch reaction. Both these compounds and their iso-versions are produced in the Kolbe synthesis, while
they are created form carboxylic acids in the Letts synthesis. Also undergoing the Pinner reaction with
alcohols, they react with Grignard reagents to form imines, which can then be hydrolyzed to ketones.
Usually created by simply reacting an unhindered alkyl halide with a cyanide ion in an SN2 reaction, these
are, FTP, what organic compounds which contain a carbon triple bonded to nitrogen.
ANSWER: Nitrile
The Kuwajima synthesis of Taxol used a diethylaluminum compound to get to this functional group
from a ketone. A partial solvolysis of this functionality is named for Pinner, and amides and this
functional group form from an aldehyde and azide in the Schmidt reaction. These react with benzene
derivatives to give imines because of their electronic similarity to acylium cations. Phosphorus
pentachloride reacts with amides to give these. Aryl ones are made from halides in the Rosenmund-von
Braun reaction, and alkyl ones in the Kolbe synthesis. For 10 points, name this functional group whose
simplest example is cyanide, with a carbon triple-bonded to nitrogen.
ANSWER: nitriles
These compounds react with an alpha-bromoester and zinc metal to form a beta-ketoester in the
Blaise reaction. One of them reacts with an arene to give an aryl ketone in a reaction similar to the
Friedel-Crafts acylation, called the Hoesch reaction. These non-ester functional groups produce a
strong peak at 2250 inverse centimeters in an IR spectrum and can be reduced to aldehydes by
DIBAL-H. They are hydrolyzed to form (*) amino acids in the second step of the Strecker synthesis. A
polymer of this functional group forms a synthetic rubber commonly used in laboratory gloves. In a reaction
named for Kolbe, these compounds are produced by reducing primary amides or by reacting alkyl halides
with
hydrogen cyanide. For 10 points name this functional group containing a carbon triple bonded to nitrogen.
ANSWER: nitriles [or cyanides until "hydrogen cyanide" is read]
One atom of this element is found in rings called lactams, where it is bound to two carbons on the
ring. A compound containing two atoms of it and four of hydrogen is synthesized in the Olin-Raschig
process. A biological process involved in the reduction of this element uses an iron-molybdenum
complex, while carbon is double bonded to this element in imines, and single bonded to it in amines. For
10 points, identify this element which constitutes about eighty percent of the atmosphere.
ANSWER: nitrogen [or N]
An acid made from oxygen and this element is combined with hydrochloric acid to form aqua regia,
which can dissolve platinum and gold. It condenses to its liquid form at 77 degrees Kelvin, and that
liquid form is very commonly used in (*) cryopreservation or as a coolant. The Haber-Bosch process
makes a useful product out of this element, the most common gas in the atmosphere. Fertilizers and
ammonia contains, for ten points, which element with atomic number 7 and symbol "N"?
ANSWER: Nitrogen
Heating substances with sulfuric acid is used to determine the amount of this element in the Kjeldahl
method. Two atoms of this element are triple bonded in a diazonium salt, and three atoms of this element
connected by double bonds form an azide ion. It is reacted with hydrogen in the Haber-Bosch process, the
main artificial method of fixing it. An atom of this element has a lone electron pair in amine groups. For 10
points, name this element with atomic number 7 whose diatomic form comprises 78% of Earth's
atmosphere.
ANSWER: nitrogen [prompt on N]
A polyatomic ion with negative one charge consists of three atoms of this element and is called azide.
Two atoms of this element and four atoms of hydrogen form a compound used in rocket fuel, called
hydrazine. Negative 196 degrees Celsius is the boiling point for the compound that the natural elemental
form of this element is found in. This diatomic element contains a triple bond and is the most abundant gas
in the atmosphere. For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 7 and symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen [or N before it is read]
This is the heaviest element in a hydrazine (HIGH-druh-zeen) molecule. When dissolved in the
blood, this element can cause capillary blockage, also called decompression sickness. This element
forms a diatomic gas in which it forms a (*) triple bond with itself. This nonmetal bonds to a carbon in
both a cyanide ion and an amine (AH-meen) functional group, and this element's namesake fixation
converts it to ammonia. For 10 points, name this chief component of Earth's atmosphere that has atomic
number 7 and symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen
Senoff and Alen created the first coordination complex with this compound as a ligand, in which it is
coordinated to a ruthenium atom. Either Argon or this gas is pumped through a Schlenk line in a
common air-free technique. The Wolff-Kishner reaction is driven by the formation of this compound
in the final step. This compound is broken down by a (*) molybdenum-iron complex containing protein
using 16 ATP molecules. That reaction requires eight electrons, and is somewhat replicated by a method
that uses 3 atoms of hydrogen gas and an iron-containing catalyst; that process is named for Haber and
produces ammonia. For 10 points, name this compound that contains a triple bond between two atoms of
element number 7.
ANSWER: N2 [or dinitrogen or nitrogen gas]
Azides and amines are functional groups composed of this element, whose diatomic form is used as a
modified atmosphere to preserve foods. This element is fixed in the Haber process and bonds with
carbon to form cyanide. This element with (*) five valence electrons is the central atom in ammonia.
78% of the volume of Earth's atmosphere is, for 10 points, what element with atomic number seven and
chemical symbol N?
ANSWER: Nitrogen (accept N before mentioned)
The amount of this element in a substance can be determined with the Dumas and Kjeldahl methods.
A process that combines this element with hydrogen typically uses a porous iron catalyst prepared by
reducing magnetite. Four atoms of this element are bonded to the iron in a heme group, and it is
bonded with two hydrogen atoms in an (*) amine group. Legumes engage in a symbiotic relationship
with Rhyzobium bacteria because of their ability to "fix" this element into a more usable form. Its triplybonded diatomic molecule is the most common in Earth's atmosphere. For ten points, identify this element
found in fertilizers and ammonia, with symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen
Regions with a high concentration of this element but without much metabolizable iron are known as
HNLC. An oxide of this element is the primary cause of eutrophication (YOO-tro-FEE-kay-shun) along
with phosphates. A important process that uses a ruthenium catalyst to produce a compound of this element
and hydrogen is the Haber-Bosch process. Lightning and rhizobia bacteria both contribute significantly to
the "fixing" of this element. For 10 points, name this element essenial for life that is found in ammonia.
ANSWER: nitrogen
Lord Raleigh discovered argon by comparing the weights of two different samples of this element. Two
atoms of this element are found in a molecule of hydrazine. In proteins, the bond between this atom and
carbon has partial double bond character. Laughing gas contains two atoms of this element, and at standard
temperature and pressure this element exists as a diatomic molecule with a triple bond. For 10 points, name
this element with chemical symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen
The amount of this element in a substance is found by reacting it with sulfuric acid and combining the
resulting salts with lye, which is the Kjeldahl [KYEL-dahl] method. One combination of it with hydrogen is
hydrazoic [hie-drah-ZOE-ik] acid, which is also known as hydrogen azide [AYzide]. After the gold foil
experiment, Ernest Rutherford bombarded this element with alpha particles to isolate protons. It is
combined with oxygen in the Ostwald process, and it is combined with hydrogen in the Haber process.
Name this element that combines with hydrogen in ammonia.
ANSWER: nitrogen or N
This element has two stable isotopes, the more common of which is produced in the Bethe-Weizsackercycle in stars. The Gabriel synthesis yields an organic compound that features this element in a functional
group. Because of its propensity to be absorbed in the bloodstream and body fats, rapid decompression can
lead to a sickness called "the bends." 18th century chemists described it as phlogisticated [flow-GIS-tikated] air, and one of its oxoacids forms part of the aqua regia mixture that can dissolve gold. FTP, name
this element, diatomic in elemental form, that is the most common component of the Earth's atmosphere.
ANSWER: Nitrogen
The amount of this element in a substance can be determined by passing heated gases over columns that
absorb carbon dioxide and water in a method named for Dumas. Although not oxygen, one compound used
to power space satellites in the 1960s contains two atoms of this element. Reacted with calcium carbide in
the Frank-Caro process, this element was called(*) "fixed air" by its discoverer, Daniel Rutherford. This
pnictogen is synthesized by the fusion of carbon and hydrogen in supernovae and is found in hydrazine and
the azide ion. Existing in oxidation states ranging from -3 to +5, for ten points, name this most abundant
element in the atmosphere with chemical symbol N.
ANSWER: Nitrogen (accept N before mention)
An atom of this element is triple bonded to carbon in cyanides, while azides contain three atoms of it.
Saltpeters are one source of this element. Hydrazine contains two atoms of this element. An industrial
process involving this element uses an iron catalyst in a reaction that breaks a triple bond. This element is
combined with hydrogen to form ammonia in the Haber process. Its diatomic form is the most common
compound in the atmosphere. For 10 points, name this gaseous element with symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen [or N until it is read]
The imidazole ring has two atoms of this element, and a benzene analogue called borazine contains
alternating atoms of boron and this element. In one context, the single bond from a carbonyl carbon to an
atom of this element is called a peptide bond. One class of phase transfer catalysts is quaternary amines,
which contain this element. This element's diatomic form has a triple bond that is broken in the "fixation" of
it performed by bacteria. For 10 points, name this element whose diatomic form makes up the majority of
the air we breathe.
ANSWER: nitrogen
This element is single-bonded to itself in hydrazine ("HIGH"-druh-zeen) and triple-bonded to carbon in
cyanide. This element forms in the second of three steps of a cycle of stellar fusion reactions, and the oxide
that this element forms when it takes a plus one charge is known as laughing gas. This element's diatomic
form contains a triple bond. For 10 points, name this element whose diatomic form is the gas most prevalent
in the earth's atmosphere.
ANSWER: nitrogen [or N]
This element detected via the Kjeldahl method is double-bonded to carbon in certain compounds which
react with dienes in the Aza Diels-Alder reaction. Found in products of the Gabriel synthesis, three atoms of
this element form a double-bonded chain in the explosive sodium azide. Its dioxide is a toxic brown gas.
Diazotroph bacteria can "fix" this element. Hydrazine and laughing gas both contain this element found in
imines, amides, and amines, as well as ammonia. For 10 points, name this gaseous element which comprises
about 80% of the atmosphere.
ANSWER: nitrogen [prompt on N]
An enzyme containing molybdenum is used to cleave a strong bond that this element forms.
Nanotubes similar to carbon nanotubes uses a compound containing boron and this element. When
bonded to carbon, it forms a complex with iron known as Prussian blue. When bonded to oxygen, it
forms a powerful vasodilator popular among bodybuilders. Two atoms of this element are found in
laughing gas and a diatomic molecule composed of this element reacts with hydrogen gas in the Haber
process. For 10 points, name this compound bonded to three hydrogen atoms in ammonia.
ANSWER: nitrogen (prompt on "N")
A functional group containing this element is oxidized and eliminated to form an alkene in the Cope
Elimination. Aryl halides are synthesized from aromatic rings bonded to a functional group made up of two
atoms of this element in the Sandmeyer reaction. Compounds containing this element are synthesized in the
Gabriel synthesis. Substituting one carbon in a benzene ring with this element give pyridine, and two atoms
of this element are bonded to a carbonyl carbon in urea. This element is also present in amides and azides.
For 10 points, name this element with chemical symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen [accept N until mentioned]
Along with five ammonia ligands, this molecule is bonded to a ruthenium(II) [two] metal center in a new
complex prepared by Allen and Senoff in 1965. As a ligand, this molecule exhibits weak sigma-donation
and strong pi backbonding. When silver(I) [one] oxide is added, this gas is evolved in the Arndt-Eistert
homologation of carboxylic acids. When ketones are used as the starting product for the Schmidt reaction,
this gas is evolved. This gas is also released as a byproduct of the Sandmeyer reactions. In plants, it binds to
a molybdenum-containing enzyme. This gas can be produced by just heating diazonium salts or azides. This
gas is often used as an alternative to argon for the creation of inert atmospheres. For 10 points, name this
most common gas in Earth's atmosphere.
ANSWER: dinitrogen gas [or N2]
This element appears in the ion whose sodium compound drives the explosion of airbags, azide. In organic
compounds, this element usually has one lone pair and forms three bonds, while it also exists as a diatomic
molecule with a triple bond. A compound of this element and hydrogen is used in fertilizer and made in the
Haber-Bosch process; that compound is ammonia. For 10 points, name this element to the left of oxygen on
the periodic table, with atomic symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen
One method to measure the amount of this element in a substance involves heating with sulfuric acid
and is named after Kjeldahl. Two molecules of this element appear in a compound used in both the
Wolff-Kishner reduction and rocket fuel. It is bonded to carbon in a notably toxic compound that smells
like almonds, and this pnictogen can have an oxidation number anywhere between -3 and +5. For 10
points, name this most abundant atmospheric element, with atomic number 7.
ANSWER: nitrogen [accept N]
This is the largest homonuclear diatomic molecule with a pi-u molecular orbital at a lower energy than a
sigma-g orbital. Along with water, carbon dioxide, and sulfur dioxide, it has a zero enthalpy of combustion.
Old airbags produced this compound from sodium azide. It is isoelectronic to carbon monoxide. An iron
catalyst is used to break down this compound at very high pressures in the Haber process because it is so
unreactive. In nature, the conversion of it to ammonia is called "fixation." This compound makes up about
80% of the atmosphere. For 10 points, name this diatomic gas consisting of element number 7.
ANSWER: nitrogen gas [or N2]
In a potentially useful reaction, this compound was cleaved homolytically by a three-coordinate
molybdenum (III) complex. A carbonic intermediate is formed from the release of this substance in the first
step of the Wolff rearrangement. The Sandmeyer reactions involve the release of this molecule after it is
freed from diazonium compounds. Iron promoted with potassium, calcium, silicon, or aluminum oxide is
used in reaction chambers instead of the traditional osmium in a reaction in which this compound is the
reactant. Biologically, sixteen equivalents of ATP are hydrolyzed in converting this compound to ammonia
in a process carried out by legumes. For 10 points, name this diatomic compound whose strong triple bond
is broken during a namesake type of fixation.
ANSWER: dinitrogen gas [or N2]
This substance directly modulates ligand-gated ion channels and stimulates the mesolimbic reward
pathway. It is traditionally made by a method developed by Berthollet. Oxidation of (*) methane will
occur in the presence of this substance when catalysed by palladium. Long term exposure can lead to
anaemia and neuropathy as it interacts with neuronal plasma membranes. It was first recognized when it was
synthesized by Joseph Priestley. It has an anti-anxiolytic effect as well as being an anaesthetic. For 10
points name this gas historically used in dental treatments which is commonly known as laughing gas.
ANSWER: Nitrous oxide [prompt on "laughing gas" before mention]
The sensitivity of this assay drops off with probe frequency due to state saturation, a condition in which the
population imbalance becomes negligible; that drop-off occurs because the absorption probability is
proportional to the state imbalance. The transverse and longitudinal relaxation times affect this technique
because it hinges on detecting the results of the flip of high-energy spin states; the frequency of the radiation
thus produced is proportional to the chemical shift, which is output of this form of spectroscopy. For 10
points, name this chemical spectroscopic technique in which radiation from magnetized molecules is
detected via frequency overlap with an applied radio field.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [accept nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy]
In this process, current can be adjusted using tightly wound coils in a process known as "shimming" in
order to homogenize the involved magnetic field. This method can be used to calculate relatively long
distances using the Paramagnetic Relaxation Enhancement. The simplest experiment using this method is
the Continuous Wave experiment. The Larmor precession frequency is the rate at which the magnetic field
rotates in this process, which most commonly uses either carbon-13 atoms or protons. For 10 points, name
this spectroscopic technique applicable to nuclei with spin, which identifies the magnetic properties of
nuclei.
ANSWER: nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy [or NMR spectroscopy]
Two-dimensional versions of this technique, which include NOESY and COSY, use variable pulses to
detect interactions, and all modern versions of this technique use a Fast Fourier Transform to obtain
information from free induction decay. Relying on the Larmor precession, this technique was developed by
Felix Bloch and Edward Purcell, who discovered that atoms will resonate at different frequencies depending
on their chemical environment. For 10 points, name this type of spectroscopy that applies a strong magnetic
field to a sample in order to determine its structure, the basis of MRI.
ANSWER: NMR [or nuclear magnetic resonance; prompt on magnetic resonance spectroscopy o MRS]
One form of this technique is followed by sequential walking and uses the Nuclear Overhauser effect. A
two-dimensional type of this technique is called COSY. This procedure produces data expressed in parts per
billion and is affected by J-coupling. Often using tetramethylsilane as a reference compound, one type of
this technique is enhanced by cross-polarization while another type requires deuterated solvents. It comes in
proton and carbon-13 varieties and produces a graph with absorption peaks created by chemical shifts. For
10 points, name this spectroscopic method for determining chemical structures by applying a magnetic
pulse.
ANSWER: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy
Two-dimensional correlation extensions of this technique include NOESY (like "nosey"). A dihedral angle
dependence central to this technique may be quantified by the Karplus equation. Common additives in this
technique like TMS provide standards against which chemical shifts may be measured. The most commonly
noticed couplings in this technique occur between substituents separated by three bonds. This technique
may be employed with any isotope with an odd number of nucleons, but is most commonly employed with
carbon-13 and hydrogen. For 10 points, name this analytical technique wherein a sample is exposed to a
magnetic field.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy]
The SPT technique, which uses selective applications of a pi pulse, was a fore-runner of one form of
it, and another form makes the use of Magic Angle Spinning to eliminate line broadening. Its two
dimensional form which provides information about bond connectivity is called COSY. The Pascal's
triangle can be used to model the splitting of peaks when the spins of neighboring particles are coupled,
and it uses tetra-methyl-silane as its base to measure the relative chemical shift of the sample. For 10 points,
identify this form of spectroscopy wherein a magnetic field is applied to a sample, which is frequently
performed in its Carbon 13 and Proton varieties.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [or Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy]
Organic complexes of some rare-earth metals are used to resolve overlaps in this method, and quadrupole
broadening can occur if nitrogen atoms are present in the sample. Current methods of performing it use a
pulse of several frequencies, which is then analyzed with a Fourier Transform. It makes use of the Larmor
precession, and J values quantitatively describe spin-spin coupling, which results in the creation of n+1
peaks. For 10 points, identify this spectroscopic technique relying on the perturbation of a magnetic field.
ANSWER: NMR or Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Ramp cross-polarization is used for coherence transfer in "inverse" forms of these experiments, while an
orientation at which cosine-squared equals one third is used to enhance resolution in some forms of this
technique. Tetramethylsilane is used to create a standard in this technique because it is chemically inert and
because its values do not interfere with those of the compounds being studied. The difference in resonance
frequencies of the molecule being studied and the standard over the frequency gives the chemical shift,
which is plotted in this technique. For 10 points, name this type of spectroscopy in which a magnetic field is
introduced to a sample of atoms.
ANSWER: nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy [accept NMR spectroscopy]
One form of this technique uses the equation three cosine square of theta minus one; that equation vanishes
at the magic angle of 54.7 and is the solid state form. Another form of this technique is distortionless
enhancement of polarization transfer. The nuclear Overhauser effect forms the basis of a two-dimensional
form of it. In this technique, n plus one multiplets whose ratios follow Pascal's triangle can be created by Jcoupling. The relationship between the dihedral angle of vicinal hydrogens and its namesake coupling
constant is described by the Karplus equation. Spin-lattice and spin-spin are two types of relaxation that can
occur in this technique. It uses TMS as a reference to measure the relative chemical shifts of a sample, and
common varieties of it include proton and carbon-13. For 10 points, name this type of spectroscopy in
which an external magnetic field is applied to a sample.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy]
This technique can be used in tandem with a type of Overhauser effect analysis to distinguish between
molecular conformations. Materials whose conduction electrons acquire ordered spins during this technique
exhibit the Knight shift. A quadratic equation in cosine phi describes the relationship between dihedral
torsion angle and a quantity fundamental to this technique in an equation named for Karplus. That quantity
controls the shape of signals formed in this technique, which frequently form doublets and triplets. For 10
points, name this form of molecular analysis, which may be carried out on any atom with an odd mass
number, most prominently with carbon-13 and hydrogen.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy]
A two-dimensional form of this technique is able to calculate the distance between two atoms of interest by
making use of a phenomenon caused by cross-relaxation. Relating peak integrals in this technique can
determine the number of atoms of each element in the compound being studied. Deuterated chloroform is a
common solvent in this technique, in which tetramethylsilane is often used as a standard with a 0 ppm
chemical shift. Both the carbon-13 and proton variants of this technique rely on the magnetic moments of
atoms changing in response to a magnetic field. For 10 points, name this spectroscopic technique which
relies on a phenomenon also used in MRIs.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy; prompt on "spectroscopy"]
Many versions of this technique use polarization transfer to enhance signals. Sequential walking is
used to correlate cross-peaks in two-dimensional forms of it. This technique can be used instead of
X-ray diffraction on small proteins in solution. TMS is used as a standard in this technique, in which
J-couplings split signals and the integration gives the number of equivalent atoms. This technique
relies on the fact that atoms in different chemical environments (*) oscillate at different frequencies. It
operates by subjecting a solution of a molecule to a series of radio frequency pulses, and a variation of it
used in medicine is the MRI. For 10 points, name this type of spectroscopy that uses very high powered
magnets to determine chemical structures.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [or Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy; prompt on "MRI" or "Magnetic Resonance Imaging" before mention]
In one use of this technique, highly deuterated solvents such as deuterated chloroform are needed to ensure
that the solvent does not interfere with the reading. In another use of this technique, the relative rarity of the
Carbon-13 isotope means that samples usually need to be enriched and the DEPT can be measured to
determine how substituted a carbon is. The spectra produced show the chemical shifts of the molecules in
the compound that are a result of the molecules achieving resonant absorption. Based on the Larmor
precession that occurs when protons are exposed to a magnetic field, in medicine it is used to create images
of soft tissues. FTP, name this phenomenon that is also used in MRI scans.
ANSWER: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
The ab initio IGLO method calculates the outcome of this technique, which is used to generate
delta-sub-sigma values for carbocations. At very low temperatures, this procedure is used to detect
the ring flips of cyclohexane. Ring currents shift the results of this technique downfield. TMS is a
standard in this technique, and deuterated (*) chloroform is often used as its solvent. The readout of this
procedure has chemical shift on the x-axis. In this technique, a proton adjacent to a methyl group produces
a quartet due to spin splitting. Two common forms of it measure the absorption of radio waves by
carbon-13 and by protons. For 10 points, name this form of spectroscopy that uses a magnetic field to
deduce chemical structures, which is used in MRIs.
ANSWER: nuclear magnetic resonance [or NMR; or proton NMR; or other forms of NMR]
This technique can use the CYANA algorithm for automatic structure assignment. One form on this
technique requires evolution and mixing phases as well as a Fourier transform to create interpretable data.
Two dimensional variations of this technique include COSY. Readouts from this technique can be
complicated by J-coupling, which can be affected by relaxation processes. Tetramethylsilane is used as a
standard for this technique, whose most common forms include hydrogen-1 and carbon-13. Using a
phenomenon that is also used in MRIs, this technique measures the chemical shift of a molecule. For 10
points, name this spectroscopic technique, which uses an applied magnetic field to determine the structure
of a molecule.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy]
Paramagnetic materials show a change in frequency in this technique named for Walter Knight. The
strength of dipolar interactions in this technique is proportional to 3 cos squared theta minus 1,
meaning that interaction is zero at 54.7 degrees. Samples in this technique are placed into a
borosilicate tube of 5 mm diameter, and this technique uses deuterated solvents in order to cut down
on background. The outputs in this technique are equal to the difference in absorption frequency
relative to a reference divided by the operating frequency. This technique relies on splitting the spin
states of a nucleus and applying a field at the energy difference between them. Shielding and spin-spin
coupling cause subtle changes in the readout, which is used to identify of organic molecules. For 10 points,
name this form of spectroscopy which applies a strong magnetic field to a sample.
ANSWER: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance or NMR
The accuracy of this technique can be improved by inserting a step for solid-phase extraction
between HPLC and it in an example of a hyphenated technique. If samples are very dilute, as is often
the case with proteins, tubes manufactured by Shigemi can be used for this process. For this process,
the equation A plus B cosine theta plus C cosine two theta, where theta is the dihedral angle, can be
used to find the J-coupling constant. Pascal's triangle is followed by the intensity ratios of multiplets in this
technique. Samples for this process are often dissolved in DMSO or deuterated chloroform. TMS is used as
a chemical shift reference for this technique. For 10 points, name this kind of spectroscopy that comes in
proton and carbon-13 varieties.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy [or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy]
The analysis of one form of this technique relies on sequential walking for the correct assignment of
crosspeaks, which are generated in the Overhauser effect. That effect forms the basis for the NOESY
version of this technique, which along with HNQC and COSY are two-dimensional versions of it. In solid
state forms of it, the magic angle reduces unwanted effects, while desired effects include the induction of
Larmor precession, the decay of which gives rise to signals that are split into multiplets based on spin-spin
coupling and measured in chemical shift. For 10 points, name this spectroscopic technique that begins with
the alignment of nuclei in a strong magnetic field.
ANSWER: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy
This technique can be used to measure distances using observations of an associated through space dipoledipole interaction known as the Overhauser effect. The coupling constant associated with this technique is
related to the torsion angle by Karplus's equation. Some samples observed using this technique show
induced ring currents that produce observable shielding. Measurements involve calibration using a
reference compound such as TMS and determination of the chemical shift. FTP, name this technique
involving transitions between spin states of nuclei in an applied field.
ANSWER: nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
The six- to eight-ppm area of the spectrum of this technique is referred to as the aromatic region. A
common solvent for this procedure is deuterated chloroform with trace amounts of tetramethylsilane.
This technique can detect carbon particles in its (*) carbon-13 variant. Hydrogen peaks in the spectra for
this technique can be split depending on the number of neighboring hydrogens. For 10 points, identify this
technique which exposes samples to a magnetic field, similar to the medical technique of MRIs.
ANSWER: NMR spectroscopy (or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy)
One element in this family was originally isolated by heating clevite, while the first isolated element in
this family was discovered when Lord Rayleigh and William Ramsay noted that a sample of pure nitrogen
air was too heavy to be just nitrogen. Neil Bartlett was the first chemist to make a compound containing
one of these elements, which had previously been thought to be "inert." For 10 points, name this family of
elements that includes xenon, argon, krypton, and helium, which is found at the extreme right of the
periodic table.
ANSWER: noble gases [or inert gases before mentioned; or Group VIIIA (eight-A); or Group 18; prompt on Group 0]
Compounds containing these elements inside endohedral complexes of buckminsterfullerene have
been found in the Allende and Murchinson meteorites. One of these elements was discovered when
unexpected (*) emission lines were observed in the spectrum of the sun, while others were isolated in 1898
by fractional distillation of liquid air. Neil Bartlett succeeded in creating the first compound containing one
of these elements by combining it with platinum and fluorine, a difficult feat because a compound
containing one of these elements violates the octet rule. With full valence electron shells, for 10 points,
identify this group of elements which rarely form compounds and includes argon and helium.
ANSWER: noble gases [accept inert gases; accept group 8A; accept group 18]
One element in this group was produced by the bombardment of californium with a calcium beam and is the
heaviest known element. In addition to ununoctium, another element in this group is part of a trioxide
compound that reacts violently with organic compounds, and that element's difluoride, tetrafluoride, and
hexafluoride compounds are uncharacteristic of this group whose elements have full valence shells. Identify
this group of elements including xenon, argon, neon, and helium, located at the far right of the periodic
table that are named for their non-reactivity.
ANSWER: noble gases (or inert gases or group 18 or group O; prompt group VIIIa or group VIIIb)
Lee, Osheroff, and Richardson hypothesized that the properties of an isotope of an element in this
group were due to fermions forming Cooper pairs. One of these elements forms a Rollin film that
exhibits the fountain effect at low temperatures. An element's abbreviated (*) electron configuration
puts the chemical symbol of the last preceding member of this group in square brackets. Neil Bartlett
discovered that another one of these elements could form a compound with platinum and six fluorine atoms
despite this group's unreactivity. For ten points, name this group of elements which have full valence
electron shells and include helium and xenon.
ANSWER: noble gases (accept group 18)
One of these elements emits a light whose wavelength is used to define the meter. Ununoctium doesn't
behave like one of these elements, but ununquadium does. Potassium-40 decays to the forty isotope of one
of these elements. Their full valence shells cause them to be generally non-reactive. For 10 points, name
this group of elements including argon, xenon, and neon, found on the far right end of the periodic table.
ANSWER: noble gases [or group 18 elements; or group VIIIA elements (group eight A elements); prompt on inert gases]
Neil Bartlett created the hexafluoroplatinate of one element in this family, which was the first compound
using a member of this family to violate the octet rule. The only known radioactive element in this family is
the leading cause of lung cancer to non-smokers. These elements are defined as having a full electron shell,
leading to their relative inertness. For 10 points, name this group found at the extreme right of the Periodic
Table, which includes xenon and radon.
ANSWER: noble gases [or Group 18; or Group VIIIA (eight-A); or inert gases before "inertness"]
The relative abundance of one of these elements to potassium gives a rock sample's time since
recrystallization. One of these elements is the net product of the C-N-O cycle in stars. The hexafluoride
(HEX-uh-FLOOR-ide) of one of these elements was the first compound formed using one of them; they are
typically inert. For 10 points, name these elements with full electron shells, a group that includes argon and
helium.
ANSWER: noble gases [or inert gases until "inert"; or Group VIIIA; or Group 18]
One member of this group is abundant in sediment at the Permian-Triassic boundary, and makes up nearly
1 percent of the earth's atmosphere. Hexafluorides and tetrafluorides of some of these elements have been
formed in violation of the octet rule, though they typically have low reactivity due to a complete outer shell
of valence electrons. These inert elements are often used in lighting, and the most abundant member of this
group is argon. For 10 points, name this group of gaseous elements that includes xenon, helium, and neon.
ANSWER: noble gases [or group 18 elements; or group 8a elements]
Barium and a member of this group are produced by one of the fission reactions that uranium-235
undergoes. Neil Bartlett created a new compound after reacting one member of this group with platinum
hexa-fluoride. One type of radiometric dating is based on the decay of potassium into a member of this
group that is the third most common element in Earth's atmosphere. Another member of this group is often
found in advertising signs. The halogens are located to the left of this group on the periodic table. For 10
points, name this group of relatively inert elements that includes krypton, xenon, argon, neon, and helium.
ANSWER: noble gases [or Group 18; or Group VIIIA]
The van der Waals interactions of one of these compounds was used to derive the Lennard-Jones
potential. These compounds can be used to shorten electron configuration notation, and one of these
compounds is the second most abundant element in the universe. These compounds have the largest
ionization energy for their (*) period because they have a full outer electron shell. For 10 points, name
these elements that include neon, krypton, and helium, which occupy the rightmost column of the periodic
table.
ANSWER: noble gas [or inert gas]
One element in this group becomes a superfluid when cooled below the lambda point, and another
element in this group notably forms a square planar compound with four fluoride ions. This group also
includes element 36, whose name means "hidden thing." A nucleus of an element from this group is
equivalent to an alpha particle, and has electron configuration "one s two." For 10 points, identify this
group in the periodic table which includes xenon, krypton, and helium.
ANSWER: noble gases [or inert gases; or Group 18]
Studies on one element of this group was used to develop the Lennard-Jones potential. Elements in this
group have negative electron affinities and the the highest first ionization energies of any elements. The
electron configurations of atoms of these elements appear in a shorthand method for writing electron
configurations for all elements. One element in this group is the third most common gas in the Earth's
atmosphere. For 10 points, name this group of elements that includes xenon, argon, neon, and helium, so
named for their very low reactivity.
ANSWER: noble gases [or inert gases or Group 18 elements]
The first true compound containing one of these elements was discovered in 1962 by Neil Bartlett
after he tried reacting platinum hexafluoride with the fifth of these elements. However, prior to this
discovery, several clathrates and hydrates containing these elements were already common
knowledge. After the (*) Hindenburg disaster, one of these gases replaced hydrogen as the standard lifting
gas in blimps and balloons. These gases are colorless, odorless, and have full valence shells. For ten points,
name this group of unreactive elements, situated on the rightmost side of the Periodic Table.
ANSWER: Noble gases
A metal halide is placed along with one member of this group in a type of high intensity discharge
car headlights. Neil Bartlett notably reacted that member of this group with six fluorines. An isotope
of potassium decays into another member of this group, which allows for a certain kind of
radiometric dating. Those two members, (*) xenon and argon, are found along with radon, krypton,
neon, and helium in this group. For 10 points, name this group of highly unreactive elements.
ANSWER: noble gases [or inert gases; accept group 18]
The heaviest element in this group was synthesized by bombarding californium with calcium. The
textbook example of a molecule with square planar geometry involves four fluorines bound to an element
in this group. Ununoctium is technically a member of this group, which contains an element that potassium
decays into, making it a viable alternative to carbon-14 dating. The most common element in this group is
found in 0.94% of the atmosphere. For 10 points, identify this group with a full octet that contains xenon,
radon, helium, and argon.
ANSWER: noble gases [or inert gases]
One of these species reacts with fluorine to form square planar tetrafluoride and octahedral hexafluoride
molecules, and another of these can bind with a proton to form a hydride thought to be present in interstellar
space. A shorthand method of writing an atom's electron configuration involves putting one of these
elements in brackets, followed by any remaining valence electrons. These species' stability comes from
their completely filled p subshells, an exception being a member of this group with atomic number two. For
10 points, name these chemical elements which include neon and helium, known for their full valence shells
and limited reactivity under standard conditions.
ANSWER: noble gases [or inert gases; or Group 18]
The electron affinity is negative for the elements, and these elements can form endohedral complexes when
one of their atoms gets trapped inside a fullerene. These elements were initially omitted from the periodic
table by Dmitri Mendeleyev until William Ramsay discovered three of these elements. These elements
constitute Group 18, and since they have completely filled outer electron shells, they are very unreactive.
For 10 points, name this group of gases that includes radon, xenon, krypton, argon, neon, and helium.
ANSWER: noble gases or inert gases
The most recently discovered element from this group was formed by collisions between californium and
calcium. The first one was discovered by Pierre Janssen and their name was coined by Hugo Erdmann.
Another element from this group was discovered by Lord Rayleigh when he noticed a difference between
the mass of chemically produced nitrogen and atmospheric nitrogen. Linus Pauling predicted that one of
them could form a hexafluoride compound and their filled p orbital gives them the highest first ionization
energies on the periodic table. FTP, identify this group of elements on group 18 of the periodic table that
include Radon and Neon.
ANSWER: Noble gas (prompt on inert gas, accept group 18 elements before it is mentioned)
The discovery of several of these through fractional distillation earned William Ramsay the 1904 Nobel
Prize in Chemistry. Commonly used in Geiger counters, they are used in a shorthand notation for electron
configurations. Linus Pauling predicted that the heavier ones could form fluoride compounds. These
elements have the highest first ionization energies of any group, and are characterized by a full valence
shell. Comprising group 18, they are found on the far right of the periodic table and include xenon, argon,
krypton, and neon. For 10 points, name this group of gases named for their inertness.
ANSWER: noble gases [accept group 18 before it is mentioned]
One element in this group forms stable difluoride, tetrafluoride, and hexafluoride compounds.
Another member of this group is the third most abundant gas in the Earth's atmosphere at
approximately (*) 1%. Yet another element in this group has a nucleus that forms the alpha particle, and
these elements all have full valence shells. For 10 points, name this group of non-reactive elements that
includes xenon, argon, and helium. ANSWER: noble gases
A Penning mixture is mostly composed of one of these elements, and the decay of one of these elements'
isotope-40 to its isotope-39 is used in a namesake type of radioactive dating. One of these elements is the
main component of the mixture ionized by radiation in a Geiger counter. An alpha particle is the nucleus of
one of these elements, and all of these elements have complete octets. For 10 points, name this group of
very non-reactive elements including xenon, argon, and helium.
ANSWER: Noble Gases
Lord Cavendish discovered one member of this group by comparing the masses of different
samples of nitrogen. Linus Pauling predicted that a member from this group could form a compound
with six fluorine atoms. All the elements of this group are predicted to have electron affinities of zero
since it would require a jump to a higher (*) energy level. Because of their extremely low reactivity,
they are sometimes called inert gases. For 10 points, name this group of elements that include radon and
neon.
ANSWER: noble gas [or group 18 elements before it is mentioned; prompt on inert gases]
This term describes molecules with a mu of 0 Debye, and most hydrocarbons are this type of molecule.
London dispersion forces are the dominant intermolecular force for this type of substance, and most of
these substances are hydrophobic. When the electronegativity of two atoms are equal, they share the
bonding electron pair equally and thus form this type of covalent bond. For 10 points, name this term which
describes molecules which doesn't have a dipole moment.
ANSWER: nonpolar
Their relative reactivity is analyzed in the constant selectivity relationship, called in some sources the
Richie equation, while more recently they have been modeled with the Mayr-Patz equation. A carbonyl
carbon can be made to act as one through the formation of a thioacetal and exposure to an acid, reactivity
known as umpolung, and an ambident one is the cause of the mix of products resulting from the Kolbe
nitrile synthesis, while a more traditional example participates in the Williamson ether synthesis. Their
strength depends on factors like polarizability, because, like bases, their characteristic behavior includes the
donation of an electron pair. Azide and methoxide act as, for 10 points, what reagents that donate their
electrons to form a bond with a Lewis acid?
ANSWER: nucleophiles [accept word forms]
Jencks and Carriulo discovered that lone pair donation bolsters this property in the alpha effect, and
one scale used to measure the strength of these compounds sets the log of k equal to the quantity N
plus E times a namesake slope parameter. That equation, named for Mayr and Patz, succeeded the
Ritchie and Swain-Scott equations. When a compound with this property attacks an arene with
electron-withdrawing groups, a Meisenheimer complex is created, and solvolysis occurs when the
solvent acts as one of these. More famously, one of these compounds triggers a Walden inversion when it
attacks the backside of a carbon with a good leaving group. Functionally equivalent to Lewis acids due to
their electron-donating nature, for 10 points, name these compounds that are part of namesake unimolecular
and bimolecular substitutions, the opposite of electrophiles.
ANSWER: Nucleophiles (accept Lewis acids before mention, accept nucleophilicity or other word forms)
Epoxides react with carbon ones of these compounds due to their increased ring strain to form alcohols, and
carbonyl groups react with Grignard reagents because the Grignard reagent acts as one of these compounds.
Their strength increases with increasing polarizability and decreases with increasing electronegativity, and
these compounds can be interchangeably called Lewis bases. The conjugates of weak Lewis acids can act as
strong ones of these compounds, and these compounds take the place of the leaving group on alkyl halides
during SN1 and SN2 reactions. For 10 points, identify these compounds, whose name suggests that they
love neutrons and protons.
ANSWER: nucleophiles
Due to steric hindrance, this property is lacked by LDA and a compound named for Hunig, making
them useful for creating enolates. When a molecule with this property reacts with a carbonyl alpha to
a stereocenter, the product stereochemistry can be determined using the Felkin-Anh model.
Compounds with this property can be used to open aziridines and epoxides. Stereochemical (*)
inversion occurs in a reaction mechanism describing how a compound with this property displaces a leaving
group in a single step. Compounds with this property, which often correlates with basic strength, participate
in namesake bimolecular substitution reactions. For 10 points, name this property measuring the ability of a
molecule to donate electron pairs in a chemical reaction, contrasted with electrophillicity.
ANSWER: nucleophilicity [accept word forms like "nucleophiles"]
Rare examples can contain hyperons, while those with radii substantially larger than predicted by
the liquid drop model are called "halo" examples. The interaction between their components can be
modeled by a screened Coulomb potential named for Yukawa. Their composition is defined by
certain (*) "magic numbers" that deviate from the semi-empirical mass formula by having unusually large
average binding energy. The existence of this entity was demonstrated by the gold foil experiment. For 10
points, name this dense region at the center of an atom composed of protons and neutrons.
ANSWER: nucleus
The VLBI method of analyzing group delay between radio telescopes can give an estimate of the amplitude
of this effect, while Kinoshita and Souchay have developed a popular theory of this effect. The dissipation
effect at the core-mantle boundary can be measured through observation of the free core variety of this
phenomenon. This effect's frequency is proportional to the angular momentum divided by the moment of
inertia and it has a period of 18.6 years for the Earth, and its "free" variety is called the Chandler
wobble. Caused on Earth by the variation of tidal forces over time, for 10 points name this phenomenon, a
wobbling in the axis of rotation of precessing objects.
ANSWER: nutation (of the Earth)
Due to this rock's metastability, no specimens older than the Cretaceous era have been observed. Once the
past temperature of this rock is known, the SIMS-SS profile can be used to determine its age because this
rock absorbs water at a constant rate. The appearance of the "fire" variety of this rock is due to
nanoparticles of magnetite, while the appearance of its "snowflake" variety is due to gray spherulites
centered on locations where crystallization has begun. This rock is commonly formed by the cooling of
relatively viscous, silica-rich granitic magmas; because of the rapidity of cooling, it exhibits few to no
crystals. This rock's conchoidal fracture made it ideal for use in surgical blades and stone tools. For 10
points, name this usually-black extrusive igneous rock, a volcanic glass.
ANSWER: obsidian
In these features, cold seeps leak methane and hydrogen sulfide. Upwelling in these features brings
nutrient rich water to the surface. These features are quickly being turned acidic by the absorption of
carbon dioxide emissions. Large, flat areas lying beneath these features are called abyssal plains, which are
found after the continental rise. For 10 points, identify this geographical feature that covers over 70% of the
Earth's surface with liquid water.
ANSWER: oceans [or sea; or ocean floor until "carbon" is read; prompt on water, lakes, and other bodies of water]
Sverdrup's theory describe movement in these bodies, which experience transport and spirals
named after Ekman. These bodies contain manganese nodules at their bottoms. Recently, problems
have emerged with low oxygen areas in them called (*) dead zones. They can be divided into different
layers, such as pelagic and abyssal. The thermohaline circulation in them helps drive their currents. For 10
points, name these very large bodies of water, examples of which include the Arctic and the Indian.
ANSWER: oceans
Daniel G. Wright pioneered the use of the Tumlirz equation of state for modeling the in situ density of these
bodies. The ideal irregular surfaces of these bodies are compared to the reference ellipsoid by taking the
angle between the plumb line and the ellipsoidal normal, which results in the "deflection of the vertical."
The geoid is an equipotential surface that coincides with their mean surface level. The Coriolis Effect
causes the wind to deflect the movement of the surface of these entities rightward. Near their edges, winddriven cooler material surfaces in a process called upwelling. These bodies are also home to Ekman spirals
and lie atop tectonic plates made of basalt, not granite. For 10 points, name these bodies that include the
Arctic, Indian, Atlantic, and Pacific.
ANSWER: the Earth's oceans
This process is occurring in tandem with hypercapnia. This process raises the CCD. This process can be
depicted on a Bjerrum plot. Scientists studying this process make use of the Revelle factor. This process
will require the use of a protective organic coating known as a periostracum. This process will likely affect
the structure and behavior of otoliths. This process results in a decrease in the concentration of aragonite,
which will have a negative impact on pteropods. This process exacerbates the thermal effects that lead to
coral bleaching. This process is occurring due to the fact that H2CO3 decomposes into bicarbonate and a
proton. For 10 points, identify this process in which the uptake of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere is
decreasing the pH of the Earth's waters.
ANSWER: ocean acidification [prompt on an increase in the amount of dissolved inorganic carbon DIC, TIC, CT carbonic acid or carbon dioxide in the oceans; prompt on global warming]
The OSCAR dataset maps these entities, which are responsible for mixing isopynic parcels via
cabbeling. Stommel showed that their "westward intensification" was due to gradients in the Coriolis
force. The total flux due to these phenomena is measured in Sverdrups. One driving force for them is
variations in temperature and salt concentration; those differences drive (*) upwellings and
downwellings. Wind forcing results in net transport via these entities at 90 degrees to the wind direction, a
process called Ekman transport. Sediment buildup causes the "turbidity" type of these entities. Examples of
another form of these entities include the Kuroshio, North Equatorial, and Antarctic circumpolar. For 10
points, name these flows of water through the Earth's oceans.
ANSWER: oceanic currents [accept oceanic circulation; prompt on "flow" or "ocean flow"; prompt on anything that implies water is moving]
The direction of these entities is explained by the Ekman spiral, in which they travel at an angle to the
frictional forces which form them. These entities have a "boundary" type, while their circular types are
called gyres. Though they are not winds, these entities are angled by the (*) Coriolis force. A misnomer for
one type of this entity is the rip tide, while other prominent examples include ones called the equatorial and
the "surface" type. These entities transport energy and heat as they travel across the globe. The Gulf Stream
is an example of, for 10 points, what directed flows of fluid found in the ocean?
ANSWER: ocean current (accept gyres and other specific currents before they are read)
One of the two major kinds of these entities are created by cabbeling. Fridtjof Nansen's Fram
expedition proved the existence of one of these. One example of these entities is the Kuroshio. The
global conveyor belt consists of them, as do gyres. A displacement in these entities by the Coriolis
effect is known as the Ekman spiral. The Humboldt one is associated with (*) upwelling near Peru.
Eddies can be formed by their type formed by wind, surfaces ones, which are contrasted with deep water
ones. For 10 points, identify these masses of moving water that include the Gulf Stream.
ANSWER: ocean currents
The meridional transport of these features is related to the curl of the wind stress by the Sverdrup
balance. The Coriolis force, when balanced by a pressure gradient, is the cause of geostrophic ones.
The Coriolis force also causes the direction of the net transport of these features to be perpendicular
to the direction of the wind in (*) Ekman transport. One system of these features is driven by the
formation of cold, saline bottom water that is later upwelled, and is called the thermohaline circulation.
Systems of these features can link to form ocean gyres. For 10 points, including the North Atlantic Drift and
the Gulf Stream, name these large scale motions of ocean water.
ANSWER: ocean currents
"Rogue" types of these entities might be created by spatio-temporal focusing and modulational
instability. Shallow ones have velocities that are approximately the square root of depth and gravitational
acceleration. Their size is dependent on fetch. They can be plunging or spilling. Smooth, long ones are
called swell. Like the tides, work has been done on generating electrical energy from these. These can
break near the shore. For 10 points, name these undulations in the ocean.
ANSWER: ocean waves [or wind waves; or surface waves]
The superconducting Chevrel phase adopts this geometry, whose stability complex for formation can
be found form the Irving-Williams series. They can isomerize via a reaction that forces them through
a C-sub-2v intermediate or a D-sub-3h intermediate. Besides undergoing the Ray-Dutt or Bailar
twists, their ligands can be arranged facially or meridonally. Werner complexes exhibit this formation,
whose orbitals can be divided into the t-sub-2g and e-sub-g sets due to crystal field splitting. One of their
axes may elongate to break degeneracy in the classic Jahn-Teller effect, and this geometry occurs in sulfur
hexafloride, molybdenum hexacarbonyl, or any complex with no lone pairs and six ligands according to
VSEPR theory. For 10 points, name this moleculer geometry which resembles an eight-faced solid.
ANSWER: Octahedral
The Jahn-Teller ("YAWN" TELL-er) effect is most commonly observed in transition metal
complexes with this configuration. Though their molecular geometries are, respectively, square
planar and square pyramidal, xenon tetrafluoride (TET-ruh-FLOOR-ide) and bromine
pentafluoride both have this electron geometry. For 10 points, give this electron geometry of
sulfur hexafluoride (HEX-uh-FLOOR-ide) and all other compounds with a central atom surrounded
by (*) six atoms or lone pairs.
ANSWER: octahedral [or octahedron; award 15 points even on a giveaway buzz before power mark]
A cluster compound with this property and named for Chevrel is an excellent type II superconductor.
Alfred Werner won the Nobel in Chemistry for studying these compounds. Compounds with this
characteristic can isomerize via the Ray-Dutt or Bailar twists and can exist as facial and meridional
isomers. Because of their large splitting energy, they have the possibility of existing in either
high-spin or low-spin states. The orbitals of molecules with this characteristic can be divided into (*)
t-sub-2-g and e-sub-g sets. The Jahn-Teller (YAHN-Teller) distortion is most commonly encountered in
complexes with this geometry. Characterized by sp3d2 hybridization, it is exhibited by sulfur hexafluoride.
For 10 points, name this molecular geometry in which six ligands are arranged symmetrically around a
central atom.
ANSWER: octahedral molecules [or octahedral geometry; prompt on "coordination compounds" until "high-spin or low-spin" is read]
This law's conception was assisted by the 1932 Chemistry Nobel Prize laureate, Irving Langmuir, and the
German physicist Walther Kossel. The 1913 Chemistry Nobel Prize laureate, Alfred Werner, provided the
groundwork for this law's later development from Abegg's law. For transition metals, this law is replaced
by a law using eighteen as its required number while free radicals like nitrogen oxide present an odd
number issue with this law. Helium and hydrogen adhere to the duet rule instead of this rule. For 10 points,
name this rule stating that atoms tend to combine in order to have eight electrons in their valence shells.
ANSWER: octet rule
Sulfur hexafluoride is an exception to this rule because it is hypervalent; it contains 12 electrons
around the sulfur atom. Diborane is another example of this exception, because two electrons are
binding together more than two atoms. In this case, there are not enough electrons to make the entire
group. Boron trifluoride is another exception, that does not complete the titular structure. Generally,
though, atoms will combine until their valence shells contain a certain number of electrons, by either ionic
or covalent bonding. For ten points, name this insight, popularized by Gilbert Lewis.
ANSWER: Octet rule
One atom that does not follow this law is instead governed by Wade's rules. Molecules with either
trigonal bypramidal or octahedral molecular geometries are exceptions to this rule. This rule cannot be
satisfied by a molecule with an odd number of electrons. For 10 points, name this rule of thumb in
chemistry that states that in covalent bonds, atoms will attain eight outer-shell electrons.
ANSWER: octet rule
The reason that carbenes are so reactive is they violate this prinicple. This principle, a consequence of
Abegg's rule, is violated by compounds with trigonal bipyramidal and octahedral molecular geometries.
Other exceptions to it are the electron-deficient compounds, including most of those with boron as a central
atom. Violators of this rule that have five or more groups surrounding the central atom are said to have
expanded valence shells. For 10 points, name this chemical rule of thumb that states that central atoms of
most covalent compounds are surrounded by eight electrons.
ANSWER: octet rule
The 410 kilometer seismic discontinuity in the mantle results from this mineral's transformation to
spinel. This mineral occurs as a solid solution of forsterite and fayalite. According to Goldich's stability
series, this mineral and the calcium plagiocase anorthite are most easily weathered. 500 Celsius is the
boundary temperature for a reversible reaction in which this mineral and water combine to yield serpentine.
Ultramafic rocks like peridotite consist of pyroxene and this mineral. This mineral consists of silica
tetrahedra linked by magnesium or iron cations. For 10 points, name this mineral at the top of the
discontinuous branch of Bowen's reaction series.
ANSWER: olivine
This effect is the basis for investigating the interactions between proteins and metals and the secondary and
tertiary structures of proteins via circular dichroism. Using the model of an asymmetric tetrahedral carbon,
van 't Hoff was one of the first to explain this effect. This effect is similar to the Faraday effect and is a type
of birefringence. Molecules that exhibit this effect are classified as dextro- or levo- depending on whether
this effect was right or left handed. Chemically synthesized tartaric acid does not display this effect. Only
chiral molecules exhibit this effect that depends on polarization. For 10 points, name this effect in which
light turns when it passes through an organic molecule.
ANSWER: optical rotation [accept optical activity; I guess prompt on "chirality" before mention]
The sum of a perturbation and the Hartree-Fock operators to equal the Hamiltonian of one type of these
entities is the result of Moller-Plesset theory, and the coupled cluster method can also be used to calculate
that type. The Jahn-Teller effect prevents degeneracy in these, and the LCAO approximation simplifies
calculations involving them. Overlap of two lobes of these creates pi bonds, and higher-energy molecular
ones are considered "antibonding." For 10 points, name these wavefunction solutions with atomic s, p, d,
and f types.
ANSWER: orbitals [accept molecular orbitals before "one type of these"]
The LCAO method is a law of superposition for these objects that drive the Diels-Alder reaction
whose highest occupied and lowest unoccupied levels lead to the band gap. Bond order is conserved
in the non-bonding type, while the stability of the molecule is reduced in an antibonding variety. The
hybridized ones can be represented with terms like sp3 (ess, p, three), while the ones simply designated
p have azimuthal quantum numbers of one. For ten points, name these probability distributions of electrons'
locations that come in molecular and atomic varieties.
ANSWER: orbitals (take atomic orbitals before non-bonding)
In spin-charge separation, electrons split into three quasiparticles: spinons, holons, and a particle carrying
information about this function. The Roothaan-Hall equation extends one method of calculating these to the
case of a non-orthonormal basis, and a theorem that states that the first ionization energy is equal to the
energy of one of these is named for Koopman. The spectrochemical series orders ligands based on the
degree to which they split energy levels of these functions. A common method for finding them involves
approximating the wavefunction as a single Slater determinant and using the variational method; that is the
Hartree-Fock method. Atomic ones have shapes that are entirely given by the quantum numbers, and s ones
are spherical. For 10 points, name these regions where electrons are likely to be found around a molecule or
atom.
ANSWER: (molecular or atomic) orbitals [accept specific types; accept orbitons on the first clue; prompt on "wave function"]
In computational chemistry, the Gaussian-type of these entities are used in the LCAO method. For radially
symmetric potentials inversely proportional to radial distance, the wavefunctions of these objects are given
by Laguerre polynomials multiplied by the spherical harmonics. Within molecules, these entities can exist
as nonbonding, bonding, and anti-bonding types. These objects mix together in molecules in a phenomenon
known as hybridization, and are filled according to the Aufbau principle. For 10 points, name these wavelike functions describing the location of electrons within atoms, whose classifications include s, p, d, and f.
ANSWER: orbitals [Accept atomic orbitals or molecular orbitals.]
The first four varieties of these were named based on the properties of their spectroscopic lines, and the
Hartree-Fock method concerns another type. Doubling the azimuthal quantum number and adding one gives
the number of these in a subshell. Molecular ones may be approximated by linear combination of atomic
ones, while the Pauli exclusion principle states that their contents must have opposite spin. "Hybridized"
according to the number of atoms to which an atom must bond, for 10 points, give this term for the regions
in which an electron is likely to be found.
ANSWER: orbitals
Pericyclic reactions only take place when these entities are symmetrical in both
products and reactants according to Woodward-Hoffmann rules, and the Jahn-Teller effect explains why
degeneracy in these entities is unfavorable in complexes. They are eigenvalues of the Fock operator in the
Hartree-Fock method of calculating them, and nodes in these entities can be either angular or radial. Mixing
of these entities is called (*) hybridization, and they come in atomic and molecular varieties. Classified as
s, p, d, or f, for ten points, name these regions of space that contain electrons.
ANSWER: orbitals
The Gaussian type are more computationally efficient due to the theorem that overlapping Gaussian
functions can be treated as a single function centered on the internuclear axis. The Slater type differ from
the hydrogenic type by accounting for shielding effects of adjacent electrons. Mixing in higher excited
states of appropriate symmetry can create polarized ones, while linear combinations of the atomic type
create the molecular type. All types consist of both radial and angular portions and are, FTP, what
mathematical functions that identify the probability of finding an electron in a given region?
ANSWER: orbital
The second and third quantum numbers describe these entities. These entities can be hybridized.
Effective nuclear charge is based on the penetration of these entities. Madelung's rules involve the
sum of the principle quantum number and azimuthal quantum number in relation to these entities.
Hund's rule of maximum multiplicity involves (*) occupation of these entities. The Aufbau principle
states that those of lower energy are filled before those of higher energy. The Pauli exclusion principle is
often explained in terms of these entities. For 10 points, name these entities surrounding a nucleus where
one is likely to find an electron.
ANSWER: atomic orbitals [or electron orbitals; or electron subshells; do not accept "molecular orbitals"; do not accept "electron shell"]
The crystal field splitting parameter is equal to the difference in energy between two of these entities. The
motion of these entities can be described as conrotatory or disrotatory according to the Woodward-Hoffman
rules. Fukui developed a "frontier" theory of these entities that postulates that only two of them, the HOMO
and LUMO, are important in chemical reactions. The principal, azimuthal, and magnetic quantum numbers
describe these entities, one type of which is shaped like a dumbbell. The Aufbau principle describes the
order in which these entities are filled. For 10 points, name these regions of space occupied by electrons
that can come in s, p, d, and f varieties.
ANSWER: orbitals [accept more specific things like d orbitals, frontier orbitals, atomic orbitals, molecular orbitals, etc]
Fukui believed that reactions could entirely be modeled by analyzing the so-called "frontier" ones.
These entities are found by finding the radial and angular components of a certain system's wavefunctions.
One type of these entities is classified by whether they are formed by adding or subtracting wavefunctions
and can be bonding or antibonding. Large atoms can have g, f, and d varieties of these constructs. Smaller
atoms have only s and p ones of these. For 10 points, name these approximate paths in which electrons
travel around the nucleus of an atom.
ANSWER: orbitals [accept molecular orbitals before "molecular"; accept atomic orbitals at any time]
A rule for these regions states that ones with a smaller value for "N plus L," which is equal to the number of
"nodes" for one of these regions, will have lower energy. The topologies of these entities are described by
the principal, subsidiary, magnetic, and spin quantum numbers. Lennard-Jones's LCAO method combines
these entities linearly to derive their "molecular" counterparts. Combining two of them is called
"hybridization." They come in S, P, D, and F types. For 10 points, name these regions around an atomic
nucleus in which electrons are found.
ANSWER: atomic orbitals [do not accept "molecular orbitals"]
Basis sets used to approximate these objects are given in Pople notation and include 6-31G, and
minimal examples include STO-3G (stoh "three gee"), which combines three Gaussian functions. A
self-consistent method to approximate these objects enforces Pauli exclusion via a Slater determinant
and is named for (*) Hartree and Fock. The "linear combination" of one form of these entities names one
method for describing the molecular type. These mathematical functions describe the square root of the
probability that an electron is found in a given region, and they include five quadratic examples, such as x2 y2. For 10 points, name these entities, exemplified by the spherical "s" as well as "p"and "d."
ANSWER: atomic orbitals [accept molecular orbitals]
Separation of these materials requires the removal of gangue ["gang"], which was traditionally done
with a Frue vanner. Sea squirts may play a role in the formation of vanadium ones, while the bacteria
C. metallidurans can be used to process the valuable quartz lode ones. The Curies discovered the
elements radium and polonium in one of these that contains uranium, pitchblende. The Bayer process
dissolves the target metal in the major aluminum one, bauxite. Galena for lead and hematite for iron
are examples of what naturally occurring minerals that are mined to extract the precious metals they
contain?
ANSWER: ores [prompt on minerals]
One varity of this general class of compounds is known as homoleptic, and this class of compounds is
employed the ROMP reactions described by Grubbs. This class of molecules often undergoes reactions
called insertion and deinsertion, and a common reaction involving these compounds is called beta-hydride
elimination. An important application of this class of compounds is in olefin metathesis, as evidenced by the
application of Schrock carbenes. All sandwich compounds belong to this class of compounds, as do such
compounds as Gilman reagents, and Ziegeler-Natta catalysts are compounds of this type. Including such
compounds as Grignard reagents and metallocenes, for ten points, identify these compounds whose
distinguishing feature is a bond between a carbon and a metal.
ANSWER: organometallic compounds (accept obvious equivalents)
Cyclopropanols are synthesized from esters via an in situ formation of one of these compounds in the
Kulinkovich reaction. The industrial synthesis of the anti-estrogen receptor positive breast cancer drug
Tamoxifen uses a specific kind of these compounds, one type of which can be resolved into precipitates by
adding dioxane. A palladium catalyst and one of these compounds can be used in a form of coupling that
removes a carboxylic acid functionality from an R-COOH and attaches the R to an R' in an R' (R prime)halide. Besides Tebbe's and Gilman's reagents, the best-known type of these compounds exists in a Schlenk
equilibrium and can be added to carbonyl carbons to yield some form of alcohol. For 10 points, identify
these compounds which include Grignard reagents, which contain metals bound to carbon atoms.
ANSWER: organometallic compounds [accept organotitaniums during the first two sentences; prompt on "organotitaniums" afterwards; prompt on "organocuprates"; prompt on "organolithiums"; prompt on "organomagnesiums"; prompt on "Gilman's reagent" until mentioned; prompt on "Tebbe's reagent" until mentioned; prompt on "Grignard reagents" until mentioned , because hey, we have to cover all our bases]
Migmatites found in areas where this process occurred include core complexes and gneiss domes. Some
types of this process can create nappes. The Sevier, Nevadan and Laramide instances of this process are
grouped under the Cordilleran. The results of this process are distinguished from the process that creates
cratons. The formation of a foreland basin and fold and thrust belts often accompanies this process. This
process can result from subduction or collision with an island arc or another continent. For 10 points,
identify this creation of mountain belts by tectonic activity.
ANSWER: orogeny [or orogenesis; prompt on mountain formation or reasonable equivalents]
The "jaws of a vise" theory was used to describe this process in the 1850s, implying that the squeezing of
rocks was the main force behind it. There are three types of belts that stem from this process; the
hercynotype variety usually results in island arcs, and is responsible for the separation of Japan from the
Asian continent. Due to these events, most of the rock formations that are raised to the crust have undergone
metamorphism, and over time, erosion slowly brings these to the surface. The most famous example of this
process in action being the Himalayas, FTP, name this event that results in the creation of mountains due to
plate tectonics.
ANSWER: Orogeny
Structures characteristic of these events lie nearby suture zones, and those terranes can be
surrounded by nappes. Delamination is one process by which these events can occur, and their
namesake cycle's final stages involve formation of batholiths and tectonic uplift. These events can be
arranged into alpine, hercynotype, and cordilleran types, and these events can occur at (*) mid-ocean
ridges or at subduction zones. The Caledonian one occured after the collision of fragments of the former
Gondwana, and the Appalachian one was a result of the collision of North America and Africa. For 10
points, name these geologic events that provide the primary mechanism for the formation of mountains.
ANSWER: orogeny [or orogenesis]
One type of this process employs feed streams and draw solutions, and the classification of this process
depends on the type of pressure differential it exploits. The forward type of this phenomenon requires no
applied pressure, although another way it can occur is by hydrostatic pressure. It describes movement from
hypotonic to hypertonic solutions, and its namesake pressure is a colligative property. The reverse form of
this process is used to purify drinking water. For 10 points, name this process in which water flows through
a semipermeable membrane to reach equilibrium.
ANSWER: Osmosis [prompt on Diffusion]
In 2009, the first power plant run on the pressure-retarded type of this process opened in Tofte, Norway.
Henri Dutrochet built the first meter for measuring this process, and the formation of a silicate precipitate
layer allows this process to power the growth of chemical gardens. Another type of this process relies on
feed and draw solutions, while the equation pi equals M R T determines the pressure needed to counteract
this process. Often reversed to desalinate seawater, identify this process in which water diffuses across a
semipermeable (seh-mi-PUR-mee-uh-buhl) membrane before reaching equilibrium.
ANSWER: osmosis [accept word forms; do not accept "osmotic pressure"]
This quantity can be measured using a porous earthenware container with a copper ferrocyanide
precipiatate inside, a contraption devised by Wilhelm Pfeffer. The contribution of proteins to this
quantity is termed the Donnan effect. The difference in a form of this quantity is multiplied by the
reflection coefficient in Starling's equation. One equation that yields this quantity was improved
upon by the (*) Morse equation, which used molal, instead of molar, concentration. This quantity, which
the van't Hoff equation sets equal to MRT, is equal on both the inside and outside of a cell in an isotonic
solution. For 10 points, name this colligative property, a difference in pressure across a semipermeable
membrane.
ANSWER: osmotic pressure [or oncotic pressure; or colloid osmotic pressure; just osmotic is fine after "pressure" is read; prompt on pressure; prompt on osmosis; prompt on pi]
The difference of this quantity is multiplied by the reflection coefficient in one term of the Starling
equation, and this quantity can be measured using a Pfeffer cell. An easy method of decreasing this
quantity in cells is to activate the brancher enzyme to polymerize glycogen. This phenomenon is often
measured using a U-shaped tube demarcated by dialysis membrane, and this quantity is the reason
why putting a (*) red blood cell in pure water causes it to swell and burst. This quantity is equal to the
ideal gas constant times temperature times the molarity times the van't Hoff factor, and like freezing point
depression and boiling point elevation, it is a colligative property. For 10 points, name this quantity
symbolized pi, equal to the force necessary to stop the movement of water across a semipermeable
membrane.
ANSWER: osmotic pressure [accept oncotic pressure]
In biology, oncotic forces are due to the combination of this property and the Gibbs-Donnan effect. The
standard calculation of this value only applies for solutions that obey Henry's Law and says that this
quantity is proportional to temperature, molarity, and the van't Hoff factor. For 10 points, name this
colligative property defined as the pressure necessary to counteract the movement of water across a
semipermeable membrane.
ANSWER: osmotic pressure
This man lends his name to a U-shaped apparatus which gives the viscosity as a function of the time
required for a volume to flow through the capillary tube. Another relation derived by this man shows that
the law of mass action holds for solutions of weak electrolytes, and gives the electrical conductivities for
those solutions at very dilute conditions. An industrial process named for him uses a platinum-rhodium
gauze as a catalyst and made the Birdeland-Eyde Arc process obsolete; that process uses the product of the
Haber process and oxidizes it to give one of the components of aqua regia. For 10 points, identify this
German chemist who names a process used to produce nitric acid.
ANSWER: Wilhelm Ostwald
In 2008 Luguet et al. showed that Enriched Pt-Re-Os Isotope ratios were not necessarily the result of
material influx from here. So called "rigidity-zones" are present at one of its boundaries, and in 1995
Glatzmaier and Roberts created a three dimensional model for convection in it. SKS (*) waves
undergo a mode conversion upon entering this region. Upon entering this region, density jumps from 5.6 to
9.9 grams per cubic centimeter. It is upper bounded by the Gutenberg discontinuity, where P-wavess change
velocities and which is located near the D'' ["D double prime"] layer. S-waves notably do not appear in this
region as they cannot travel through the liquid metal that comprises it. For 10 points, name this layer of the
Earth which lies directly below the mantle and surrounds a solid piece of metal, the inner core.
ANSWER: outer core [accept liquid core before "liquid" is read; prompt on "core"; do not accept "inner core"]
Sebastion Rost's team discovered "rigidity zones" in this region. This entity is bounded to the bottom
by the Lehmann discontinuity and to the top by a region that blocks s waves and slows p waves
down, the Gutenberg discontinuity. The low viscosity of the fluids in this region cannot contain shear
stresses. This region, also found immediately below the D Double (*) Prime Layer, has eddy currents in
the nickel iron fluid, which are thought to create the magnetic field of the Earth. It can be found below the
mantle. For ten points, name this region composed of iron and nickel that sits above its "inner" counterpart.
ANSWER: outer core (prompt on partial answer)
As heat leaves this region, it shrinks by about 1 mm per year. Convection in this region is one of the major
reasons Earth is habitable and Mars is not. This difference consists in the Earth's shield from solar wind, the
magnetosphere. The only s-waves that leave this region are due to the effect of p-waves generated by
earthquakes. This behavior occurs because of the low viscosity of substances. Consistent with its
ferromagnetic properties, this region consists of about 2,266 kilometers of molten iron and nickel heated to
between 4500 to 6000 Celsius which is warmer than the mantle. For ten points, name this layer of the earth
directly outside of the solid inner core.
ANSWER: outer core (Prompt on core before end, do not accept or prompt on inner core.)
C-waves do not enter this region, and the K in PKP denotes the part of the waves that travel through
it. This is the innermost of two regions whose lower boundary is marked by a Lehmann discontinuity,
and its upper bound is named after Gutenberg. Refraction of P-waves here causes a (*) "shadow
zone," and the S-waves cannot move through this region because they are transverse. The dynamo theory
explains the geomagnetic field as a result of the rotation of this region. For ten points, identify this liquid
region of the Earth found just below the mantle.
ANSWER: outer core (prompt on core)
Like point bars, these structures are formed not by deposition of the suspended load but by secondary flow,
since the common belief that the primary, vortex flow forms them conflicts with Bernoulli's principle. The
formation of these structures is linked with helicoidal flow in the cross section of an inner bend. These
landforms ultimately develop into meander scars upon drying up because they do not receive water from
their source river. Called billabongs in Australia, for 10 points identify these structures which form when
meanders become so deep that they are bypassed by the original stream, forming curved lakes.
ANSWER: oxbow lakes [prompt on meanders before mentioned]
In 2003, a team of Austrian scientists led by Fischer and Wieltschnig used one of these to study the
impact of lysis-inducing viruses on sediment-layer dwelling bacteria, discovering that viruses play
only a minor role in sedimentary carbon exchange. Robert Chant used acoustic Doppler profiling to
study the formation (*) of these bodies, and in 1994, Winemiller found that they decrease in both
biodiversity and biomass over time. They result from the creation of a secondary flow of suspended mass
following transition to vortex flow, and their formation is preceded by the formation of a sedimentdepositing channel. For 10 points, name this type of lake that forms from a bend in a river.
ANSWER: oxbow lakes [accept: Billabongs]
A reaction of this type uses a solution of chromium trioxide to convert an alcohol to a ketone and is named
for Jones. Nitric acid is formed by performing this type of reaction on ammonia. Manganate and hydrogen
peroxide contain highly electronegative elements and are thus good agents of this type of reaction. This
reaction occurs at the (*) anode of a voltaic cell, and an example of it is rusting. This reaction occurs to
sodium when a salt is formed because it loses an electron and gains in the namesake state of this reaction.
An increase in charge on an atom occurs in, for 10 points, what type of reaction contrasted with a
reduction?
ANSWER: Oxidation (prompt on "redox" or "reduction-oxidation"; do not prompt or accept "reduction")
One type of this reaction uses DMSO and oxalyl choloride at about negative 78 degrees Celsius to generate
a ketone, and another type can use peracids to convert cyclic ketones into lactones. In addition to the type
named for Swern, a reaction of this type catalyzed by chromium trioxide, its namesake's "reagent," converts
secondary alcohols into ketones. The Baeyer-Villiger and Jones are types of this reaction, for which a Lewis
structure can be employed to determine its namesake state. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in
which an atom loses an electron, contrasted with a reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation
This type of reaction can be performed by a mild periodinane [pear-EYE-oh-dih-nayne] reagent developed
by Dess and Martin. PCC uses this kind of reaction to produce an aldehyde, while a chromic acid reagent
will perform this kind of reaction twice to produce a carboxylic acid; those reactions start with an alcohol.
This kind of reaction happens to aluminum in the thermite reaction and at the anode in a galvanic cell,
giving the chemical species undergoing it a more positive charge. Occurring in iron to produce rust, for 10
points, name these type of chemical reaction in which a species loses electrons, contrasted with reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation [prompt on redox]
In the Jones type of this, an alcohol is converted to carboxylic acid or ketone. Permanganate and
dichromate are reagents that catalyze these processes. Electrons appear on the right side of the half-reaction
for this type of process, which causes rusting. For 10 points, name this process referring to the loss of
electrons, contrasted with reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation
Ozonolysis of alkenes is one type of this class of reactions, as is the transformation of NADH to NAD+.
The addition of chromic acid to alcohols converts them to carboxylic acids and ketones in this type of
reaction. A common and powerful reagent in this type of reaction is potassium permanganate, and in
combustion reactions hydrocarbons undergo this process. While generally -2, the "number" associated with
this process for oxygen is -1 in peroxide. For 10 points, name this type of reaction, which is accompanied
by a loss of electrons and often happens simultaneously with reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation [Prompt on redox.]
This type of reaction converts the indicator ferroin from red to pale blue. It is used as an
alternative to water-softening agents in removing iron and magnesium impurities. It is commonly
performed by adding dichromate or permanganate salts to a solution. This type of reaction occurs at
the (*) anode of an electrochemical cell. For 10 points, name this reaction in which a substance loses
electrons, which is contrasted with reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation [do not accept or prompt on "oxidation-reduction" or "redox"]
Baeyer and Villiger discovered an organic reaction of this type that proceeds via the Criegee
intermediate to produce an ester from a ketone. An anti-Markovnikov reaction of this type was
developed by Herbert Brown and produces an alcohol. In addition to the hydroboration reaction of
this type, this term also names a "state" that indicates the hypothetical charge that an atom would
have if all bonds were fully ionic. This term names a (*) "number" designated by Roman numerals that
denotes the charge of the central atom of a coordination compound when all of its ligands are removed. For
10 points, name this term that names a type of reaction in which electrons are lost, the opposite of reduction
reactions.
ANSWER: oxidation [do not accept "redox"]
Baeyer and Villiger name one of these reactions, whose states name the two-dimensional version of a
Latimer Diagram, also named for Frost. That state often sees Lanthanide elements form triatomic ions. The
number associated with this process is usually constant for oxygen, except in peroxide. Disproportionation
involves one of these reactions and a reduction in the same reaction. FTP, name this type of reaction,
classified by the loss of an electron, a subset of redox reactions.
ANSWER: Oxidation (Prompt on Redox)
The key step in the Bessemer process is the removal of impurities from iron through this type of
reaction. Potassium permanganate and nitric acid usually catalyze this class of reaction. These reactions
occur at the anode of a galvanic cell. Hydrocarbons undergo the "complete" form of it in combustion
reactions, producing carbon dioxide. In this type of reaction, its namesake "state" increases as one species
loses electrons. For 10 points, name this type of reaction which occurs with a corresponding reduction in
redox reactions.
ANSWER: oxidation [prompt on "redox" or "reduction-oxidation" reactions before mention]
In organic chemistry, common reagents used in this kind of reaction include PCC and chromic acid, and
this type of reaction converts KA-oil into adipic acid. Two of this kind of reaction are used in the Ostwald
process for producing nitric acid from ammonia. In biochemistry, Vitamins C and E inhibit this kind of
reaction, which can be caused by free radicals. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in which a reactant
loses electrons, which is contrasted with reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation
One reaction of this type uses mCPBA, which converts ketones to esters; that reaction is named after
Baeyer and Villiger. This type of process removes silicon and carbon impurities from iron in the Bessemer
process. Manganate(VII) and hydrogen peroxide are examples of this process's namesake "agents," because
they accept electrons, causing this process to occur to another substance. Half-reactions describing this
process include electrons on the right-hand side. It is defined as the loss of electrons or an increase in its
namesake number. For 10 points, name this process paired with reduction in redox reactions.
ANSWER: oxidation [accept word forms; prompt on redox or reduction-oxidation reactions]
The alpha and beta types of this reaction take place in peroxisomes [pur-"OX"-ih-sohmz] and
remove a carboxyl [kahr-BAHK-sil] group from a fatty acid to form pristanic acid and then
acetyl-coA [uh-SEE-tul KOH-ay]. This type of reaction is used with the Bessemer process to
remove impurities. Persulfate is a good agent of this type of reaction, as are the halogens due to
their high electronegativity; such agents, as opposed to the reactants, are electron acceptors. In this
reaction, electrons are removed from an atom or molecule, often by adding this reaction's namesake
element. Name this reaction that often takes place at the same time as reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation [accept word forms; prompt on redox or oxidation-reduction; do not accept "reduction"]
Stock nomenclature is used to designate this value for the central atom of a complex. Latimer and
Frost-Ebsworth diagrams represent the potential difference between atoms with different values of
this number. Due to the presence of an oxygen-oxygen bond, this value is (*) negative one for oxygen
in hydrogen peroxide. When this number decreases for a species, reduction has occurred. For 10 points,
name this number that represents the number of electrons an atom gains or loses when forming a
chemical bond, which is useful when balancing redox reactions.
ANSWER: oxidation number [or oxidation state]
A reaction of this type is the second step of an anti-Markovnikov reaction developed by Herbert Brown
whose first step uses boron. The peroxy acid mCPBA is used in a reaction of this type that converts cyclic
ketones to lactones. Another reaction of this type uses the Jones reagent to convert primary alcohols to
carboxylic acids. In electrochemistry, this process occurs at the anode. Its namesake number is represented
in compounds by a Roman numeral, and is zero for atoms in their elemental form. The mnemonic "OIL
RIG" can be used to remember that this process results in the loss of electrons. For 10 points, name this
process, the opposite of reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation
One reaction of this type uses oxalyl chloride and DMSO, and another uses mCPBA to convert ketones to
esters. PCC is used in some reactions of this type, examples of which include the Swern and Baeyer-Villiger
reactions. This type of reaction cannot happen to a tertiary alcohol, but can convert a primary alcohol to an
aldehyde or a secondary alcohol to a ketone. Half-reactions describing this process include electrons on the
right-hand side. It is defined as the loss of electrons or an increase in its namesake state. For 10 points,
name this type of reaction often paired with a reduction reaction.
ANSWER: oxidation reaction [do not accept "redox reaction" or "oxidation-reduction reaction"]
One example of this type of reaction is the addition of chromium trioxide in acidic solution to an
aldehyde; that is the Jones variety. Addition of nitric acid to silver metal causes silver to undergo this
process, while nitric oxide is released. In combustion reactions, (*) alkanes undergo this process and are
converted into carbon dioxide. For 10 points, name this process involving a loss of electrons, often
compared to reduction when considering redox reactions.
ANSWER: oxidation
One variety of this reaction involves oxalyl chloride and dimethyl sulfoxide to produce a ketone or an
aldehyde. In addition to the Swern variety, another variety of this reaction converts ketones to esters by
using mCPBA, a process named for Baeyer and Villiger. Tertiary alcohols cannot experience this type of
reaction, but secondary alcohols can convert into ketones through this kind of reaction. The namesake state
of this reaction for an atom often corresponds to the ionic charge of that atom, and for a galvanic cell, this
reaction occurs at the anode. For 10 points, name this reaction often paired with reduction reactions.
ANSWER: Oxidation
A spectroscopic characterization of their products was formulated by Jorgensen and Wieghardt. A solution
of chromium trioxide in sulfuric acid and acetone is used in one of these reactions, and another one
produces quinones. Carboxylic acids or ketones are produced from alcohols in one of these reactions named
for Jones. Including one named for Baeyer and Villiger. These reactions occur at the anode in
electrochemical cells and are described by an increase in its namesake state. For 10 points, name these
reactions in which a reactant loses an electron, often occurring with reduction.
ANSWER: oxidation reactions [do not accept "redox reactions"]
A technique for inserting this element adjacent to carbonyl was developed by Baeyer and Villiger,
and it is half as prevalent as carbon in a family of compounds used for phase transfer catalysis called
crown ethers. This element's triplet ground state makes it highly (*) paramagnetic, and it is found along
with aluminum and hydrogen in the ore bauxite. A compound consisting of three atoms of this element
absorbs harmful UV rays in the upper atmosphere, and it reacts under heat with hydrocarbons in
combustion. Ozone is an allotrope of, for 10 points, what element with atomic number 8, the second-most
abundant in Earth's atmosphere?
ANSWER: Oxygen
This element is used in the final step of converting iron into steel, and this element is the most common in
the Earth's crust. This halogen's elemental form is necessary for combustion and is produced upon
electrolysis of water. Approximately 21% of the Earth's atmosphere is comprised of it gaseous diatomic
form, but this element also has a triatomic form called ozone. For 10 points, name the element with atomic
number 8 and chemical symbol O.
ANSWER: Oxygen
A quantity named "delta-18" this measures the ratio of two isotopes of it. Due to the development of bubble
overpotential, this substance, rather than chlorine, evolves at the anode in the electrolysis of a salt solution.
Its molecular variety usually exists in a triplet state which is paramagnetic. It may be converted into an
unusual two-atom reactive species with oxidation number minus one-half described by the term "super". A
triatomic allotrope of this element is depleted by stratospheric CFCs. For 10 points, name this strongly
electron-accepting element whose diatomic form is the second most common gas in the atmosphere, and
whose atomic number is 8.
ANSWER: oxygen [or dioxygen; or trioxygen; or O; or O2; or O3; accept superoxide; prompt on "ozone"]
This compound causes pyrogallol solution to turn colorless. Methods of measuring the amount of
this compound in solution include adding manganese sulfate and potassium iodide in the Winkler
test. Another method to measure its concentration uses a zirconia probe. Molecular orbital theory is
used to explain why its triplet form is paramagnetic, and its singlet form is very reactive. One
molecule of it is combined with sulfur dioxide in the first step of the (*) contact process, which
eventually produces sulfuric acid. Subjecting it to strong electric shocks transforms it into its triatomic
form, which is called ozone. For 10 points, name this diatomic gas, which comprises 21% of Earth's
atmosphere and is exchanged with CO2 in respiration.
ANSWER: Diatomic oxygen [or O2]
Due to an erroneous belief that this element was present in all acids, it was given a name meaning "sharp
producer." In an experiment that called this element "dephlogisticated air," the phlogiston theory of fire was
disproven when this element's role in combustion was deduced by Antoine Lavoisier (lahv-WAH-see-ey).
This element was discovered by Joseph Priestley. For ten points, name this gas whose role in cellular
respiration was explained by scientists such as Hans Adolf Krebs.
ANSWER: oxygen
Four atoms of this element are contained in the compound Yafet and Kittel first investigated spin canting in.
That compound was a spinel ferrite with A sites diluted by zinc, and all spinel unit formulas contain four
atoms of this element. This element contributes the most atoms to Moly Blue nanoclusters. A gas of this
element is produced by blowing air through zeolite sieves. The catalyst that is used to produce sulfuric acid
contains this element bound to vanadium(V). This element dissolves in all alkali metals. Molecular orbital
theory predicts that one compound composed of this element has two unpaired electrons and is therefore
paramagnetic. The strong oxidizing agent peracid always contains a group consisting of two atoms of this
element. For 10 points, name this second-most common element in the Earth's atmosphere.
ANSWER: oxygen
One method to determine the amount of this substance in aqueous solution is to disolve manganese,
iodine, and hydroxide, then add acid and titrate as the amount of analyte is directly proportional to
the concentration of this substance. The most common allotrope of this element has a long-lived
singlet excited state because spin, symmetry, and parity selection rules forbid the 1270 nm transition
to that alotrope's triplet ground state. The (*) second most common allotrope of this element can be
synthesized by electrolysis using a graphite cathode, platinum anode, and sulfuric acid electrolyte, but that
triatomic allotrope is more commonly made by passing direct current through the common diatomic
allotrope in the Cold Discharge method. That allotrope is mixed with this element's pale blue liquid form in
rocket fuels, and reacts with CFCs in the atmosphere to contribute to the Greenhouse effect. FTP, identify
this gaseous element, three atoms of which comprise a molecule of ozone, which along with nitrogen makes
up the majority of breathable air.
ANSWER: oxygen [accept O2 before "allotrope"]
Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions uses the question of when this element can be
said to have been "discovered" to illustrate the concept of the accumulation of anomalies. One person who
discovered this element, Carl Wilhelm Scheele, presumed that it could leech phlogiston out of a substance.
Its name is Greek for "acid-former," and was given by Antoine Lavoisier. It was called "dephlogisticated
air" by its third discoverer, Joseph Priestley. For 10 points, identify this element whose reactions with other
substances were discovered to be the source of combustion.
ANSWER: oxygen
The Dole Effect involves the occurrence of this element, which is tested for in the Winkler test.
James Dewar was the first to produce the liquid form of this element. When four of this element
bonds together, it is called (*) "red," and this gas is the only diatomic one to exhibit its own magnetic
moment. This third most abundant element in the universe is present in ozone. For 10 points, name this
chemical element directly above sulfur on the periodic table, with a chemical symbol O.
ANSWER: oxygen [or O until mentioned]
One atom of this element is found in a prototypic furan and an atom of this element forms the bridge in
an ether. The liquid form of one of its allotropes is paramagnetic. Reactive species of this element are
potent free radicals. It is found with silicon in quartz. Another allotrope of this element absorbs UV
radiation. It has atomic weight 16. Rust is a combination of iron and this. For 10 points, name this element
that along with hydrogen is found in water.
ANSWER: oxygen
One atom of this element is found in the ring of a furan, and an atom of it is bound to two carbons
in an epoxide. Reactive species of this element are due to unpaired electrons, making them radicals.
Three atoms of this element make up a compound that absorbs (*) ultraviolet light in the atmosphere.
Another form of this element is added to hydrocarbons in combustion reactions. For 10 points, name this
element, number eight on the periodic table, which has a diatomic form that is required for aerobic cellular
respiration.
ANSWER: oxygen [or O]
Molecular orbital theory explains how the naturally occurring form of this element contains a double
bond and is paramagnetic. This element was named dephlogisticated air when it was discovered by Joseph
Priestley. An ether contains an atom of this element bonded to two alkyl groups. This element has the
second highest electronegativity behind fluorine and reacts with a hydrocarbon in a typical combustion
reaction. For 10 points, name this element, three of which are bonded to nitrogen in a nitrate ion.
ANSWER: oxygen [or O]
This element is found with calcium and titanium in perovskite (puh-RAF-skite). The temperature of
ancient oceans can be determined by looking at the ratio of two isotopes of this element. Two atoms of
aluminum and three of this element are found in corundum. An allotrope of this element found in a
namesake layer in the upper atmosphere helps prevent ultraviolet light from reaching the Earth's surface.
For 10 points, name this element found with silicon in quartz, the most abundant element by mass in the
Earth's crust.
ANSWER: oxygen
Molecular orbital theory explains how this molecule's two unpaired antibonding electrons cause
it to be paramagnetic. Free radical forms of this molecule are usually called reactive [this molecule]
species. Banded iron formations are a consequence of the release of this molecule by cyanobacteria.
This is the heavier of two molecules produced in the electrolysis of (*) water. Ultraviolet radiation can
cause this molecule to combine with its monatomic form to create ozone. This is the second most abundant
gas in the atmosphere, after nitrogen. For 10 points, identify this molecule with formula O2.
ANSWER: diatomic oxygen gas [or molecular oxygen; or O2 until it is read]
One form of this element cleaves alkenes at their double bond. The active compound in photodynamic
therapy is this element's singlet state, while MO theory is needed to explain the (*) paramagnetism of
its more common triplet state. This element is given off upon heating of potassium chlorate, and its liquid
state is a translucent blue. This element is the most abundant in the Earth's crust, and it was discovered
independently by Carl Wilhelm Scheele and Joseph Priestley. Making up about a fifth of the Earth's
atmosphere, for 10 points, name this element necessary for respiration and combustion with atomic number
8.
ANSWER: oxygen
An ion of this element is converted to other forms by the SOD enzymes. Hydrogen bonds can form when
hydrogen bonds to nitrogen, fluorine, or this element. This element is the most abundant element in the
Earth's crust. The triatomic allotrope of this element absorbs ultraviolet rays in the stratosphere; that
allotrope is ozone. For 10 points, name this second-most abundant element in Earth's atmosphere behind
nitrogen, an element with atomic number 8 and atomic symbol O.
ANSWER: oxygen
This element combines with nitrogen and sulfur to form compounds largely responsible for acid rain. Four
of these atoms combine with chlorine to form the perchlorate ion. This element's triatomic version forms a
layer which protects the Earth from ultraviolet radiation and is known as ozone. Its diatomic form used in
respiration. For 10 points, name this element which combines with two hydrogen atoms to form water.
ANSWER: oxygen [or O]
In its excited form, this element yields the bright red and yellow-green colors of the aurora. Before being
replaced by carbon-12, its atomic weight was used as the standard of comparison. Antoine Lavoisier studied
reactions involving this element to develop the law of conservation of mass and found that its role was
opposite the one attributed to phlogiston [floh-JIS-tun]. Karl Scheele [SHAY-luh] first discovered it, but he
failed to publish, so its discovery is generally credited to Joseph Priestley. Name this most abundant
element in the earth's crust commonly used in combustion reactions, and which combines with hydrogen to
form water.
ANSWER: oxygen
It was recently shown that eight, and not four, atoms of it make up its solid "red" allotrope; that solid, and
this element's liquid form, are highly paramagnetic. The only non-carbon atom in the rings of furan, one
form of it absorbs ultraviolet light and is depleted by free radicals. This element is the primary nonmetallic
component of rust. For 10 points, name this element discovered by Priestley, whose triatomic form is called
ozone and which makes up 20% of the atmosphere.
ANSWER: oxygen [prompt "O"; do not prompt "O2" or "O3" or silly things like that]
Now considered the first person involved in this event, he described the combustion of saltpeter and
manganese dioxide in his work A Chemical Treatise of Air and Fire. In addition to Carl Wilhelm Scheele
another person involved in this event suggested using soda water, a process he initially described, as a cure
for scurvy, and as a result of this event the phlogiston theory was overturned. For 10 points, name this
event once credited to Joseph Priestly involving an element named by Lavoisier.
ANSWER: discovery of oxygen [accept clear-knowledge equivalents]
The location of the maximum amount of this compound is explained by the Umkehr effect. In a reaction that
follows the Criegee mechanism, this compound is used with dimethyl sulfide to cleave double bonds and
form carbonyl compounds. This compound is produced in a series of reactions named for Chapman, and the
amount of it is measured in Dobson units. This blue compound is produced during a thunderstorm, and it is
best known for absorbing ultraviolet rays in a namesake layer in the stratosphere. FTP name this triatomic
form of oxygen.
ANSWER: ozone
The addition of this compound to alkenes creates a Crigee intermediate that then resolves to two
carbonyls. This compound forms a dark blue liquid and possesses a foul odor. In contrast to the other
common allotrope of its constituent element, this substance is diamagnetic and contains one double
and one single bond. The (*) photochemical reactions of this compound with CFCs deplete it, diminishing
its ability to prevent harmful ultraviolet rays from reaching the lower atmosphere. For 10 points, name this
compound with formula O3.
ANSWER: ozone
Like hydrocarbons, this compound has unusually high concentration in photochemical smog in relation
to other kinds of smog. Although only about ten percent of the total amount of it in the atmosphere is in the
troposphere, it is nevertheless classified as a greenhouse gas. This molecule is broken down in a radical
reaction with CFCs. For 10 points, name this ultraviolet light-absorbing molecule whose namesake "layer"
now has a hole in it.
ANSWER: ozone [or O3]
The photochemical reaction that results in the production of this molecule in the atmosphere was
elucidated by Sidney Chapman. The concentration of this molecule is most commonly measured in Dobson
units. The Montreal Protocol banned certain substances that depleted this molecule in the atmosphere; those
substances were chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs. A layer in the stratosphere that contains a high
concentration of this molecule helps protect the Earth from ultraviolet radiation. For 10 points, identify this
molecule that consists of three oxygens.
ANSWER: ozone
This chemical ages rubber by creating radicals that destroy polyisoprene chains. It is often used instead of
chlorine to disinfect water, and this compound is continuously created through the Chapman cycle. The
reaction forming it can be reversed through the catalytic use of free radicals such as nitric oxide, and the
density of this compound can be measured using Dobson units. It is often found in the lower stratosphere,
where it acts to absorb ultraviolet light. For 10 points, name this gaseous allotrope of oxygen that forms a
namesake layer in the atmosphere.
ANSWER: Ozone [accept O3]
Old rubber tires often "crack" when exposed to this compound, whose concentration is reported in
Dobson units. The Chapman cycle describes the production and degradation of this compound, which at
low
temperatures forms a dark blue liquid. It takes its name from the Greek "to smell," and its odor can be
observed during lightning strikes. In the atmosphere, this compound is broken down by compounds called
chlorofluorocarbons (KLOR-oh-FLOOR-oh-CAR-buns). For 10 points, name this compound that forms a
namesake layer in the atmosphere that shields the Earth from ultraviolet light, with formula O3.
ANSWER: ozone [accept O3 before mentioned]
A heterocyclic intermediate formed from a reaction of this non-organic compound is often reductively
worked up with either zinc metal or dimethyl sulfide to form two carbonyls. Criegee's namesake
intermediate is often produced in that reaction named for this molecule, in which it cleaves alkenes or
alkynes to produce a double bond with oxygen. The Chapman cycle describes the breakdown and formation
of this compound. CFCs have caused depletion of this compound, which is formed when UV light
photolyzes the second-most common molecule in the atmosphere. For 10 points, identify this molecule
composed of three oxygen atoms, which is found in a namesake layer in the stratosphere.
ANSWER: ozone [accept O3]
Four atoms of this compound can react with 3 carbon subnitride atoms to form nitrogen gas, and it
can also be used to decompose urea and transform cyanides to cyanates. Natural and nitrile rubber
experience cracking when reacted with this compound, which can be created via the cold plasma
method. This compound is quantified in Dobson units when analyzed by spectrophotometry, and one
reaction that uses this compound passes through a pair of five-member ring intermediates in the Crigee
mechanism, and is used to cleave alkenes to carbonyls. Consisting of a bent molecular geometry with two
bonds of order 1.5, this compound is also produced via arc discharge and lightning. For 10 points, name this
compound present in a namesake layer of the earth's atmosphere, with formula O3.
ANSWER: Ozone
A Criegee intermediate is formed when this compound reacts in a 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition to cleave the
double bond in an alkene. Its concentration is sometimes measured in Dobson units. It oxidizes cyanide to
cyanate and is used instead of chlorine to disinfect water. A namesake cycle sees the recombination of this
compound catalyzed by free radicals such as those released by chlorofluorocarbons. Pale blue with a sharp
odor, it is present in the stratosphere where it absorbs UV rays. For 10 points, name this triatomic form of
oxygen found in a namesake layer in the atmosphere.
ANSWER: ozone or O3
The density of this molecule is measured using the Dobson unit, and this respiratory irritant can be
produced through the reaction of nitrogen oxides with air in the presence of sunlight. This molecule was the
subject of the 1987 Montreal Protocol. It prevents most ultraviolet radiation from reaching the Earth's
surface, but has been depleted by chloroflourocarbons, especially above Antarctica. For 10 points, name
this molecule consisting of three oxygen atoms, whose namesake "layer" of the stratosphere has a hole in it.
ANSWER: ozone [prompt on O3]
This compound's major industrial use is the oxidation of oleic acid into azelaic acid. It is generally
produced by the surface or silent discharge method, and the amount of this compound is usually
measured in Dobson units. Manifesting itself as a bluish gas, this compound is produced from electric
motors and lightning, and it reacts with atomic chlorine to form a chlorine monoxide radical and
diatomic oxygen. For 10 points, name this allotrope of three oxygen atoms found in a namesake layer
of the stratosphere.
ANSWER: ozone [accept O3 until "three oxygen"]
This compound can interact with alkenes in a 1,3 cycloaddition that results in their cleavage and
formation of carbonyl [kar-buh-NEEL] compounds. That reaction with this compound was used to
determine that rubber is made of units of isoprene ["EYE"-soh-preen], as this compound tends to form
cracks in rubber. The concentration of this compound is measured in Dobson units, and it can be
broken up by radicals formed from UV light's interaction with CFCs. The stratosphere contains a
region containing this compound that has a particularly large hole over Antarctica. Identify this
compound whose namesake layer helps block UV light, and which is made up of three oxygen atoms.
ANSWER: ozone [accept O3]
Adding this compound to untreated water can lead to formation of dibromoacetonitrile
(die-broh-moh-uh-see-toh-NIGH-try-ihl) during purification processes. This product is produced and
consumed in a set of four reactions known as the Chapman mechanism. This compound is the primary
component in photochemical smog. Its distinctive odor, often perceived following electrical sparks, is
actually due to reactive nitrogen species. In a reaction discovered by Sherwood Rowland and Mario
Molina, this compound is consumed in a free radical reaction with chlorofluorocarbons. For 10 points,
name this molecule with formula O3.
ANSWER: ozone [or O3 before read]
This compound can be used to remove manganese ions from water and detoxify cyanide compounds, and
this compound can completely decompose urea. Trace amounts of this compound will attack certain
elastomers, causing its namesake "cracking," and that reaction was first proposed by Rudolf Criegee where
this compound cleaves an alkene or alkyne. Its concentration in the atmosphere is measured in Dobson
units. Compounds like chlorofluorocarbons can deplete this compound in the atmosphere, causing
namesake "holes." For 10 points, identify this three-oxygen molecule whose best-known role is converting
atmospheric ultraviolet radiation into heat, effectively blocking it.
ANSWER: ozone (accept O3 or trioxygen until "three-oxygen")
The Griesenbaum reaction involves pentane and this compound that was first proposed as a distinct
chemical compound by Christian Schonbein. It attacks the double bond in many elastomers to cause
cracking in rubber material such as O-rings. Dobson units can be used to measure this compound that is
formed during the Catatumbo lightning storm phenomenon. Blocking ultraviolet rays and turning them into
heat energy in the Earth's stratosphere is the most important function of, for 10 points, what pale blue gas
with formula O3?
ANSWER: Ozone
The concentration of this compound can be estimated using the Umkehr effect. Reactions that consume this
compound were investigated by Nicolet and by Criegee, who lends his name to a mechanism involving a
1,3-dipolar cycloaddition. Rowland, Molina, and Crutzen found that nitrogen oxides and chlorine radicals
catalyze its decomposition, while this compound cleaves carbon-carbon triple bonds to give acid anhydrides
and carbon-carbon double bonds to give carbonyl-containing compounds. For 10 points, name this
compound whose breakdown is enhanced by the presence of CFC's in the stratosphere, and which is an
allotrope of oxygen.
ANSWER: ozone or O
3
This compound is produced in the Chapman cycle. One process sees this compound bubbled through an
alkene or alkyne in a methanol solution at negative seventy-eight degrees Celsius until the multiple carboncarbon bond is broken. This compound is measured in Dobson units, and it is often used instead of chlorine
in order to treat drinking water. This molecule is often broken down as a result of the formation of
hypochlorite after reacting with a chlorine atom once formerly bonded to a carbon and a fluorine atom. For
10 points, name this compound made up of three oxygen atoms which forms a namesake "layer" that
protects Earth from ultraviolet radiation.
ANSWER: ozone [prompt on "O3"]
The reaction that breaks down this compound is catalyzed by certain free radicals like elemental
chlorine. Measurements for this entity can range from one hundred to three hundred Dobson units.
Compounds known as chlorofluorocarbons (clor-oh-FLOR-oh-car-bons), or CFC's, were banned because of
their role in breaking down this compound. This molecule is an allotrope consisting of three oxygen atoms.
For 10 points, name this pale blue gas that absorbs solar ultraviolet radiation by forming a namesake layer
in the atmosphere.
ANSWER: ozone [accept O3 before oxygen is mentioned]
Old rubber tires often "crack" when exposed to this compound, whose concentration is reported in
Dobson units. The Chapman cycle describes the production and degradation of this compound, which at
low temperatures forms a dark blue liquid. It takes its name from the Greek "to smell," and its odor can be
observed during lightning strikes. In the atmosphere, this compound is broken down by compounds called
chlorofluorocarbons (KLOR-oh-FLOOR-oh-CAR-buns). For 10 points, name this compound that forms a
namesake layer in the atmosphere that shields the Earth from ultraviolet light, with formula O3.
ANSWER: ozone [accept O3 before mentioned]
This molecule facilitates the Griesbaum reaction and cleaves an alkene to forms an aldehyde or a ketone in
a 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition, the Criegee mechanism. In the Chapman Cycle, this diamagnetic compound
with a bent geometry is replenished by a paramagnetic, diatomic molecule. In that reaction, this molecule is
formed by the absorption of a photon with a wavelength of less than 280 nanometers. It can be depleted by
chlorofluorocarbons, making the Earth more susceptible to ultraviolet radiation. For 10 points, name this
molecule found in a namesake atmospheric "layer", a triatomic allotrope of oxygen.
ANSWER: ozone [or O3]
This compound is the primary component of the Griesbaum reaction. The Criegee Mechanism refers to
the method by which this compound splits alkenes. It is one end of the Chapman cycle and it is diamagnetic
in contrast to a similar paramagnetic compound that is the other end of the cycle. It is destroyed by hydroxy
radicals. It can form in mixtures of oxygen gas and nitrous oxide. In the atmosphere, it helps screen out
ultraviolet light. For 10 points, name this compound with formula O3.
ANSWER: ozone
This compound's absorption coefficients were developed by Bass and Paur, and this compound attacks
elastomers in a reaction that causes cracking. One reaction of this compound is a 1,3-cycloaddition with
alkenes that proceeds via an intermediate named for Criegee. This compound cleaves alkenes in that
reaction, and Sydney Chapman is known for his work on this compound, whose density is reported in
Dobson units. This compound is formed when nitrogen dioxide is cleaved to form nitric oxide, and it is also
formed by ultraviolet radiation during a process in which it converts radiation to heat in the stratosphere.
For 10 points, name this pale blue gas depleted by chlorofluorocarbons, a triatomic allotrope of oxygen.
ANSWER: ozone [accept O3 before "triatomic"]
In the Criegee mechanism, this compound reacts through a 1,3-dipolar cyclo-addition to cleave double
bonds in alkenes. Sydney Chapman discovered the process by which this continuously regenerates.
Discovered by Christian Friedrich Schonbein in 1840, it gives a thunderstorm its distinctive smell. It
converts electromagnetic radiation into heat energy in a reaction catalyzed by hydroxyl and
chlorofluorocarbons. At ground level, it is a pollutant and respiratory irritant, but it occurs in high
concentrations in the stratosphere, where it absorbs UV rays. For 10 points, name this triatomic form of
oxygen, which has a namesake "layer" in the atmosphere.
ANSWER: ozone (prompt on O3 until "triatomic" is read)
This compound participates in the Griesenbaum reaction along with pentane, which results in a tetrasubstitution in a five member ring. Indigo trisulfonate can be used to quantitatively assess the presence of
this compound in water. It participates in a reaction that follows the Criegee mechanism, and is a 1,3 dipolar
cycloaddition reaction occurring in the presence of dichloromethane that creates ketones or aldehydes from
alkenes. Having a blue color, it is formed during lightning, while its name comes from its foul smell and
halocarbons are able to catalyze the degradation of this compound in the atmosphere. For 10 points, identify
this allotrope of oxygen with three atoms.
ANSWER: ozone [accept: O3]
This layer in the atmosphere was the concern of the 1978 Montreal Protocol, and it was discovered by
Sidney Chapman. The thickness of this layer is measured by Dobson units. Twenty-two years after the ban
on CFCs in the Montreal Protocol, the Antarctic hole in this layer is finally recovering. For 10 points, name
this layer in the atmosphere that has a high concentration of triatomic oxygen and which absorbs nearly all
the Sun's ultraviolet radiation.
ANSWER: ozone layer
The atomic subshell denoted by this letter can contain up to six electrons and has three orbitals at each
energy level. This letter names a dumbbell-shaped orbital with an azimuthal quantum number of 1 that, by
the Aufbau principle, begins to fill with electrons after the 2s orbital is full. This letter also stands for the
atomic symbol of an element whose white variety is highly flammable when exposed to air. For 10 points,
give this letter used as the symbol for phosphorus.
ANSWER: P [or p orbital]
They are refracted slightly as they pass the boundary between the mantle and the liquid outer core. These
longitudinal waves can travel through gases, liquids, and solids. They can provide an early warning for
deep, distant earthquakes, arriving up to a minute before other destructive waves. FTP, name these seismic
waves that travel faster than S-waves.
ANSWER: P-waves (primary waves)
The only example of one of these types of orbitals being filled in violation of Madelung's rule is in
lawrencium. Examples of these orbitals are generally expressed using a single subscript of x, y, or z,
and these have no density at points where the variable matching its subscript equals zero. Pictures
of this tend to look like two balloons being pushed together. This orbital corresponds to a value of
one for the angular momentum quantum number. Name this orbital type containing three pairs of
electrons at each principal quantum level after the first, a dumbbell-shaped orbital contrasted with s,
d, and f orbitals.
ANSWER: p orbital(s)
The inert pair effect is caused by the relative weakness of electrons in orbitals denoted by this letter.
Electrons in orbitals denoted by this letter have an angular quantum number of one, and aromatic
compounds are required to have an (*) unhybridized one of these orbitals. Overlap of these orbitals can
produce either sigma or pi bonds, and three of these orbitals hybridize with one s orbital in the carbon atom
in methane. Boron is the first element to require an electron in one of these orbitals. For 10 points, name
this orbital that is oriented along either the x, y, or z axis and whose subshell therefore carries six electrons.
ANSWER: p orbital
These constructs have n minus 2 radial nodes and one angular node. These constructs have an
angular momentum quantum number of one and a minimal principal quantum number of two. Two
of these overlap in order to form a pi bond. For a given energy level, there exist (*) three of these,
which are mutually perpendicular and have a dumbbell shape. For 10 points, name these atomic orbitals
that can hold 6 electrons and are typically filled after s orbitals.
ANSWER: p orbital
In the presence of a magnetic field, the energy separation between the most and least stable of these
orbitals is two times the field magnitude in units of Bohr magnetons. Electrons delocalizing from these
orbitals leads to resonance and aromaticity. Elements with this subshell partially filled include halogens,
which have five electrons in it. Overlaps between examples of these orbitals, when left unhybridized, lead to
pi bonds. For 10 points, give the letter that denotes the three orbitals that make up a namesake subshell that
is filled following the 2s (two "s") subshell.
ANSWER: p orbital
In the split method for studying these entities, the wave function remains continuous, but a discontinuity in
the gradient split function arises in the nodal plane. In Diels-Alder reactions, it is the overlap of these that
drives bond formation, and, for increasing energy, they first appear in the L-region. They interact in
conjugated systems in dienes or allyl radicals, where just a single electron is present in one of these objects,
which has azimuthal quantum number one. For 10 points, name this dumbbell-shaped region of an atom
involved in pi bonds, which is filled after the s orbital.
ANSWER: p orbital
Bent's rule states that atomic orbitals directed towards electronegative groups have this character, and
part of the derivation of the Lamb shift relies on the fact that the nonrelativistic wave function for these
entities vanishes at the origin. In crystal field theory, a group of them is labeled t sub 1u. These entities
generally have n minus 2 radial nodes, and the magnetic quantum numbers of these entities vary from
negative 1 to 1. They overlap perpendicularly to form pi bonds. They are shaped like dumbbells and are
mutually perpendicular to each other, intersecting at the origin. They hold 6 electrons. For 10 points, name
this electronic orbitals that are larger than s and smaller than d orbitals.
ANSWER: p orbitals
The band structure of graphene originates from the dispersion of these constructs across the
honeycomb structure, and these entities have angular momentum of h-bar. The angular
wavefunction of these entities is quantity 3 divided by four pi to the one-half power, and they contain
n minus 2 radial nodes and a single angular node. Carbenes have an empty one, a series of
overlapping ones is responsible for the delocalization in both conjugated and aromatic systems. Their
azimuthal quantum number is equal to 1, and for each principal quantum number there exist three mutually
perpendicular ones of these. They overlap to form pi bonds, look like dumbbells with no density at the
origin, they can hold 6 total electrons. For 10 points, name these atomic orbitals that are more energetic
than s orbitals and less energetic than d orbitals.
ANSWER: p orbital (prompt on orbitals, atomic orbitals, molecular orbitals, etc)
These things can be partially described by spherical harmonics with L-index 1. They have a single nodal
plane and are bilobate. In an aufbau table, one of these things is the third thing that is added-to. In
hydrogen, electronic transitions down to them lie in the visible range and are named for Balmer. In
methane, these orbitals on the carbon atom are given the exponent "3" when hybridized to form a
tetrahedral geometry. Their name is the same as the symbol for a nonmetallic element that has red and white
allotropes and is used in matches. For 10 points, name these things that are higher in energy than s orbitals
and share a name with the chemical symbol for phosphorus.
ANSWER: p orbitals [prompt on "phosphorus" before it is read]
This body of water contains an entity known as the "black stream," and the Andesite line delineates between
andesitic and mafic rocks in it. The Louisville hotspot lies underneath it, and the Humboldt current here
sees high primary productivity due to upwelling. The Kuroshio current lies in this entity whose changing
location relative to a hotspot created the Emperor seamount chain. Weakened trade winds over this entity
cause its eastern portion to heat up and upwelling to stop, disrupting fisheries, in one phase of the El Nino
Southern Oscillation. For 10 points, name this ocean containing the California and Alaska Currents, the
largest ocean on Earth.
ANSWER: Pacific Ocean
A catalyst with this element and four chlorine atoms catalyzes the oxidation of ethylene in the Wacker
process. This element is used in the catalyst in a reaction of aryl boronic acid and aryl halides called the
Suzuki coupling. Another coupling reaction involving aryl halides and a catalyst of this element is the Heck
reaction. Lead acetate and quinoline are used to poison a catalyst of this element used to hydrogenate
alkynes. That catalyst is named for Lindlar. This metal can store large amounts of hydrogen, and like
platinum, which is in the same group, it is used in catalytic converters. For 10 points, name this group ten
element named indirectly after Athena, with symbol Pd.
ANSWER: palladium
The Stille reaction uses this element as a catalyst. In 2001, Ford suffered a $1-billion loss when it
stockpiled this element and then developed a way to substitute for it; this metal's price thus fell
approximately 75%. Minted in four Canadian $50 coins showing Ursa Major and Ursa Minor, this
transition metal has a "black" variety useful in hydrogenation. This platinum-group metal used in
dentistry and jewellery is able to help formation of carbon-fluorine and carbon-nitrogen bonds, but is
mainly used in catalytic converters. For ten points, name this element catalyzing the Suzuki and Heck
reactions, which is element 46 and has symbol Pd.
ANSWER: Palladium [or Pd before mentioned]
Evidence for this entity includes Cynognathus, Glossopteris, and Lystrosaurus fossils, and the closing of
the Rheic and Khanty seas during the Alleghenian and Uralic orogenies precipitated its formation. It
followed Rodinia and Columbia, and was formed from Avalonia, Baltica, Laurentia, and Cimmeria.
Surrounded by Panthalassa and containing the Tethys Ocean, its existence was first proposed by Alfred
Wegener to support his theory of continental drift. Its breakup occurred 200 million years ago, when
Laurasia split from Gondwana. For 10 points, name this supercontinent whose name is Greek for "all
Earth."
ANSWER: Pangaea
The field of chemistry that studies modern approaches to the manufacture of this material is called "wetend" chemistry. The "elemental chlorine free" variety of this material is manufactured using chlorine
dioxide in place of dichlorine as a bleaching agent. When using a device named for Buchner to trap filtrates,
it is typically moistened and placed in the base of that funnel. One variety of this material is impregnated
with a mixture of lichen-derived dyes, turns blue in the presence of base and is called litmus. For 10 points,
name this thin material produced from wood pulp which can be used for chromatography, and on which one
might record one's lab observations.
ANSWER: paper [accept filter paper; accept litmus paper]
For a Fock state, this quantity is well defined. This expected value of this quantity is given by the
degeneracy of the corresponding energy level over the exponential function applied to the difference
of energy and chemical potential over Boltzmann's constant times temperature, according to the
Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics. In the canonical ensemble, temperature, volume and this quantity are
held constant. A slight change in Gibbs free energy over a slight change in this quantity yields the (*)
chemical potential. It can be calculated by multiplying the number of moles by Avogadro's number. For 10
points, name this thermodynamic quantity, a dimensionless extensive quantity usually symbolized big N.
ANSWER: particle number [accept number of particles and synonymous answers; do not accept or prompt on "number of moles"]
For Bose-Einstein condensates, this value is proportional to fugacity over quantity 1 minus fugacity. In
general, its expectation value is the negative of fugacity times change in the grand potential over fugacity.
The operator corresponding to this quantity is the product of the creation and annihilation operators.
Allowing this value to be variable generalizes the Boltzmann distribution to the Gibbs distribution. This
quantity is conjugate to the chemical potential. By subtracting b times this value from volume, the van der
Waals equation corrects the ideal gas law, which states it as equal to P times V over quantity k times T. For
10 points, name this property of a system often symbolized N, equal to Avogadro's number times the
number of moles.
ANSWER: particle number [or obvious equivalents; prompt on N; accept number of moles due to the van der Waals clue]
For a photon gas, this quantity is proportional to volume times temperature to the third power times
the zeta function of 3, and unlike for an ideal gas this quantity is not conserved. Fock states are
defined by a constant value for this quantity, and for a given state the operator for this quantity is
equal to the product of the creation and annihilation operator for that state. This dimensionless
quantity is conjugate to the (*) chemical potential, and the chemical potential is equal to the derivative of
free energy with respect to this parameter; in other words, the chemical potential is the change in energy
when this quantity is increased by one. For 10 points, name this quantity, which for one mole of substance is
equal to Avogadro's number.
ANSWER: particle number [accept any answer along the lines of "number of particles" or "number of atoms" or "number of molecules"]
The expected value of a system's energy is minus the beta derivative of the log of this quantity. The
Helmholtz free energy is minus Boltzmann's constant times temperature times the log of this
quantity, and its log is not analytic near phase transitions. A quantum form of this quantity, which
normalizes probabilities over state space, is equal to the exponential of minus beta times the Hamiltonian.
The canonical one is equal to e to the minus energy over the sum of Boltzmann factors over all microstates,
and describes the properties of a system that can exchange only heat with its environment. For 10 points,
name this quantity, often symbolized Z.
ANSWER: partition function
The resolution to the Gibbs mixing paradox involves noting that this quantity must be divided by the
factorial of the number of particles. The Helmholtz free energy is proportional to the product of the
temperature with the log of this quantity, and the derivative of this quantity with respect to the
thermodynamic beta gives the mean internal energy. In the canonical ensemble, this quantity is defined as
the sum over all the states of the Boltzmann factors of a physical system. For 10 points, identify this
quantity, symbolized Z, which represents the energy distribution of a thermodynamic system at equilibrium.
ANSWER: partition function
This scientist names a rule that describes the structure of ionic crystals and, by revising his notion
that phosphate backbones were neutral, he developed a theory of alpha helices. Delocalization is now
favored over his (*) resonance theory, but he also names a scale for electronegativity, discovered the cause
of sickle cell disease, and introduced orbital hybridization. For 10 points, name this American author of The
Nature of the Chemical Bond who won Nobel Prizes in both Chemistry and Peace.
ANSWER: Linus Pauling
This man developed a spheron cluster model for the structure of the nucleus. This man's second rule, the
electrostatic valence rule, appears in his rules determining the structure of complex ionic crystals; he also
names a set of rules to determine the strength of oxoacids. He provided enormous insight into quantum
chemistry in his influential textbook The Nature of the Chemical Bond, which also explained the nature of
orbital hybridization. His proposal for the nature of DNA was a triple helix, and late in life he advocated for
administering megadoses of Vitamin C to cure illness. Name this man, whose namesake electronegativity
scale assigns fluorine a value of four.
ANSWER: Linus Pauling
With Wolter Kotuna and Robert Corey, this man names a color scheme often used for ball-and-stick
chemical models. He theorized that amino acids link to make proteins and was the first to describe
the alpha helix, though he incorrectly predicted DNA to be a (*) triple helix. This scientist formulated a
model of chemical bonds in which methane consists of four equal orbitals termed sp3; that concept is orbital
hybridization. This man proposed that ionic bonds and covalent bonds are two ends of a spectrum, leading
to him giving fluorine a value of 3.98 for a certain property. For 10 points, identify this scientist who
created a scale of electronegativity.
ANSWER: Linus Pauling
Along with Max Delbruck, this scientist was one of the first to propose that DNA replication is likely
connected with base complementarity. In addition, five rules for predicting the crystal structures of complex
ionic crystals are named for him. He proposed a three-strand structure of DNA, where one strand binds to a
B-form double helix through Hoogsteen or reversed Hoogsteen pairing. This famous scientist analyzed the
tetravalent nature of the carbon atom and developed a well-known model that attempts to explain its
bonding; this model is called hybridization. For 10 points, name the scientist who lends his name to a wellknown electronegativity scale on which fluorine is given a 4.0.
ANSWER: Linus (Carl) Pauling
One of this person's rules states that the number of different kinds of constituents in a crystal tends to be
small. Also known as the rule of parsimony, that is the last of his five rules on ionic crystals. He worked
with Robert Corey and Herman Branson on the structure of DNA molecules, mistakenly proposing a triple
helix structure. He also devised a since-revised commonly used scale that uses dissociation energies to
measure electronegativity. Name this scientist whose Nobel Prizes, won for his work with chemical bonds
and for opposing nuclear weapons testing, were in Chemistry and Peace.
ANSWER: Linus Pauling
This scientist proposed the concept of twinning to explain quasicrystal formation. With Samuel Goudsmit,
this man wrote The Structure of Line Spectra, and by electrophoresis he determined that a change of one
amino acid in hemoglobin causes sickle-cell disease. The electrostatic valence rule is considered the second
of this man's five rules about crystal structures, and he assumed that peptide bonds are planar to predict the
alpha-helix secondary structure of proteins. Name this man who developed the first scale of
electronegativity and received Nobel Prizes in both Chemistry and Peace.
ANSWER: Linus (Carl) Pauling
This scientist was the first to propose that enzymes help to stabilize the transition state of reactions. This
creator of an incorrect triple-helix model of DNA determined that alpha helices and beta sheets compose the
secondary structure of proteins. He was the first to propose the concepts of resonance and orbital
hybridization. This scientist also created a scale ranging from 0.7 to 4 to measure electronegativity. For 10
points, name this scientist who advocated high intakes of Vitamin C, the winner of Nobels in both
Chemistry and Peace.
ANSWER: Linus [Carl] Pauling
This scientist proposed that enzymes stabilize the transition state complex. While sick and in bed,
this man worked out the existence of alpha helices. This man's namesake rules describe the structure
of ionic crystalsm and he proposed the concept of (*) resonance in molecules. Along with three
colleagues, he discovered that sickle cell anemia was caused by altered hemoglobin. This advocate of
Vitamin C megadoses also proposed the idea of hybrid orbitals. For 10 points, name this only winner of
both
the Chemistry and Peace Nobels.
ANSWER: Linus Carl Pauling
A Ramachandran plot can be constructed by extending a set of rules, developed by this scientist and
Corey, which deals with the conformation and configuration of the polypeptide backbone. This scientist
demonstrated that a defect in hemoglobin was the cause of sickle cell anemia, and he was the first to
propose the concept of orbital hybridization. For 10 points, name this scientist who recommended a
high intake of Vitamin C, and won Nobel Prizes in both Chemistry and Peace.
ANSWER: Linus Pauling
This man names five rules for determining the structure of complex ionic crystals. He mistakenly assumed
that phosphate groups are neutral in his theory that DNA has a triple-helical structure. With Corey and
Branson, this man proposed that alpha helices and beta sheets make up the secondary structure of proteins.
This scientist created a scale that ranges from zero point seven to four to measure electronegativity, a
concept he created. For 10 points, name this author of The Nature of the Chemical Bond, an American
chemist who won Nobels in both Chemistry and Peace.
ANSWER: Linus Carl Pauling
One statement named for this man indicates that the sharing of edges and faces in anion polyhedra
decreases stability in an ionic structure. He published an erroneous three helix structure of DNA and helped
elucidate the structure of the alpha helix. This man developed a formula for a certain physical quantity
which accounts for valence bond theory and dissociation energies; hydrogen has a value of 2.20 on that
scale. He proposed that defects in hemoglobin cause sickle cell anemia. For 10 points, name this man who
developed a scale for electronegativity and won Nobels in Chemistry and Peace.
ANSWER: Linus Pauling
This scientist devised five rules for determining the structure of complex ionic crystals, and he incorrectly
proposed a triple helix for the structure of DNA. This chemist developed the idea of orbital hybridization as
part of his efforts to explain the nature of the chemical bond. This scientist proposed megadoses of vitamin
C as a cure for colds and cancer. Fluorine has the highest value at 3.98 on this scientist's namesake scale for
electronegativity, a concept he developed. For 10 points, name this American chemist who won Nobel
Prizes in both chemistry and peace.
ANSWER: Linus Pauling
This man was the first author on a 1949 paper that laid out the molecular basis for sickle cell anemia.
Valence bond theory depends on two concepts defined by this scientist: resonance and orbital
hybridization. This man forgot that phosphate groups were negatively charged in his triple helix model of
DNA. He also advocated fighting colds with mass doses of vitamin C. For 10 points, name this man who
won a Chemistry Nobel Prize for describing chemical bonding, and also won in Peace.
ANSWER: Linus Pauling
These structures form a bridge between the molecules present at P sites and A sites, while their phi and psi
angles can be visualized on a Ramachandran plot. They are usually found in the trans conformation, and
their resonance stabilization makes them fairly unreactive. They are structurally classified as amides, as they
are formed from the dehydration of a carboxylic acid and an amine group. Formed during the elongation
stage of translation, for 10 points, identify these bonds that link amino acids together.
ANSWER: peptide bonds
An early form of this idea was expanded by the German epidemiologist Max von Pettenkofer and
introduced by Johann Dobereiner, while John Newlands compared it to a musical scale in his
development of laws regarding it; those were the law of triads and the law of octaves. Glenn (*)
Seaborg made the last major modification to this object, and either Lothar Meyer or Dmitri Mendeleev
is credited with introducing its modern form. For 10 points, name this ubiquitous figure that gives the
atomic weight, number, and symbol for every element.
ANSWER: periodic table of the elements
Lothar Meyer used volumes in order to formulate a version of this entity. The Law of Triads and the Law of
Octaves were used to create precursors of this tool by Johann Dobereiner and John Newlands, respectively.
Henry Moseley used X-ray spectral lines to revise this entity. The first modern version of this diagram
grouped the known elements into rows and columns based upon their attributes, and was published by
Dmitri Mendeleev. For 10 points, name the chemist's best friend that has all the known elements in
numerical order.
ANSWER: periodic table
The first known example of this construct was the "telluric helix," a creation of A.E.B. de Chancourtois
that expanded on Dobereiner's law of triads. John Newlands, the developer of the Law of Octaves, also
created an early version of this tool. Another developer of it used it to predict the existence of eka-silicon.
Henry Moseley proposed rearranging the components of this diagram by atomic number. For 10 points,
name this diagram of the elements developed by Dmitri Mendeleev.
ANSWER: periodic table of elements
An early version of this diagram was called the telluric helix. Henry Moseley explained an apparent
abnormality of placement on this diagram. The Law of Triads and the Law of Octaves were used to create
this diagram, an early version of which used the Sanskrit word "eka," meaning "beyond," to represent items
not yet discovered. Dmitri Mendeleev (men-duh-LAY-yev) is credited with inventing it. For 10 points,
name this diagram which displays cobalt and nickel.
ANSWER: the Periodic Table of Elements
The first of these devices was probably constructed by the French geologist De Chancourtois. After
constructing his own, John Newlands developed the Law of Octaves. Lothar Meyer's was not published
until four years after he constructed it. Glenn Seaborg changed the standard one by placing the actinide
series below the lanthanides. For ten points, Dmitri Mendeleev predicted the properties of germanium using
what device that represents the elements in tabular form?
ANSWER: periodic table of the elements
Yedoma is a variety of these formations with a high proportion of trapped greenhouse gases.
These landforms are characterized by patterned ground. They are classified by the USGS as gelisols
and may be interrupted by taliks. Degradation of these formations can lead to thermokarst processes
and "drunken forests" due to subsidence. They are overlain by an active layer which is the only
portion of the (*) soil horizon able to support plant life, due to seasonal thawing. For 10 points, give this
name for continually frozen soil.
ANSWER: permafrost
The terpene ascaridole unusually contains this functional group, and a base-catalyzed breakdown of
this functional group into carbonyl compounds is the Kornblum-Delamare fragmentation. The
TBARS assay is used to measure lipids with this functional group, and fatty acid radicals tend to add
on this functional group. A version of this functional group combined with a carbonyl is found in mCPBA, which is a catalyst in epoxidation reactions. A horseradish enzyme that breaks apart this
functional group is used to visualize Western Blots. The central bond of this functional group is easy
homoloytically cleaved, giving rise to reactive oxygen species and free radicals. For 10 points, name this
functional group containing an oxygen-oxygen single bond, which is found in bleach.
ANSWER: Peroxide
Reagents containing this group are used to turn alkenes into epoxides, which are used as adhesives. Because
compounds with this group generally are explosive, manufacturers try to limit its concentration, but it
naturally arises from isopropyl ether, 2-propanol and other compounds. The most common example of this
group is in an inorganic molecule which together with iron is known as Fenton's reagent. That molecule,
which places hydrogen atoms at both ends of this group, is a bleach commonly used to color hair. Name this
group consisting of two oxygen atoms with a single bond.
ANSWER: peroxide (prompt on "O2")
MEKP, one of these, is a common catalyst for some polymerizations, and the combustion of sodium
forms another one. Beta amyloid catalyzes their decomposition when bound to heme. Acids related to
these compounds, such as MCPBA, commonly react through a butterfly mechanism to form epoxides.
Isopropyl ether, in storage for a few months, will form dangerous levels of them. For 10 points, identify
these compounds, which contain two oxygen atoms with formal charge of -1.
ANSWER: peroxides
The amount of this substance in a given deposit is quantified by STOIIP. Benthic foraminiferan fossils can
be used to date deposits of this substance. Kerogen is a precursor to it. In general, it is found within some
kind of trap, often structural, like an anticline or a salt dome. When this substance is low in sulfur, it is
described as "sweet". Refining it typically involves cracking. One technique for extracting this substance
from low-porosity rocks is to induce a fracture using a proppant and then deploy a horizontal wellbore to
extract it. That technique is hydrofracking. Bitumen is a type of it that can be extracted from namesake
sands. For 10 points, name this liquid fossil fuel.
ANSWER: petroleum [or crude oil; generously accept natural gas]
Gas chromatography of this substance results in an "unresolved complex mixture" hump at high
retention times. Its density is measured in terms of API gravity rather than specific gravity.
Asphaltenes are found in this substance. Though it lacks oxygen, a group of nonspecific nonpolar
solvents are named for this substance's "ether". This substance is called (*) "sweet" when it has a low
concentration of sulfur. Zeolites catalytically break down this substance into small paraffins during
cracking. Fractional distillation of this material is used to separate kerosene from smaller alkanes and
alkenes. For 10 points, name this substance formed from fossilized organic matter, a fossil fuel refined into
gasoline.
ANSWER: petroleum [or crude oil; prompt on oil]
This quantity can be measured with a Harned cell, and when it becomes very low, the Hammett function is
often used instead. It is graphed against voltage potential in a Pourbaix diagram. Defined in terms of
activity, this quantity is given in terms of pKa by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. Commonly measured
using substances such as methyl orange and bromothymol blue, this quantity is found by taking the negative
log of the concentration of hydrogen ions. It is held relatively constant in buffered solutions. For 10 points,
name this measure of acidity, which is 7 for pure water.
ANSWER: pH
One equation named after Hammett can calculate an alternative to this quantity if the Henderson-Hasselbalch 
equation does not apply, and changes in this quantity resulting from temperature can be modeled 
using the Nernst equation. Ion-selective electrodes are used to measure it. Ketosis can lead to
rapid drops of this quantity in the blood, in which this has a value of about 7.2. This quantity can be
obtained by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of hydronium ion concentration. For 10 points,
identify this chemical quantity that measures how acidic or basic a solution is and is equal to 7 for water.
ANSWER: pH
The standardized method of measuring this quantity is the Harned cell. One instrument used to
measure this contains an internal electrode, a reference electrode, and an ion-selective glass tip. For
antimonial compounds, the Hammett function is often used instead of this quantity. Compounds like
Tris, MOPS, and HEPES are designed to keep this quantity constant. Popular methods of noting
changes in this quantity involve adding (*) methyl red and bromophenol blue. A sudden jump in this
quantity occurs around the equivalence point of a standard titration, and indicators like phenolphthalein
show changes in it by changing color. It is found by taking the negative logarithm of the concentration of
hydrogen ions. For 10 points, name this measure of acidity.
ANSWER: pH [prompt on "acidity" or "basicity"; accept pOH until "hydrogen"]
The log of free metal ion concentration in soil increases linearly with an increase in this property. Potential
energy is plotted against this property in a diagram that shows regions of passivity and immunity, the
Pourbaix diagram. An "optimum" of this property is the range over which an enzyme displays maximum
catalytic activity. This property is equal to the negative log of the acid dissociation constant, minus the log
of the quotient of the concentration of the weak acid and that of its conjugate base, by the Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation. This property is plotted against the amount of titrant added in a titration chart. For 10
points, give this property that equals the negative log of the hydrogen ion concentration in solution, which is
seven for pure water.
ANSWER: pH
This quantity can be measured in a Harned Cell using the Guggenhiem-Bates convention, and Pitzer
developed a method for calculating this quantity when the common ion effect occurs. Sorenson
defines this quantity as the logarithm of activity, and it can be computed in a (*) buffer solution using
the dissociation constant with an equations named for Henderson and Hasselbalch. This quantity is
typically measured by titration with an indicator such as phenolpthalein. Computed as the logarithm of the
number of hydrogen ions, for 10 points, name this quantity that measures the acidity of a solution.
ANSWER: pH [accept power of hydrogen]
Under some conditions, an ICE table must be use to compute this property, and a device used to measure
this property is named for Arnold Beckman. The Henderson-Hasselbalch (HEN-der-sun HOSS-el-bock)
equation relates this quantity to the pKa of a compound, and it is kept constant by buffer solutions. It is
defined as the negative of the base ten log of the concentration of hydronium ("high"-DRO-nee-um) ions.
For 10 points, give this quantity that measures how acidic or basic a solution is, which is seven for water.
ANSWER: pH
A dozen compounds that resist changes in this quantity are named for Norman Good and are exemplified by
bicine and tricine. The isoelectric point for a protein is this quantity at which the net charge is zero. This
quantity can be determined by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. Changes in this quantity can cause the
indicator phenolphthalein [fee-nawl-THAY-leen] to change color. This quantity is a measure of the
concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution, and its most common scale has values that range from zero to
fourteen. For 10 points, name this quantity that is less than seven for acidic solutions.
ANSWER: pH [or power of hydrogen; prompt on "acidity" or "basicity" or "pOH"]
A variant of GFP sensitive to this value is often fused to VAMP to track synaptic vesicle
transport. An instrument used to measure this value is governed by the Nikolsky-Eisenman
equation, and Glassoe and Long suggested correcting this value by an additive factor of 0.4 in
deuterated media. For compounds like TFMS and certain carboranes, this value is often
supplanted by a function named for Hammett. Hydrion strips can be used to measure this
quantity, though it is more accurately measured using an ion-selective glass electrode. More
often, compounds like bromothymol blue and phenolphthalein are used to estimate this value
from color changes. For 10 points, name this value which ranges from 0 to 14, which is found by
taking the negative log base 10 of the hydrogen concentration of an aqueous solution.
ANSWER: pH [or pOH until "hydrogen" is read; prompt on "acidity" or "basicity"]
Arnold Beckman invented a device using a glass electrode to measure this. It can be found by replacing the
reaction quotient by the activity coefficient in the Nernst equation. Often used to measure the same property
as the Hammett function, it was revised in terms of activity after its definition by Soren Sorensen. This
value is computed from the log of the dissociation constant using the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, and
is roughly equal to the negative log of the concentration of H-plus ions. Estimated by litmus paper, for 10
points, name this measure of acidity with a range from 0 to 14.
ANSWER: pH [accept power of hydrogen; prompt "acidity" or "basicity" before "Soren" is read; accept "pOH" before "Soren" is read]
Inside the body, this quantity is tightly maintained by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase. For solutions that are
not dilute and aqueous, this quantity may be replaced by the Hammett function. Soren Sorenson introduced
this quantity, which is equal to the base-ten logarithm of conjugate base over conjugate acid plus pKa by the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. Phenolphthalein turns pink when this quantity reaches about nine. For 10
points, name this quantity that measures the acidity of a solution on a namesake logarithmic scale.
ANSWER: pH [accept acidity before "Sorenson" and prompt on it thereafter]
Chitosan is a polysaccharide used effectively in bandages and ineffectively as a weight loss miracle because
it swells as this quantity increases. Instruments used to measure it sometime account for its variation due to
temperature, and those instruments generate a current at an electrode with high resistivity. The physiological
one is fairly constant since deviations can denature enzymes. For ten points, give the term for this quantity,
the negative base-ten logarithm of a solution's concentration of hydronium ions.
ANSWER: pH [prompt on acidity or basicity or equivalents]
The Nernst equation gives the potential of a SHE cell as "E-nought minus 2.303 RT over F", times
this quantity. When this quantity is greater than the pKa, the predominant components of the
solution will be deprotonated as a consequence of the (*) Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. It equals the
negative log of hydronium ion concentration and is seven for neutral solutions. For 10 points, name this
measurement of acidity.
ANSWER: pH [or potential of hydrogen]
This quantity is measured along with volume on a Gran plot, and one device for measuring this quantity
was developed by Arnold Orville Beckman. An analogue of this value is used to determine potential in an
electrochemical cell in the Nernst equation, and a related value to this quantity, alkalinity, is derived from it
and measures the concentration of hydroxide ions in a solution. For a high value of this quantity,
phenolphthalein will turn pink, indicating the presence of a base, and it is calculated using the negative log
of the concentration of hydrogen ions. For 10 points, name this chemical quantity that runs from values of 0
to 14, used to indicate acidity.
ANSWER: pH
An increase in carbon dioxide levels, which decreases this quantity in the bloodstream, decreases
hemoglobin's affinity for oxygen in the Bohr effect. The color of hydrangeas depends on the value of
this quantity for the soil. Pepsin works best when this quantity for its surroundings is low, helping it
digest foods in the (*) stomach. It is defined as the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration.
For 10 points, identify this value which can be measured by litmus paper and is less than seven for acids.
ANSWER: pH [prompt on acidity or basicity]
The Hammett function calculates a related quantity to this value when this is too extreme for conventional
means. This quantity is related to pKa and the log of two related quantities via the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation, and along with changing temperature, changes in this value can denature proteins. Defined as the
negative logarithm of the concentration of hydrogen ions, for 10 points, name this scale, ranging from zero
to fourteen, for which water has a value of seven.
ANSWER: pH or power of hydrogen
A Harned [Har-ned] Cell is a device used for measuring this quantity, and other devices used to measure
this quantity have an asymmtetry potential that arises due to the presence of an electrode. The attachment of
a certain ion to a central nitrogen atom creates a positive charge on its adjacent nitrogen, which eventually
leads to a distinctive change allowing its quantification. This quantity is related to the pKa according to the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, and buffers minimize changes in this quantity for a system. For 10 points,
identify this quantity that is equal to the negative log base 10 of the hydrogen ion activity, which for water
equals 7.
ANSWER: pH
The Hammett function replaces this quantity when activity coefficients become highly variable.
Anthocyanins are biological compounds used to measure this quantity, and the Bohr effect for hemoglobin
states that binding of oxygen is dependent on this quantity. Activity of lysosomes is determined by
alteration of this quantity, which can be measured using cresol red or various alizarin compounds. One
equation for determining this quantity sets it equal to the pKa plus the log of conjugate base over acid
concentration and is named for Henderson and Hasselbalch. Measured by chemical indicators, for 10
points, identify this quantity given by the negative log of the concentration of hydrogen ions, whose value is
less than 7 for acids.
ANSWER: pH [prompt on negative log of hydrogen until mentioned]
This value can be measured using a wire immersed in HCl ["H-C-L"] and measuring the
potential across a glass membrane. Substances that keep this value constant are described by the
Henderson-Hasselbach equation. Mixing with a substance whose value for this property is above 8
turns phenolphthalein purple, and other (*) indicators of this property include litmus. It is the negative
log of hydrogen ion concentration. For 10 points, name this scale that goes from 0 to 14, a measure of
acidity.
ANSWER: pH [or power of hydrogen]
One analogue of this quantity, designed for use in concentrated solutions, is equal to -19 for a certain
mixture that contains antimony pentafluoride. One equation for this quantity, which may be derived by
rearranging the defining equation for "K sub a", is called the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. Under
standard conditions, this quantity is half the self-ionization constant pKw. This quantity is defined as the
negative logarithm of the concentration of hydronium ions in a solution. For 10 points, name this quantity
which can be crudely measured using indicators like phenolphthalein, and which is 7 for neutral solutions
and less for acids.
ANSWER: pH [prompt on "acidity"]
Liquid helium-3 displays two of these called "A" and "B" which are an aniostropic and an isotropic
type of them, respectively. When two of these entities coexist in a pure system, their molar Gibbs free
energies must be equal. Order parameters characterize transitions between these entities. Latent heat
over temperature times volume change is set equal to the temperature derivative of pressure in the
Clausius-Clapeyron equation, to give the coexistence curves between these entities. The number of these
entities in a mixture in thermal equilibrium is given by the number of components minus the degrees of
freedom plus two, according to the Gibbs rule. The boundary between these entities disappears at the
critical point and three of them coexist at the triple point. For 10 points, identify these states of matter which
include plasma, solid, liquid, and gas.
ANSWER: phases
Examples of these entities like geletin and lipid bilayers are sometimes described as meso, much as
are examples such as the "smectic" and "nematic." Transitions between these entities may include
spinodal decompositions and are classified by (*) Ehrenfest. The number of these entities coexisting in
equilibrium is set equal to two plus the number of components minus the number of degrees of freedom in a
rule formulated by Gibbs. Two of these entities become indistinguishable at temperatures and pressures
above the critical point. For 10 points, name these entities, exemplified by solid, liquid, and gas ones.
ANSWER: phases
The Clausius-Clapeyron (CLAP-er-on) relation gives the slope of lines separating this property.
Eutectic (yoo-TECK-tick) systems can induce a change in the transition of this property. Gibbs
names a rule relating the number of degrees of freedom to the number of components and this
property. Only one of these can exist beyond the critical point, and three of these can exist at the (*)
triple point. Transitions between these include deposition and boiling. For 10 points, name this property of
matter that can usually be either solid, liquid, or gas.
ANSWER: phase of matter
The lever rule is used to calculate the relative concentration of two of these. Degrees of freedom for a
system equal the number of components, minus the number of these, plus two, according to a rule named for
Gibbs. There are two of them along the liquidus curve. At a given concentration, the dew point is the
highest temperature at which two of these can coexist in a system. The latent heat is the enthalpy associated
with a transition between them. At the triple point, three of them exist. Diagrams depicting them usually plot
pressure against temperature and are divided into regions. For 10 points, name these things which include
solids, liquids, and gases.
ANSWER: phases of matter [prompt on "states" of matter]
One method of drawing these diagrams is to produce bundles around invariant points using
Schreinemaker's method. Software packages like THERMOCALC use the CALPHAD method for
drawing these figures. For minerals, this diagram is used to display various polymorphs. The
formula C minus P plus 2 is used to find the degrees of (*) freedom at each point in these diagrams. For
binary systems, these diagrams can display the eutectic and peritectic points. These plots often show
temperature and pressure on their axes and show coexistence curves as lines. These diagrams also show the
triple and critical points. For 10 points, name these plots that display the state variables at which a system
exists as a solid, liquid, or gas.
ANSWER: phase diagram
One of these can be used to determine whether a liquid crystal has isotropic, smectic, or nematic ordering,
while the "binary" variety contains a representation of the eutectic point. The slope of the boundaries on
them is equal to latent heat divided by the product of temperature and change in volume according to the
Clausius-Clapeyron equation; that change, the slope of the coexistence curve, is oddly negative for water.
They can be used to identify the conditions for deposition or to find a substance's critical point and triple
point. For 10 points, name this type of graph, usually plotting pressure against temperature, that shows when
a substance will be a solid, liquid, or gas.
ANSWER: phase diagram [prompt "coexistence curve" or "line of equilibrium" until "coexistence curve" is read]
One constructs a tie line when applying the lever rule to these constructs. Specific volume is included
on three-dimensional forms of these constructs. Two liquiduses on these constructs intersect at the
eutectic point. A prominent and complicated example of these constructs is used for the iron-carbon
system. Two coexistence curves meet at a triple point on these constructs, which also contain a critical
point. For 10 points, identify these graphs, often with axes of pressure versus temperature or temperature
versus percent composition, that show the equilibrium conditions between thermodynamically distinct
phases.
ANSWER: phase diagrams [or binary phase diagrams; or multiple-component phase diagrams; prompt on P-T diagrams; prompt on pressure-temperature diagrams]
On one of these constructs, the barrier between an unstable and a metastable region is given by the
spinodal, which always lies inside the binodal. Calculating properties at a point on one of these
constructs can be done by drawing a tie line and applying the lever rule. The equation "C minus P
plus 2" gives the number of degrees of freedom at a point on one of these constructs. Their Txy ("t-xy") and Pxy ("p-x-y") variants can be used to show the location of (*) azeotropes. Three coexistence
curves on the most common type of these constructs meet at the triple point. For 10 points, name these
diagrams whose simplest versions typically display the pressure and temperature at which a material exists
as a solid, liquid, or gas.
ANSWER: phase diagrams [the word "diagrams" is unnecessary after it is given in the tossup]
The extended singularity theorem states that these phenomena must be analyzed using an infinite
system, which can be done using Wilson's renormalization group theory. Magnetic systems
undergoing some types of these phenomena are subject to Widom scaling, and continuous ones that
break no symmetries are called infinite-order. One theory of these phenomena expand the free
energy in terms of a power series of the (*) order parameter. The onset of superfluidity and the onset of
paramagnetism are second-order ones, which are described by Landau's phenomenological theory, and
first-order ones have latent heats. For 10 points, name these processes in which a system changes from one
state to another, exemplified by freezing and boiling.
ANSWER: phase transitions [accept equivalents mentioning phases changing, prompt on things with the word "critical" in it]
These phenomena can be characterized by discontinuities in the derivative of the free energy, and
infinite-order ones break no symmetries. An equation important to understanding these phenomena finds
the slope of the coexistence curve and is named for Clausius and Clapeyron. First-order ones are
characterized by latent heats; those include deposition and sublimation. For 10 points, name these
phenomena that include evaporation and condensation, in which matter changes form.
ANSWER: phase transitions [or phase changes; or phase transformations]
These phenomena may be divided into universality classes based on how their correlation lengths
diverge as a certain variable approaches a critical value. Another classification of these phenomena
developed by Paul Ehrenfest is based on discontinuities in the derivative of the free energy, and their
(*) second-order variety are described phenomenologically by Lev Landau by order parameters. One
occurs at the Neel point, the antiferromagnetic analogue of the Curie temperature. The Clausius-Clapeyron
relation characterizes them in a gas-liquid system. FTP, name these thermodynamic transitions, examples
of which include deposition, sublimation, condensation, freezing, and other changes of state.
ANSWER: phase transitions [prompt on changes of state before mentioned]
Halperin and Nelson developed a theory of one type of this process that is mediated by dislocations. One
occurrence of this process happens when a particular parameter is equal to pi over two times the spin
stiffness and occurs when vortexes unbind. One way of describing these processes is based on a Taylor
series of free energy where each term has a power of the order parameter. Another way for classifying them
is to find which order derivative of a thermodynamic variable is required for there to be a discontinuity.
They are classified by Ehrenfest and Landau schemes. The Clausius-Clapeyron relation gives the slope of a
curve representing one of these occurrences. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, in which one state of
matter is transformed into another.
ANSWER: phase transitions (also accept phase changes;)
In polymer solutions, these phenomena occurs through a process called spinodal decomposition, and
one of these that does not break symmetry occurs in the two-dimensional XY model and is of infinite order.
Continuous ones can be sorted into universality classes by their critical exponents. One equation for
describing these phenomena equates the derivative of pressure with respect to temperature to the inverse of
temperature times the change in volume; that equation is named for Clausius and Clapeyron
("KLAH-peh-rohn"). Black postulated a form of energy that is absorbed or released during this
phenomenon without causing a change in temperature, known as latent heat. For 10 points, name this type
of physical phenomenon whose variants include deposition, sublimation, and melting.
ANSWER: phase transition [accept equivalents like phase change; accept separation before "XY model"]
Rudolf Peierls proved that the two-dimensional Ising model was guaranteed to exhibit one of
these events. An example of these events can be characterized by a critical exponent, which
allows one to place systems into universality classes. The existence of a latent heat is a defining
characteristic of another type of these events. An order parameter that is zero on the high
temperature side of these events and jumps to non-zero below the temperature, accompanied by a
symmetry breaking, was described by Lev Landau. On pressure-temperature diagrams, these
events occur when crossing the plotted lines, and their discontinuous variety can be described the
Clausius-Clapeyron relation. For 10 points, what changes in a state of matter include sublimation
and melting?
ANSWER: phase transitions
The Bamberger rearrangement creates the aminated type of these compounds. The sodium salt of one of
these compounds reacts under high pressure with carbon dioxide in the Kolbe-Schmitt reaction, and an aryl
ester is promoted to a ring-acylated derivative of this type of compound in the Fries rearrangement. This
class of compounds is created along with acetone in the cumene process and methylated versions of them
with a pKa of approximately nine are known as cresols. For 10 points, name this class whose parent
compound, which was used by Joseph Lister as a surgical antiseptic, is also known as hydroxybeneze.
ANSWER: phenols [accept benzenols; or carbolic acids]
These compounds may be created in a Sandmeyer-like reaction in which aqueous diazonium salts are
heated to 100 degrees Celsius. Epoxy resins are most commonly made using a compound with two of
this functional group. One extraction technique adds a mixture of this compound and chloroform to
an aqueous solution of lysed cells in order to separate DNA and proteins. These compounds are
carboxylated in the (*) Kolbe-Schmitt reaction to make salicylic acid. Methylating the ring of this
compound yields cresol. A red crystalline indicator named for this compound transitions from yellow to red
over the pH range of 6.8 to 8.2, and another indicator is formed from the condensation of phthalic
anhydride with two of these compounds. For 10 points, name this compound with a hydroxyl group attached
to a benzene ring.
ANSWER: phenol
This substance is dissolved in alcohol, then placed on concrete, in a test to measure carbonation depth. The
peroxidase-catalyzed oxidation of this molecule provides the basis for the Kastle-Meyer test. It was
replaced by bisacodyl in the laxative Correctol shortly before FDA reports confirmed its carcinogenicity.
This molecule's most notable property occurs due to interconversion between a lactone structure and one
containing a quinoid ring. It is synthesized by reacting phenol molecules with phthalic anhydride in the
presence of hot sulfuric acid. For 10 points, name this "universal indicator" that is colorless in acidic
solution and pink or purple in basic solution.
ANSWER: phenolphthalein
This compound constricts smooth muscle and is used as a laxative. It is used in the Kastle-Meyer test,
where its oxidation is catalyzed in the presence of blood. Although this organic molecule is insoluble in
water, it can be dissolved in alcohols, and is usually found in that form for laboratory use. In extremely
acidic solutions it appears orange, but it can also be found in two other colors. Discovered in 1871 by Adolf
von Baeyer, this indicator is produced by the condensation of an anhydride and phenol. Between pH 0 and
8.2, it appears colorless in neutral and acidic solutions. For 10 points, name this pH indicator that turns pink
in basic solutions.
ANSWER: phenolphthalein or HIn
The oxidation of hemoglobin is involved in the Kaiser-Meyer test of this compound, whose synthesis from
phthalic anhydride was discovered by Adolf Baeyer. One form of this compound only absorbs ultraviolet
light while another form of this compound with full delocalization absorbs both ultraviolet and visible light
at five hundred fifty-three nanometers. That modified, deprotonated form of this compound absorbs light in
the green region of the spectrum and is visible at a higher pH than compounds like thymol blue or methyl
red. For 10 points, name this acid base indicator that at pH nine point two turns into a distinctive magentapink color.
ANSWER: phenolphthalein
A 2000 study by P. F. Coogan, et al. states that this chemical is found to be genotoxic and can bind to
estrogen receptors. It is usually synthesized in the presence of zinc chloride or sulfuric acid by the
condensation of its namesake (*) anhydride and phenol, and is closely related to triphenylmethane. One of
its forms has a charge of negative three due to the removal of two extra hydrogen ions, and occurs only in
solutions with pH greater than 12, and in solutions with pH less than 0, it appears orange. It was at one
point used as a laxative, where it dyed feces pink. For 10 points, identify this indicator, which is colorless in
acids and pink in bases.
ANSWER: phenolphthalein [accept 3,3-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)isobenzofuran-1(3H)-one]
Ferroxyl solution is prepared by adding sodium chloride, potassium hexacyanoferranate, and this
substance to water, and when bonded to two extra hydrogen atoms it contains a benzene ring fused to a
gamma-lactone. Fluorescin has a higher quantum yield than this molecule due to an additional bridging
oxygen, and its most notable property occurs when one of its benzene rings twists out of plane with respect
to the other two. When mixed with bromothymol blue, thymol blue, and methyl red, it forms a universal
indicator. For 10 points, name this chemical which turns pink in basic solutions and orange in acidic ones.
ANSWER: phenolphthalein
In the Fischer indole synthesis, a hydrazine with this moiety in place of one of the hydrogens is
reacted with an aldehyde or ketone. A byproduct of the Wittig reaction is a compound with three of
these moieties. Two of these moieties bound together are the basis for PCBs. This compound is bound
to ethene in styrene, the monomer of polystyrene. A mutation in the enzyme that hydroxylates the amino
acid with this cyclic group bound to another amino acid, to tyrosine is the cause of PKU. That amino acid
consists of this moiety attached to an alanine instead of its normal methyl group. For 10 points, identify this
aryl group that is a benzene lacking a hydrogen, giving it formula C6H5 and often abbreviated Ph.
ANSWER: phenyl (FEE-nil) group [or Ph until it is read; do not accept "phenol" (fee-GNOLL) - if in doubt, have the player spell it]
When it was first proposed, it was the "fat" type of three types of earth that together replaced one of
the four main elements, a theory put forth in the 1669 work Subterranean Physics by Johann Becher.
Early in the 18th century, one of Becher's students expounded on the theory and gave this substance
its more common name. According to that student, Georg Ernst Stahl, it was one of the products of
corrosion along with calx, (*) known today as a metal's oxide. Its existence was defended until the
beginning of the 19th century by some chemists, including Joseph Priestley, even after being discredited by
Antoine Lavoisier. FTP, name this theoretical substance that was thought to explain why wood gets heavier
after combustion.
ANSWER: phlogiston
Upon depletion of this substance, calx is created. An experiment by Lornonosov led to the idea that this
substance had negative weight. This substance was originally called terra pinguis by Johann Behcer before
being renamed by Georg Stahl. Oxygen was originally believed to be air that had been depleted of this
substance. (lah-vwah-see-AY) Lavoisier disproved its existence. For 10 points, name this substance which
was believed to be released by combustion.
ANSWER: phlogiston
Although hydrofluoric acid can be used, an acid of these anions is the preferred etchant of silicon
nitride. Salts of these anions are often used as water softeners because they readily complex with
magnesium and calcium, as in hydroxyapatite, a major component of bone. Often used in fertilizers, for
10 points, name this biologically important class of ions with general formula PnO3n+1, the simplest of
which is its namesake, PO4
3-.
ANSWER: phosphates
Observations of the Hope diamond as red under certain conditions can be explained by this phenomenon,
though this is only observed in blue diamonds. It occurs because of unusual electron transitions to triplet
states called electron traps, where transitions to other energy levels are improbable. Strontium aluminate
exhibits this property up to 1090 degrees Celsius, though cuprated zinc sulfide is a cheaper alternative,
appearing green. For 10 points, identify this type of luminescence that continues even after the source of
radiation is gone, thus distinguishing it from fluorescence.
ANSWER: phosphorescence
A tribromide of this element converts alcohols into alkyl bromides. A triphenyl ylide (ILL-id) of this
element is used to convert a ketone into an alkene in the Wittig reaction. The yellow allotrope of this
element is pyrophoric, although the primary two allotropes of this element are colored red and white. The
electron transport chain produces a molecule that contains three anions named for this element. For 10
points, identify this second element in the nitrogen family that is extensively used in fertilizers and has
atomic symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P until read]
The presence of this element at the center of sarin allows it to inhibit acetylcholinesterase. This
element bonds to an azide in the first step of the Staudinger reduction. A functional group containing
this element in its center stabilizes the carbanion in the intermediate of the Horner-WadsworthEmmons reaction. Four atoms of this element bind to 10 oxygen atoms in its (*) pentoxide. A Z-alkene
can be produced by reacting a carbonyl with an ylide with positive charge on this element in the Wittig
reaction. Coming in notable white and red allotropes, for 10 points, name this element with atomic number
15 which is found below nitrogen on the periodic table.
ANSWER: phosphorus [prompt on "P"]
Occupational exposure to one form of this element can cause one's jawbone to glow in the dark, and
this element inhibits acetylcholine breakdown. With four oxygen atoms, this element forms a common
anion with a charge of negative three which is present in detergent and fertilizer and can cause
(*)eutrophication; three of those ions are also present in living cells' most common energy carrier. Though
this element's black form is the most stable, it is more commonly present in its white form, used in
incendiary weapons, and its red form, used in match heads. For 10 points, name this element below nitrogen
on the periodic table with symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus
This element is surrounded by cyclohexyl groups in a ligand which interacts with ruthenium and gets
replaced by a chelating isopropoxy ligand during the action of a Hoveyda catalyst in olefin
metathesis. Four atoms of this element each double bond to one oxygen and are bridged by an
additional six oxygen atoms in its most important oxide. A carbon atom is bound to this element with
a positive charge in a (*) betaine that is formed by the reaction of a ylide with this element attached to
three phenyl groups. This element appears in a salt used in the Wittig reaction. This element, which exists in
red and white allotropes, exists as a 3- anion bound to four oxygens. For 10 points, name this glowing
nonmetal found below nitrogen.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P]
This element was first discovered by Hennig Brand, who was attempting to create gold from his own urine.
This highly reactive element is never found in its elemental form in nature, instead found as allotropes
named red and white. A common ion found in biology has this atom bound to four oxygen atoms and has a
minus 3 charge. That ion of this element is found in ATP and the backbone of DNA. This nonmetallic
element has heavy industrial use in fertilizers and detergents and is found on matches. For 10 points, name
the element with atomic number 15 and symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus
Atoms of sulfur are bonded to atoms of this element in the central ring of Lawesson's reagent, and one
rhodium atom is bonded to three atoms of it in Wilkinson's catalyst. Discovered by Hennig Brand, who was
attempting to turn urine into gold, this element is also the central atom in the toxic nerve gases soman and
sarin. A reaction that converts aldehydes or ketones into alkenes uses an ylide [ILL-id] containing this
element, and is named for Wittig. This element's red allotrope is used in matches, and its white allotrope
ignites spontaneously when exposed to air. For 10 points, name this element located below nitrogen on the
periodic table, and symbolized P.
ANSWER: phosphorus
High pressures are usually needed to synthesize this element's black allotrope, while its violet
allotrope is sometimes named after Johann Hittorf, who was the first to recrystallize it from molten
lead. In its red allotrope, one of its usual tetrahedral bonds is broken, allowing bonding with
neighboring tetrahedrons and a more stable structure. Its (*) white allotrope has alpha and beta forms
depending on the temperature and is the most volatile and reactive allotrope; hence its use as an additive in
napalm. For 10 points, name this chemical element, number 15, which was used in early matches.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P]
A powerful desiccant is made from the pentoxide of this element. A compound containing this element is
a dental etching solution and iron III oxide rust remover. This element occurs in plus-3 and plus-5 oxidation
states in its two triprotic acids. It forms a variety of elemental structures in its white and red allotropes.
Because this element possesses a 3-s-2-3-p-3 configuration, it can break the octet rule, unlike nitrogen,
which is also in its family. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 15 and symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus
This element forms two new bonds in the Arbuzov reaction, and it is bonded to fluorine in the nerve
agent Sarin. A triphenyl derivative of it is used alond with DEAD in the Mitsunobu reaction, and a
reagent often used to convert carboxylic acids to acyl bromides is this element's pentabromide. Most
of the body's supply of this element comes in a mineral of calcium and this element called apatite.
Allotropes of this element include the chain-like red and the tetrahedral white, and the Wittig reaction
requires a ylide containing this element. Adjacent DNA bases are linked by diester bonds containing this
element. For 10 points, name this element in nitrogen's group with symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus [accept P before mentioned]
A compound consisting of only chlorine and this element converts carboxylic acids to acyl chlorides.
This element's pentoxide actually consists of ten atoms of oxygen and four atoms of this element. In a
phenomenon named for this element but ironically not actually demonstrated by it, an electron decays to a
triplet intermediate state before returning to the ground state. The strong double bond this element forms
with oxygen drives the Wittig reaction. In its most common form, this element exists as a tetrahedral
structure which decomposes into a pentagonal structure, its "red" form, when heated. The white allotrope of
this element is most common. For 10 points, name this element located directly below nitrogen on the
Periodic Table.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P]
Tigard, Oregon's Durham Treatment Facility is the U.S.'s first plant to use the struvite recovery process to
reclaim this chemical from wastewater. Phossy jaw results from exposure to its most common form, which
was first isolated when Hennin Brand tried to manufacture gold using his own urine. From the Latin for
"light-bearer", its pure form gives a glow in the presence of oxygen as it burns to form this element's "red"
variety. For 10 points, identify this Group 15 element that comes in a "white" variety and has atomic
number 15 and symbol P.
ANSWER: Phosphorus
One atom of this element with three ether linkages reacts with an alkyl bromide in the Arbuzov reaction. In
one compound, this element is bonded to an anisole group, double-bonded to a sulfur, and single bonded to
two other sulfurs; that compound is called Lawesson's reagent. Its radioactive 32 isotope is used to label
DNA hybridization probes for Southern blots, and it appears in namesake di-ester linkages running along
the DNA backbone. Notably discovered by Henning Brand in his own urine, for 10 points, identify this
element which has red and white allotropes and chemical symbol P.
ANSWER: Phosphorus [accept P until mentioned]
Unlike graphene, a single-layer orthorhombic allotrope of this element has a band gap. Exposure to this
element can lead to BON, its associated necrosis of the jaw. It is used as a radioactive marker in Northern
and Southern blots, and its pentachloride violates the octet rule. A violet-colored allotrope of this element is
named for Hittorf. The oxidation of this element's white allotrope gives rise to chemiluminescence while
this element's red allotrope is often used in the tips of matches. For 10 points, name this element which
forms the backbone of DNA and has the chemical symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus
A reagent with this element makes alkenes (AL-keenz) from carbonyl (CAR-bo-NEEL) compounds in the
Wittig (VIT-tig) reaction. Its black form has a structure like graphite. Its white allotropes has a tetrahedral
structural unit, and the red kind forms a network of those tetrahedrons chained together. For 10 points,
name this element, whose oxide is found in the backbone of DNA, and which is located immediately below
nitrogen on the Periodic Table.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P]
An iodide of a methyl group attached an atom of this element, which is attached to three phenyl groups,
is used to form the ylide for the Wittig reaction. The simplest example of a divalent compound breaking the
octet rule is this element's pentachloride. This element comes in violet, black, red, and white allotropes.
Found just below nitrogen on the periodic table, for 10 points, identify this element, number 15 with
symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus [accept just P before mention]
High pressures are usually needed to synthesize this element's black allotrope, while its violet
allotrope is sometimes named after Johann Hittorf, who was the first to recrystallize it from molten
lead. In its red allotrope, one of its usual tetrahedral bonds is broken, allowing bonding with
neighboring tetrahedrons and a more stable structure. Its (*) white allotrope has alpha and beta forms
depending on the temperature and is the most volatile and reactive allotrope; hence its use as an additive in
napalm. For 10 points, name this chemical element, number 15, which was used in early matches.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P]
The bite angle and the cone angle are usually defined for metals bonded to this element. An atom of this
element attacks the azo functionality of DEAD in a substitution reaction of alcohols. Rhodium bonds to
three atoms of this element in Wilkinson's catalyst. The most common dative ligands for cross-coupling
reactions have this element bonded to palladium. In another reaction, this element displaces a halide to form
a quaternary, positively-charged center, which is subsequently deprotonated at the alpha carbon. The strong
bond this element forms to oxygen leads to the formation of alkenes from carbonyls in the Wittig reaction.
It is usually substituted with three phenyl groups as a ligand. For 10 points, name this element located
directly below nitrogen on the Periodic Table.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P]
A ligand containing it as its central atom dissociates from rhodium(I) ["rhodium-one"] in the catalytic
mechanism of Wilkinson's catalyst. It is found in a four-membered ring with sulfur in Lawesson's reagent,
and this element nucleophilically attacks nitrogen in the Staudinger reaction and the Mitsunobu reaction. It
was discovered in 1669 by German alchemist Hennig Brand where is was prepared through a sample of his
own urine. Existing as both red and white allotropes, FTP, identify this nonmetallic element that is found
below nitrogen as element number 15 on the periodic table.
ANSWER: phosphorus or P
Carbon tetrachloride and a compound consisting of this element bonded to three cyclic groups is
used to convert alcohols to alkyl chlorides in the Appel reaction; that same compound is used with
DEAD in the Mitsunobu reaction. A compound containing this element and three alkyl groups reacts
with an alkyl halide in the Michaelis-Arbuzov reaction, which forms esters of its namesake acid.
Those aforementioned three cyclic groups are phenyl. Electrons from the carbonyl bond form a sigma
bond with this element in the first step of the Wittig reaction, where its ylide is typically used. The bond
between the carbon of a 3' sugar, an ion whose central component is this element, and the carbon of a 5'
sugar forms its namesake -diester bond in DNA. This element has violet, red, black and white allotropes.
For 10 points, identify this element with chemical symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus [or P until it is read]
One quantity typically denoted using the capital version of this Greek letter is a colligative property
equal to molarity times the gas constant times temperature. That quantity is the osmotic pressure. This
Greek letter also represents a type of chemical bond typically formed from the overlap of p orbitals found
in double-bonded compounds, such as alkenes. For 10 points, name this Greek letter that symbolizes a
mathematical constant roughly equal to 3.14.
ANSWER: pi
One model of this phenomenon predicts increased stability of alkene-metal bonds due to the electron
metathesis that this interaction essentially is. This interaction decreases one participant's bond order,
but compensates by increasing that of the other, so that it gets nearer to fulfilling the 18-electron
rule. A quick diagnostic for this process is an anomalously low ligand functional stretching frequency
on an infrared spectrum. The volatility of nickel tetracarbonyl is explained by this process having
occurred in it in agreement with the aforementioned (*) Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson model. For 10 points,
name this chemical phenomenon in which electrons from an atomic orbital of the central atom of a
coordination complex delocalize to fill an anti-bonding pi orbital.
ANSWER: pi backbonding [or pi backdonation]
According to the Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson model, Zeise's salts undergo this type of interaction as
electron density is donated back to an olefin anti-bonding orbital. It can occur with CH groups in a
modified form of hydrogen bonding. The hydrophobic interaction between bases in DNA is known as
this type of (*) stacking. This type of interaction gives graphite its electrical conductivity. For 10 points,
name this type of bond that is responsible for phenomenon such as conjugation and aromaticity and forms
between parallel p orbitals on adjacent atoms.
ANSWER: pi bonding (prompt on double bond)
The smallest one of these objects is the Juan de Fuca one. The Nazca one of these objects is part of
the Chile Triple Junction. The North American one extends to the Mid-Atlantic ridge. (*) Subduction
zones usually occur because those that are made of basalt are heavier than those made of granite. These
objects float on the asthenosphere and name a scientific theory when followed by "tectonics." For 10
points, name these regions of the lithosphere that meet at transform, divergent and convergent boundaries.
ANSWER: plates
Theories about the dynamics of these objects were tested through the Vine-Matthews-Morley hypothesis.
These masses are able to stay in a relative vertical equilibrium through isostasy. Subduction zones can exist
at the boundaries between these. Examples include the Nazca and Indo-Australian. These make up the
Earth's lithosphere in the crust. They move very slowly and the San Andreas Fault is on the boundary
between the Pacific and North American ones. For 10 points, name these geological slabs of rock that make
up the surface of the earth and whose movements are described by tectonic theory.
ANSWER: tectonic plates [prompt on lithosphere before mentioned]
Don Anderson proposed that these objects move due to calcium carbonate deposited by living organisms.
Passive and active margins are found between these objects. A restatement of Archimedes' principle,
isostasy, keeps these objects in gravitational equilibrium. Gravity causes them to move under "slab pull",
while convection currents cause them to "roll-back" to form a back-arc. The existence of ophiolites in the
Himalayas was proof of their existence. These objects can meet at convergent, divergent, or transform
boundaries and can sink into the mantle at subduction zones. For 10 points, name these giant pieces of
Earth's crust in a namesake geologic theory.
ANSWER: tectonic plates
Harry Hammond Hess proposed the existence of these objects to explain Wegener's (VEG-uh-nerz)
earlier theory. Two of these objects move away from each other at a divergent boundary, which is also the
cause of seafloor spreading. These objects, whose examples include the Eurasian and Indo-Australian one,
may meet at subduction zones or faults. For 10 points, identify these large objects that slide around on the
surface of the Earth's crust, and may cause earthquakes if they move suddenly.
ANSWER: tectonic plates
One process by which these entities move is called "basal drag." The theory that they float in a
gravitational equilibrium is central to the Pratt and and Airy models of isostasy. Cratons are most
often found near the centers of these objects. The three main types of borders between these entities
are (*) "divergent," "convergent," and "transform." They come in "continental" and "oceanic" types, which
are made of granite and basalt, respectively. For 10 points, name these large sections of rock that float atop
a sea of magma and make up the earth's crust.
ANSWER: tectonic plates [accept plate tectonics; prompt on partial answer]
The Pratt and Airy models describe the gravitational equilibrium of these objects, called isostasy,
while Vacquier noticed magnetic striping in them. They are found above the asthenosphere, and their
movement is controlled by factors including basal drag and(*) slab suction. Two of these objects grind
alongside one another at transform boundaries, which include the San Andreas Fault. A subduction zone is
often created where an oceanic one meets a continental one. The Nazca and Juan de Fuca are examples of,
for 10 points, what large slabs of rock that make up the Earth's crust?
ANSWER: tectonic plates
This theory's final complete model was published by Xavier Le Pichon in 1967. It was supported by
Edward Bullard's "fit" model and analysis of the fern genus Glossopteris. This theory proposes the
existence of entities named after Juan de Fuca and the Nazca and the existence of "Gondwana". It built off
of Alfred Wegener's earlier theory of continental drift. For 10 points, name this theory which divides the
lithosphere into various moving portions.
ANSWER: plate tectonics [or continental drift until it is read]
The hydrated dioxide form of this element is a catalyst in hydrogenation reactions and is called Adams's
catalyst. The cis- form of one complex containing ammonia, chlorine, and this element as a ligand is an
effective chemotherapy drug. Before vanadium oxide was used, this element was the catalyst in the contact
process, and it can be a catalyst in the electrolysis of water. It is found in a standard hydrogen electrode,
and, like gold, it is dissolved by aqua regia. Name this transition metal appearing below palladium on the
periodic table, with atomic number 78 and symbol Pt.
ANSWER: platinum [accept Pt before mentioned]
Catalytic coating of a quartz tube lined with carbon and this element is required for oxygen to be
analyzed in CHN analysis. Organometallic chemistry was kicked off by a coordination complex of this
element, known as Zeise's salt. The standard hydrogen electrode is made of this element. A popular
chemotherapy drug is a square planar coordination complex of this metal and four chlorine atoms. Also
present in Adams's catalyst, this least reactive metal forms an alloy with iridium that has been used to
define the kilogram. In the group named for this element, the metal above it catalyzes hydrogenation
reactions if "poisoned" by Lindlar catalyst. Palladium is a substitute for, for 10 points, what expensive
group 10 transition metal?
ANSWER: platinum [or Pt]
A catalyst based on this element is used in the Shilov system of activating C-H bonds. A
hydrosilylation agent called Karstedt's catalyst contains two atoms of this metal. Krogmann's salt
and Magnus's green salt both contain this element, whose arsenide is known as sperrylite. Adam's
catalyst is a dioxide of this element, to which three chlorine atoms and an ethylene ligand are
coordinated in Zeise's salt. The standard (*) hydrogen electrode is made of this metal. A common
chemotherapy drug that crosslinks DNA contains this atom bonded to two ammonia ligands and two
chlorine atoms. In chemistry labs, it is common to use palladium in place of this element, which is located
below palladium on the periodic table. For 10 points, name this transition metal with atomic number 78.
ANSWER: platinum [or Pt]
With arsenic this element is found in the mineral sperrylite, which is associated with nickel ores in
Sudbury Basin. Adam's catalyst is an oxide of this element that converts to this element's "black"
form. This element was used by Barnett Rosenberg in the electrodes for an experiment involving E
Coli and electric field, and this element is found in the cis formation linked to two chloride ions and
two ammonia groups in an (*) anticancer drug that crosslinks cellular DNA, leading to apoptosis. Along
with palladium and rhodium, this element is commonly used in catalytic converters. For 10 points, name
his noble metal with atomic number seventy eight and symbol Pt.
ANSWER: Platinum [accept Pt before mentioned]
This metal and fluorine were used to synthesize one of the first xenon compounds, and its oxide is
known as Adams' catalyst. This metal is bonded to chlorine and ammonia ligands in a potent
chemotherapy drug. Though it is not gold, this metal dissolves in hot (*) aqua regia, and with iridium,
another metal in its namesake group, it forms the alloy for the International Prototype Kilogram. This
element is commonly used as an electrode on account of its unreactivity. For 10 points, identify this
precious, heavy metal often more valuable than gold whose name is Spanish for "little silver."
ANSWER: platinum [or Pt]
One atom of this element is found in a catalyst for hydrosilylation named for Speier. One dimensional
chains made of ions of this element are found in Magnus's green salt. With elements like potassium, this
metal is found in Zeise's salt. Chernyaev introduced the trans effect to the chemistry of this element, which
influences the synthesis of a particular cancer drug that crosslinks DNA. This element is present in the
hydrogenating Adams' catalyst. It and a similar element's plus two oxidation states are in a d8 configuration
and often found in square planar complexes. Osmium and palladium are found in this element's namesake
group. For 10 points, name this metallic element with symbol Pt.
ANSWER: platinum
This time period saw quasiperiodic rapid climate variations called Dansgaard-Oeschger events. After
the last glacial maximum in this time period, the melting of North American continental glaciers
caused the formation of Lake Agassiz. The effects on solar forcing of cyclic variations in eccentricity,
axial tilt, and precession were hypothesized to cause the climate variations in this time period by
Milutin (*) Milankovitch. A small white flower gives its name to a glaciation in this time period which was
notable for its brief duration of 1300 years, the Younger Dryas. The fossils in the La Brea Tar Pits are
mainly from this epoch which roughly corresponds with the paleolithic era. For 10 points, name this
geologic epoch, which extended from 2.58 million years ago to 11.7 thousand years ago, and which
occurred between the Holocene and Pliocene.
ANSWER: Pleistocene Epoch
One possible source of these structures is dense thermochemical piles overlying ultra-low velocity zones.
Campbell and Griffith showed that komatiite was probably formed due to these structures. The large
positive Clapeyron slope of the post-perovskite transition has a significant impact on their formation. Hans
Ramberg pioneered the use of large-scale models to study these structures. W. J. Morgan was the first
person to propose the existence of these structures. They consist of a hot tail and a cooler head. These
structures explain giant oceanic plateaus, large igneous provinces, continental flood basalts, and hotspot
volcanism. For 10 points, identify these columnar upwellings in the mantle.
ANSWER: mantle plume
This element exhibits six solid-state phase transformations before reaching a liquid state, more than any
other element. It probably would have been discovered by McMillan and Abelson, but when they joined the
Manhattan Project, this became the first element discovered by Glenn Seaborg. It made up much of the core
of The Gadget detonated in the Trinity test, and it was used in the Fat Man bomb dropped on Nagasaki.
This is used in an alternative to enriched uranium fuel known as mixed oxide fuel. Name this radioactive
element found just after uranium and neptunium in the Periodic Table.
ANSWER: plutonium [or Pu]
Ligand group orbitals are classified based on which one of these entities they belong to when
constructing molecular orbital diagrams. The identity operator E gives the degeneracy of the orbitals
assigned to their labels. Homonuclear diatomic molecules belong to their own set due to the
possession of an infinity fold axis of rotation and a horizontal plane of (*) symmetry. They can be
divided into C and D class and their elements are listed in character tables. For 10 points-name these
mathematical groups that give the number and nature of the symmetry elements for a given molecule.
ANSWER: point groups
The protein clathrin regulates this property in cells, and molecules that partially have this property may
form micelles. Surfactants exploit it to promote emulsions, and soaps and detergents take advantage of it to
carry away otherwise insoluble dirt. Although important when forming bonds, it may also be calculated as a
net quantity across a molecule by taking the sum of the molecule's dipoles. Resulting in partial positive and
negative charges, this is, FTP, what term denoting the uneven distribution of charge across a molecule, as
with water but not oxygen gas?
ANSWER: polarity (accept word forms such as polar)
When this property is present in a molecule, one set of atomic orbitals are depicted at a higher energy
on an MO diagram. This property occurs when two atoms have a difference of greater than 0.4 on the
Pauling scale. Boron trifluoride does not possess this property because it has a trigonal planar geometry, so
the moments cancel out. Carbon-hydrogen bonds don't have this property because they have very similar
electronegativities. For 10 points, name this property in which a molecule has partially positive and
partially negatively-charged regions because atoms in bonds aren't shared equally.
ANSWER: polarity [or word forms]
The mobile phase of HPLC may be optimized using an index named for Snider and this property.
Amphipathic molecules typically have one group with this property and one without. A molecule acquires
this property by possessing an uneven charge distribution, leading to an electric dipole, which owes to
differences in electronegativity; that is why water, but not methane, possesses this property. For 10 points,
give this term which, when applied to a chemical bond, refers to the degree to which electrons are equally
shared.
ANSWER: polarity [accept word forms]
Molecules which have this property in one domain and lack it in another are called amphiphilic, and often
act as surfactants. Symmetric molecules necessarily lack this property. For solvents, the strength of the
dielectric constant is a good measure of this property, which is the origin of the notion that "like dissolves
like". Conventionally, bonds are taken to have this property if the electronegativity difference between their
atoms is between 0.4 and 1.7, providing the bond with partial ionic character. For 10 points, name this
property of some covalent bonds in which the atoms possess separated partial charges.
ANSWER: polarity [accept word forms; accept nonpolar or word forms until "lack this property" is read, but do not accept afterwards; prompt on "dipole moment" or "dipole"; prompt on "hydrophilicity" or "hydrophobicity"; do not accept "hydropathicity"; do not accept "polarizability" or word forms of that, because that's a different word]
The absence of this property in trans- isomers accounts for their lower boiling points as opposed to
cisisomers. The magnitude of this property is measured in debye units, or coulomb-meters (COO-lawm
meters). Molecules with lone pairs on a central atom almost always have this property. Diatomic
compounds of the same element never have this property. Bonds have this property if the relevant atoms
have different electronegativities. For 10 points, name this property of a molecule with an uneven
distribution of charge.
ANSWER: molecular polarity [or nonzero dipole moment]
The Chandler wobble is a nutation affecting the location of these places that are on Earth, and contributes to
their "wandering". These locations are the antipodes nearest to one another. The prevailing winds
surrounding these locations are weak easterlies, and the most powerful jet streams circulate around and are
named for these locations. Due to CFCs, the atmosphere over one of these locations usually has less than
100 Dobson units of ozone each September. These places are the only locations where lines of longitude
intersect. For 10 points, name these locations at 90 degrees latitude that are on opposite ends of the Earth's
axis of rotation.
ANSWER: the North and South poles of the Earth [accept North and South geographic poles; accept North and South terrestrial poles; accept North Pole; accept South Pole; do NOT accept any answer that mentions "magnetic"; do NOT accept "the people of Poland"]
At the theta point, the self-repulsion of these substances matches a random walk model. They are
modeled by an exponentially-decaying correlation function in the Kratky-Porod model. Substances
like DEHP and DINP can be used to lower the glass transition temperature of these substances. If
they can be dissolved and softened to be remolded into their old shape, they are called (*) thermoset.
The formation of covalent bonds within these substances leads to an increase in their strength called
crosslinking. Carothers' equation gives the namesake degree of the formation of these substances, which
can proceed via a "step-growth" process. A synthetic example of them is Teflon. For 10 points, name these
long molecules made of monomer units.
ANSWER: polymers
The development of an electrically conducting form of these substances won the Nobel Prize in 2000 for
Alan MacDiarmid and his associates. Many of these materials, like many silicates, undergo a glass
transition when they are cooled to form crystalline structures, yet when heated they generally develop into
viscous liquids. The superabsorbent types of these are used to form a type of colloids called hydrogels, and
human-made examples include Kevlar, Teflon, nylon, and polyethylene. Name this category of substances
composed of large complex molecules created by joining together smaller sub-units into long chains.
ANSWER: polymers
The Flory-Huggins theory is a mathematical model used to predict the thermodynamics of solutions of these
complex molecules, and it gives a free-energy of solvation based on the volume fractions of solute and
solvent. Ziegler-Natta catalysts are used to form these from 1-alkenes. Terms such as tacticity describe the
relative orientation of chiral centers in these large molecules. The Carothers equation describes their
formation, and their formation can be through step-growth or chain-growth mechanisms. For ten points,
name these long chains of monomers that are chemically linked which include nylon and PVC.
ANSWER: Polymers
The random coil structure of these entities is described by a quantity that measures the distance from its
center of mass to its outside edge, the radius of gyration. Component chains of them are connected by
crosslinks. Plastics and rubber are examples of materials made from synthetic ones of these. For 10 points,
name these substances like teflon or nylon that consist of repeating units of monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
One theory that explains the behavior of these substances was developed based on a series of thought
experiments, one of which considers a solutions in which the solutes and solvents are of the same size and
the second of which considers systems in which the solute is much larger than the solvent. That theory was a
modification to Raoult's law made by Flory and Huggins. Electrospinning is often used to create nanofibers
out of these molecules, one of which is made out of lactide and is known for its biodegradable properties.
These molecules are generated by step growth and chain growth techniques, which are used to make
substances such as nylon. For 10 points, name these molecules made up of a series of monomers,
exemplified by polystyrene.
ANSWER: polymers
One type of these molecules takes on a rigid mold structure that cannot be softened by heating and is called
"thermosetting." One model for describing these molecules views them as rigid segments with a defined
length connected by hinges and is called the freely-jointed chain. The relative stereochemistry of adjacent
stereocenters in one of these compounds is described using tacticity. Amide or ester linkages can be used to
form the condensation type of these molecules. Peroxides can be used in the initiation step of a reaction
which generates these compounds using free radicals. For 10 points, name these macromolecules that
consist of repeating units called monomers.
ANSWER: polymers [prompt on "plastics"]
Reactions that form these can use iniferters with dithiocarbamate groups to catalyze and ends the
reaction. O-rings are made of a type of these materials that have a low Young's modulus and high
failure strain above their glass transition temperature. One theory of them considers their layout on
a lattice and calculates the entropy and change in Gibbs free energy of mixing them with a solvent;
that theory is due to (*) Flory and Huggins. A model of them that assumes all bond lengths are the same
and bond angles are random is the freely jointed chain model, and when all of their substituents are on the
same side, they are called isotactic. For 10 points, name these large molecules made up of chains or
networks of smaller molecules.
ANSWER: polymers
One of the most accurate thermodynamic models describing them is the FJC model, and in that model, they
can be thought of as various segments whose dimension is the Kuhn length. Another thermodynamic theory
developed by Flory and Huggins describes their interactions in solvents. "Block" varieties of these are
simply two or more different ones of these which are covalently bonded, and reactions in which these
substances are produced from free radicals have initiation, propagation, and termination steps. For 10
points, identify these substances which are composed of several building blocks, examples of which include
polyethylene and polypropylene.
ANSWER: polymers [do not accept or prompt on "monomers"]
One quantity associated with these compounds is given by "B-sub-s" over the product of Boltzmann's
constant and temperature. One of them can be formed by the radical addition of ethene molecules,
and retains an "ene" suffix although it's not an alkene. These substances' stereochemistries are
described by their tacticity, but they are also described by the persistence length. They are formed in
"step-growth" and "chain-growth" processes. In vulcanization, sulfur forms (*) cross-links between
two of them. For ten points, name these compounds including nylon and polyethylene, which consist of
thousands of repeated monomers bonded together.
ANSWER: polymers
The number-average degree of these entities, denoted X sub N, is given by the Carothers equation, and
ABN or benzoyl peroxide is implemented in the creation of these molecules in one method's initiation step.
The Resin Identification System can be used to sort them, and the 2000 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was
awarded for the discovery of a conductive variety of these molecules. For synthesizing these molecules
from 1-alkenes, methylaluminoxane is often used with certain metallocenes in Ziegler-Natta catalysts.
Commercial examples of these include styrofoam, kevlar, and plastics. For ten points, name this class
of molecules composed of many repeated subunits known as monomers.
ANSWER: Polymers
Milner, Witten, and Cates approximated the average density of the "brush" form of these molecules
described in Carothers equation. They are produced in a reaction between copper compounds called ATRP.
An equation for Gibbs free energy including terms for volume fraction comprises the Flory-Huggins model
of these molecules. Organoaluminum cocatalysts are often used to produce these molecules along with
Ziegler-Natta catalysts. They may be produced via step-growth, chain-growth, condensation, or addition.
For 10 points, starch and nylon are what macromolecules consisting of repeating subunits called monomers?
ANSWER: polymers
Common models of these molecules include the "freely jointed rod" and "worm-like chain." Tacticity
describes the arrangement of these compounds' substituents, which are sometimes called Kuhn segments.
The Flory-Huggins theory models these substances. The synthetic condensation form of these are
synthesized in a step-growth method. The free radical mechanism of synthesizing these compounds includes
initiation, propagation, and termination stages, and Ziegler-Natta catalysts are often used in their synthesis.
Common examples include nylon, PVC, and plastics such as polyethylene and polypropylene. For 10
points, name these compounds that are large chains of repeating monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
Depending on the chirality (kie-RALL-ih-tee) of these molecules, they can be syndiotactic
(SIN-dee-oh-tack-tick), atactic (AY-tack-tick), or isotactic (IY-soh-tack-tick). They can gain enhanced
structural properties through crosslinking. Branching allows them to take on shapes like a star, comb, and
brush. Rubber is an example of one of these substance using isoprene (IY-soh-preen) as a building block;
other examples include nylon and most plastics. For 10 points, name these macromolecules formed by a
repeating subunit called a monomer.
ANSWER: polymer
One synthesis for these molecules often uses MAO as a co-catalyst. The second virial coefficient for
these molecules is zero at the theta temperature. The intrinsic viscosity for these molecules is equal to
some constant times molecular weight raised to another constant according to the Mark-Houwink
equation. Dynamic mechanical analysis of these molecules can be used to generate a plot of modulus
versus temperature, which contains a knee at the glass transition temperature. The configuration of
subsequent R and H groups determines the tacticity of these molecules. Very few branches are observed
when they are synthesized from alkenes with Ziegler-Natta catalysts. For 10 points, name these long
molecules made of small, repeating structural units that include polyethylene and polypropylene.
ANSWER: polymers [prompt on plastics; prompt on viscoelastic materials]
Shirakawa discovered a conducting variety of these substances after doping with iodine. These
substances can be called isotactic or syndiotactic, either quality making them stereoregular. A solution of
these substances can be modeled using Flory-Huggins theory, and one class of compounds used to
synthesize these substances work via the Cossee-Arlman mechanism and are titanium-based heterogeneous
catalysts known as Ziegler-Natta catalysts. Common examples of these substances include PET, PVC, and
nylon. For 10 points, name these molecules that consist of repeating units called monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
One method of synthesizing these molecules is controlled by the redox equilibrium between halide
salts of copper one and copper two. That reaction is considered "living" as it lacks a termination step,
and is useful because it provides great control of the products made. The relative stereochemistry
of chiral [KY-rul] centers in these molecules is called the tacticity ["tack"-TIH-sih-tee], and that
can be visualized with a Natta projection. One compound of this type is formed by combining
hexamethylene-diamine and adipic acid. PVC and rubber are made of these molecules, as is
nylon. Name these large molecules containing repeated units called monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
One method to make this class of compound has its rate controlled by a redox equilibrium between
Cu (I) ("copper one") and Cu (II) ("copper two") halides and is called ATRP. Two center aluminumtitanium complexes can control the tacticity of these molecules via the Cossee-Arlman mechanism;
those complexes are (*) Ziegler-Natta catalysts. Free-radical pathways to create this class of molecule
contain initiation, elongation, and termination steps. Commercial examples of these molecules include the
aromatic Kevlar, derived from nylon, as well as plastics. For 10 points, name this class of molecules,
referring to those composed of multiple repeated subunits called monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
The instrinsic viscosity of these materials is related to their molecular weights via the Mark-Houwink
equation. Adding a dispersant to these compounds lowers the glass transition temperature. There are comb,
brush and block variants of them. In almost all cases, these materials have a relatively broad molecular
weight distribution which can be quantified using the polydispersity index. Depending on their
stereochemistry, they can classified as isotactic or syndiotactic. An aluminum and titanium material used to
make a type of these materials is called a Ziegler-Natta catalyst. Teflon and styrofoam are examples of
these materials that include plastics. For 10 points, name these macromolecules formed by repeating a unit
called a monomer.
ANSWER: polymers
Redox reactions are used to create these substances in controlled or "living" reactions. Solutions of these
substances are modeled by the Flory-Huggins theory. These substances can be created by using titanium
tetrachloride or other Ziegler-Natta catalysts. The chain-growth reactions that produce these substances
from free radicals have initiation, propagation, and termination steps. For 10 points, name these molecules,
such as starch, nylon, and rubber, which are large chains formed from a repeating base unit known as a
monomer.
ANSWER: polymers [do not accept "monomers"]
The intrinsically-conducting type of these substances is used in OLEDs. In these substances, the glass
transition temperature measures the point at which parts of it start sliding past one another, and differential
scanning calorimetry is often used to find that temperature. In structural formulas, these are written with a
segment in parentheses and a subscript "n", and they can be described as chain-growth or step-growth. Ones
that can be remolded upon heating, like PVC, are called thermoplastic. One biological one that is produced
by a branching enzyme is starch. For 10 points, name these compounds that are made of repeating structural
units called monomers.
ANSWER: polymers [accept polysaccharides; prompt on "plastics"]
One scientist applied Kuhn's excluded volume to these compounds and developed the idea of the
"theta solvent," for which it is minimized. A coordinate convention used for this type of compound is
named for that man, Paul Flory. "Living" reactions to make these are often controlled by redox
equilibria. Bridged metallocenes called Kaminsky catalysts make them with one type of tacticity, while
traditional Ziegler-Natta catalysts give the other form. Initiation, elongation, and termination steps are
essential to the radical mechanism for forming these. For 10 points, name these compounds exemplified by
plastics, formed by repeated addition of units called monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
Bipolarons are used to explain the electrical properties of conducting varieties of these substances. An
aquamelt is this type of compound that can lose water and solidify in response to stress from the
environment. Above one phase transition temperature but below the melting point, these substances can
crystallize into spherulites. Side chains on these compounds are known as pendant groups, and their
arrangement determines their tacticity. Extending these compounds can be done through step-growth or
chain-growth manners. Synthetic examples of these compounds include nylon and polystyrene. For 10
points, name these long compounds formed from the linkage of many monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
In statistical mechanics, these objects can be modeled as a self-avoiding random walk. The end-to-end
vector of one of these objects has a Gaussian distribution, which shows that the most common value
of that vector is zero. One model describing them is derived by considering a lattice in which either
one of their substituents or a solution molecule occupies each cell. The correlation function for one of
these exponentially decays, with an exponent equal to negative s divided by the persistence length.
The freely-jointed rod and the worm-like chain can be used to model them, and solutions of them are
modeled by the Flory-Huggins theory. Chain-growth and step-growth mechanisms are used to synthesize
them, and tacticity describes the orientation of their substituents. Ziegler-Natta catalysts can create, for 10
points, these compounds like neoprene, nylon, and rubber, which consist of repeating monomer units.
ANSWER: Polymers (accept chain before mention)
Tacticity describes the relative stereochemistry of these compounds. Their tacticity is controlled in the
Chauvin mechanism, which describes how Ziegler-Natta catalysts make these compounds. Radical
mechanisms to form these compounds consist of initiation, propagation, and termination steps and can form
examples like PVC. For 10 points, name these compounds, such as proteins, carbohydrates, and
polyethylene, which are made up of many monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
The persistence length describes these entities' stiffness, and their number-average degree can be found
using the Carothers equation. They can be isotactic or syndiotactic and may be highly polydisperse. One of
these molecules can be synthesized at the interface of two solutions in a "rope trick" reaction, first
discovered by a DuPont researcher. They can be created in condensation or addition reactions by stepgrowth or chain-growth methods, respectively. Examples of these molecules include Kevlar, Teflon, PVC,
and nylon. For 10 points, name these molecules composed of a chain of repeating monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
The Flory-Huggins theory models these substances when put in solution and they are the subject of the
Krotky-Porod worm like chain model. Their stiffness is measured with the persistence length, equal to one
half the Kuhn length, which is used to model them as random walks. The Carothers equation gives their
degree in the step-growth reactions used to create them, while the free radical mechanism is often used for
chain-growth, or addition reactions. For 10 points, name these compounds, examples of which include
nylon and which are composed of repeating monomers.
ANSWER: Polymers (take polymerization or really anything involving the word polymer)
When these materials are modeled as "freely jointed" objects, they behave as rigid rods on the scale of the
persistence length. Synthetic condensation, or "step growth," is one classification of these materials.
"Addition" or "chaingrowth" varieties of these structures see no loss or gain of materials. Ziegler-Natta
catalysts are useful in syntheses of these materials that use alkenes as a base unit. For 10 points, name these
chemical molecules that are large chains of individual molecules, examples of which include polypropylene
and polystyrene.
ANSWER: polymers [do not accept "monomers"]
Without the template effect, one of these compounds, not a crown ether, is the product in 18-crown-6
synthesis. One of these compounds is chloromethylated before the carboxy end of an amino acid displaces
the chlorine in the Merrifield synthesis. One synthesis of these compounds opens with strong bases
attacking a methylene carbon, generating a carbanion. The Gibbs free energy equation for solutions of them
is modified in Flory-Huggins theory. Hermann Staudinger got the Nobel for studying these compounds,
whose relative stereochemistry is called tacticity. They can be formed by a free radical mechanism with
initiation, propagation, and termination steps. Ziegler-Natta catalysts help form, for 10 points, what
compounds, such as neoprene, that consist of repeating monomers?
ANSWER: polymers [grudgingly prompt on "plastic"s on the second sentence]
One theory of these entities models them as isotropic rods that require energy to bend. Central to that model
is a quantity that is defined as the maximum distance that the rod can travel in a straight line before it bends
in a different direction. In addition to being described by the worm-like chain model, another theory of them
relates the change in Gibbs free energy to the product of the ideal gas constant, absolute temperature, and a
complex term that is a sum of the number of moles of these materials times the volume fraction of each one
of these materials, plus some parameter chi to make an energy correction. The mixing of these substances in
a solution is governed by Flory-Huggins theory, and biological examples of them include DNA, sugars and
proteins. For 10 points, identify these compounds that consist of chemically bonded monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
One example of this general class of molecules is synthesized using a titanium aluminum compound
called the Ziegler-Natta catalyst. A diad is a unit found in these molecules, whose stereochemistry can
be described as syndiotactic and isotactic. One example of these molecules formed from the
elimination reaction of phenol with formaldehyde is called Bakelite. Those made up of sugars can
contain 1,4 glycosidic bonds while another is formed from isoprene subunits. For 10 points, name these
molecules that include PVC, nylon and rubber which are composed of many monomers.
ANSWER: polymer (prompt on "macromolecule")
Miktoarm star ones may provide efficient drug delivery systems, and the glass transition temperature
denotes when they become brittle. Flory-Huggins theory models the volume they are likely to occupy.
One kind of reaction to create these is governed by a redox reaction between copper (I) bromide and
copper (II) bromide and is called controlled/living because it lacks a termination step. For 10 points,
identify these macromolecules formed from a number of repeating subunits, natural examples of which
include starch and cellulose.
ANSWER: polymers
Heeger, MacDiarmid, and Shirakawa won a Nobel Prize for discovering a conductive form of these
molecules. The dissolution of these molecules is modeled by the Flory-Huggins lattice theory. Some of
these molecules with chirality centers are isotactic. Zirconium-based metallocenes and titanium
tetrachloride have been used in Ziegler-Natta catalysts for synthesizing these molecules. A free-radical
mechanism is involved in one type of chain growth process used to form these molecules, examples of
which include nylon and polyethylene. For 10 points, name these large molecules that are formed by
combining small molecules called monomers.
ANSWER: polymers
One form of this process was pioneered by Kris Matyjaszewski (mat uh SHEF ski) and uses redox
equilibria, commonly between copper (I) and copper (II) bromide, to control its rate. This process is carried
out on alpha-olefins using compounds like triethylaluminum, called Ziegler-Natta catalysts. Another is
carried out between the "iso" and the "resin blend," which combines provide isocyanate and hydroxyl which
react to form a urethane bond. FTP, identify this process, often carried out with a radical mechanism with
initiation, extension, and termination steps, which links monomers into long chains.
ANSWER: polymerization
This process is can be conducted in the presence of tin octoate, and some products of this process are
being used by the RepRap project. A theory that explains the products of this process is derived by
considering the occupation of a contiguous set of points in a lattice. When this process yields products
which contain many carbamate linkages, it proceeds via a (*) "step" mechanism. One form of this
process results in the formation of "propagation centers" and occurs via a stepped mechanism. This process,
whose products are the subject of the Flory-Huggins theory, is often conducted via a radical mechanism,
and Ziegler-Natta catalysts perform this process on alkenes. For 10 points, name this process which is
divided into initiation, elongation and termination phases, which yields products such as PVC and
polystyrene.
ANSWER: polymerization
Bis-phenoxy-imine systems where the phenoxy groups are sterically protected are highly effective
catalysts for this process. The extent to which this process occurs is equal to one over one minus p,
where p is N sub 0 minus N all over N sub 0 in a famous equation. The products of this process can
crystallize according to Hoffmann nucleation theory. A type of this process which could theoretically
run indefinitely is given the adjective "living." Alkenes undergo this process according to the (*)
Cossee-Arlman mechanism. The Carothers equation describes the degree of this process, which can come in
"chain-growth" and "step-growth" types, and is often aided by zirconium or titanium compounds called
Ziegler-Natta catalysts. For 10 points, name this process in which large molecules are formed from small
monomers.
ANSWER: polymerization
The formation of PAMAM is a divergent form of this process. AIBN and a dithioester are common
reagents in the RAFT form of this process. Miktoarm stars can be synthesized using a "living" form
of this process, which produces a Poisson distribution of products. For one type of this process, Nsub-n is equal to 1 divided by 1 minus the extent of reaction, a relationship sometimes called the
Carothers equation. Catalysts for this type of reaction are especially useful when they can control (*)
dispersity or tacticity. Free radicals can be used to mediate this type of reaction via initiation, elongation,
and termination steps. For 10 points, identify this type of reaction that comes in "step-growth" and "chaingrowth" variants which synthesizes a macromolecule from a series of monomers.
ANSWER: polymerization [accept anything along the lines of "making polymers," accept any more specific type of polymerization such as step-growth, chain growth, dendrimer synthesis, etc.]
Alfred Treibs isolation of these compounds from petroleum created the field of organic geochemistry.
Atsuhiro Osuka's group polymerized 1024 of these molecules in order to create a giant antenna.
Intense absorption around 410 nm known as the Soret peak is characteristic for these compounds,
whose mesotetraphenyl variety can be synthesized by refluxing methylbenzaldehyde and pyrrole
under propionic acid reflux. Ferrocheletase is needed to synthesize them in humans. Humans
synthesize them by combining succinyl-CoA with glycine in order to form alpha-aminolevulinic acid.
Pheophytin contains one of them, though more famously they are coordinated to iron in heme. For 10
points, name these large cyclic compounds which contain four pyrroles coordinated to a central metal atom,
found in chlorophyll.
ANSWER: Porphyrin
The presence of this non-aluminum element defines the tectosilicate mineral orthoclase. The
decay of a radioactive isotope of this element to argon-40 is used to date ancient rocks. Its chloride
salt is a commonly-used lethal injection additive. Along with sodium, this element is pumped through
the cell membrane to create an action potential. A strong oxidizing agent that consists of this element,
manganese and four oxygens is called its (*) permanganate. It reacts with water to form purple flames.
For 10 points, identify this alkali metal whose hydroxide is called potash and which has chemical symbol
K.
ANSWER: potassium [or K until it is read]
A gas of these atoms was cooled to create the first fermionic condensate. This element's bromate is a white
powder which is used as a flour improver to strengthen dough. In fruit flies, the shaker gene codes for ion
channels of this element, whose 40-isotope decays into argon. Hypokalemia is the abnormally low
concentration of this element in the blood. This element's nitrate is known as saltpeter, and its namesake
permanganate is a powerful oxidizing agent. This element's chloride is used as a sodium free substitute for
table salt, and is also used in lethal injections. For 10 points, name this element found in bananas that is
symbolized K.
ANSWER: potassium [prompt on "K" before mentioned]
The major component of the water-soluble portion of ash is this element's carbonate, and this metal
was the first to be isolated by electrolysis. The successful conductance of action potentials relies on
the influx of sodium cations and the efflux of the cationic form of this element, which has a higher
concentration on the inside of the neuronal soma. Because this cation prevents muscle contractions,
its chloride is often used in cardiac surgery to stop the heart. For 10 points, name this chemical element
common in bananas, with atomic symbol K.
ANSWER: potassium [prompt on K before end]
The release of this element from the body is caused by aldosterone, and it is concentrated thirty times more
inside cells than outside cells. It combines with chlorine to make sylvite, and the amount of one of its
isotopes is measured relative to an isotope of argon to determine the age of some minerals. Like nitrogen,
phosphorus, and sulfur, this element is used in many fertilizers. Its chemical behavior is very similar to
sodium, which it is immediately below in the Periodic Table. Name this alkali metal that used to be known
as kalium which is symbolized by the letter K.
ANSWER: potassium (or K before read)
Along with sodium and tartrate, this substance makes up Rochelle's Salt, the main ingredient in baking
powder. It is used with argon in radiometric dating. This element's chloride is used for executions. The ratio
of this element's concentration and those of of nitrogen and phosphorous is used to label fertilizer. This
element's carbonate is known as potash, and it forms a namesake pump with sodium in the cell wall. For 10
points, name this third-heaviest of the alkali metals, with atomic number 19 and atomic symbol K.
ANSWER: potassium [accept K before it is read]
Orthoclase is a type of feldspar that contains this element, whose isotope-40 is used with argon to
date rock formations. This element's chloride is used in executions, and nitrates of it are found in
saltpeter and fertilizer. This element emits a (*) lilac color in a flame test, and a water-soluble form of
this element is found in potash. For 10 points, name this alkali element, slightly less reactive to air and
water than sodium, whose chemical symbol is K.
ANSWER: Potassium (accept K before mentioned)
The superoxide of this element is used in submarines to scrub carbon dioxide from the air
and create oxygen gas. This element's bromide was once used to counter overactive libido.
Although it is not magnesium or chlorine, this element is found in carnallite. The antibiotic
valinomycin selectively binds this cation. This element is the cation in a very strong oxidizing
agent where the manganese atom has a plus seven oxidation state, which is this element's
permanganate. The decay of isotope 40 of this atom to argon is used to date some very old rocks.
For 10 points, name this third alkali metal after lithium and sodium, which is supposedly found
in large amounts in bananas.
ANSWER: potassium [prompt on K]
The transportation of ions of this element is hindered by both apamin and dendrotoxin, which explains
why bee stings and snake bites can be painful and dangerous. Its nitrate is known as niter in mineral form
and is a major component in gunpowder and fertilizers. A common way to date rocks is based on the
decay of this element into argon. Name this alkali metal very similar to sodium whose chemical symbol
comes from its neo-Latin name of kalium.
ANSWER: potassium or K
Deborah Jin used atoms of this element to create the first true fermionic condensate. Its citrate is used to
control kidney stones, and the main electrolyte imbalance in people with kidney failure is an
overabundance of this element. Its permanganate is a common oxidizing agent, and its beta-decay into
argon makes it useful in radiometric dating. It's the primary ion found inside cells, and it's exchanged with
sodium across neuron membranes. Its nitrate is found in fertilizers and saltpeter. For 10 points, name this
element found heavily in bananas, with atomic number 19 and symbol K
ANSWER: Potassium
Measurements of this value taken with a setup including calomel can be used to determine pH, and the
Weston cell is the standard for measurement of this value. It is equal to negative the change in Gibbs free
energy divided by Faraday's constant times "n", and it can be found at non-standard conditions using the (*)
Nernst equation. Values of the same type for the half-reactions that make up a cell are added to find this
quantity, the value of which is often marked on batteries. For 10 points, identify this measure of the
electromotive force output of a galvanic cell, often denoted E sub cell.
ANSWER: electrochemical cell potential [accept electrochemical cell voltage, accept electrode or reduction potential, accept equivalents like voltage of an electrochemical cell; prompt on E or V; accept "pH" before it is read]
One example of this is virga, which has been observed on the Canadian Prairies and the planet Venus.
Another example is called graupel, which accrues on a better known example of this phenomenon. This
phenomenon is governed by the Bergeron process, and it is used to classify climates. It can be specified as
orographic if it is caused by mountains, and a lack of it caused a devastating drought in Sub-Saharan Africa.
FTP, name this meteorological phenomenon in which water falls from clouds to the ground, common
examples of which are sleet, hail, snow, and rain.
ANSWER: Precipitation (prompt on more specific answers before mentioned)
An incomplete type of this phenomenon is called virga, and this phenomenon is often preceded by the
Bergeron process, which may accompany collision and coalescence following nucleation. Graupel is one
variety of this phenomenon, and this process can be initiated due to orographic lift, which produces a
namesake "shadow" of one type of this phenomenon. This process is preceded by condensation and
followed by runoff in the water cycle. For 10 points, name this phenomenon which includes hail, snow, and
rain.
ANSWER: Precipitation [accept specific forms of precipitation before mentioned]
Leisegang rings form as a product of this process, and the Cohn process uses it to recover albumin. It
is exploited in the isolation of francium via cesium salts, though an associated phenomenon can plague
gravimetric analysis. It can be induced by anti-solvents, and oxalic acid typically causes it in the presence
of metals, leading to kidney stones. Leaving behind the supernatant, and often occurring after the
contamination of a supersaturated solution, for 10 points, identify this process, in which the product of a
chemical reaction carried out in solution forms a solid deposit.
ANSWER: precipitation
This phenomenon may be classified by a disdrometer. Radar reflectivity is proportional to the sixth power
of the particles involved in this phenomenon. The Bergeron process leads to this phenomenon via
coalescence. The Koppen climate classification system depends on temperature and on the quantity of this
phenomenon in an area. Its pH can be altered by volcanoes and more prominently by human activity, like
mining and pollution. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, which exists in forms such as rain or snow.
ANSWER: precipitation [accept rain until mention]
A variant of the sandwich ELISA uses TMB and horseradish peroxidase in the "surface" type of this
kind of reaction. This reaction commonly occurs in supersaturated solutions, because a certain factor is
exceeded, and in soils, this kind of reaction produces crystal growth. This reaction does not occur in
solutions containing ammonium ions or nitrate ions, according to the solubility rules. For 10 points,
name this kind of reaction in which two dissolved ions form an insoluble compound.
ANSWER: precipitation reaction
Ostwald ripening can follow this type of reaction to generate larger particles, and this step follows
electrolysis in the Hall-Heroult process. The electrostatic type of this reaction recovers valuable metals from
industrial waste gases while supercritical fluids can be used as antisolvents for this. In classical qualitative
analysis, the early addition of chloride and sulfide ions can detect silver and lead by this process, and this
reaction typically occurs when a supersaturated solution is disturbed. Often resulting from a double
displacement reaction, name this chemical process in which a dissolved substance forms a solid and settles
out of solution.
ANSWER: precipitation reaction [accept word forms]
One of these reactions occurs in supersaturated solutions when a nucleation site is added. When the
reaction quotient is greater than the solubility product constant, this type of reaction will occur when the
equilibrium shifts to the left. If this occurs during a double replacement reaction, the spectator ions are
usually removed from the net ionic equation. This type of reaction occurs when lead nitrate is added to
potassium iodide, forming a yellow-ish substance. For 10 points, name this type of reaction which causes a
namesake insoluble product to form.
ANSWER: precipitation reaction [or crystallization; or word forms]
The "a prime" term is added to this quantity in the van der Waals equation. The solubility of a gas in
liquid is proportional to this quantity for the gas according to Henry's Law. The triple point is usually
shown on a diagram plotting temperature against this quantity for a substance. For 10 points, name this
physical quantity which is measured by a barometer in millimeters of mercury or Pascals.
ANSWER: pressure [accept more specific answers]
Henry's law equates a version of this quantity to the product of solute concentration and a
compound-dependent constant. It is directly proportional to (*) temperature according to Gay-Lussac's
Law, and partial ones proportional to the mole fraction are covered by Dalton's Law. For 10 points, name
this quantity measured in pascals and equal to force divided by unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
When this value is held constant, the molar heat capacity of a monatomic gas is five-halves R. For a
reversible adiabatic [ay-dee-uh-"BAT"-ik] process, this value times volume raised to some power gamma
is a constant. The integral of this quantity with respect to the volume gives the work. Processes in
which this constant is held constant are depicted as horizontal lines and are called isobaric processes.
This quantity is plotted against temperature in a phase diagram. Boyle's law states that this quantity
is inversely proportional to volume. Name this quantity that can be measured in atmospheres or
pascals, and which is defined as force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure [prompt on P]
Anticyclones have a central region with a high value for one form of this quantity. One example of the
Bernoulli (burr-NEW-lee) effect is the reduction of one form of this quantity as fluid speed increases. Lines
on a weather map where one form of this quantity is constant are called isobaric lines, and it is measured
with a barometer. Yet another form of this quantity is multiplied by temperature in the ideal gas law. For 10
points, name this term that refers to force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure [accept atmospheric pressure]
This quantity for photons is equal to the power flux density over the speed of light. For an ideal gas, the
specific heat at constant volume is equal to R less than the specific heat holding this quantity constant. Also
for an ideal gas, this quantity, all else equal, is proportional to temperature and inversely proportional to
volume. For 10 points, name this quantity defined as the ratio of the magnitude of a force over the area over
which it is exerted, often measured in torr or atmospheres.
ANSWER: pressure
Measurements of heat capacity where this quantity is constant produce larger values than those at constant
volume. This quantity can be defined as temperature times the partial of entropy with respect to volume.
Intensity over the speed of light gives one version of this quantity when light is absorbed, and when the light
is reflected the radiation type of this quantity is doubled. This quantity is constant in isobaric processes and
inversely proportional to volume in Boyle's Law. For 10 points, name this scalar quantity with units of
Pascals that is defined as force per unit area.
ANSWER: pressure
In diagramming a heat engine on a plot partially named for this value, it is generally shown along the
y-axis. At a given mass, a gas that follows Gay-Lussac's (GEH LOO-sack's) law will have this value
directly proportional to the gas's temperature. This value is kept constant for a gas when considering the
relationship of Charles's Law between temperature and volume, and this value is also kept constant in an
isobaric process. For 10 points, name this value measured in Pascals and calculated by taking force over
area.
ANSWER: pressure
One type of this quantity can be calculated by measuring the effusion through a Knudson cell; that
quantity puts the negative sign in the cavitation number. Enthalpy can be described as a function of
entropy and this quantity. Fugacity has the same units as this quantity, while another unit used to
measure it is equal to 101,000 Newtons per meter squared. For 10 points, identify this physical quantity
whose conjugate variable is volume and which is measured in Torrs or Pascals.
ANSWER: pressure [accept vapor pressure until "Enthalpy"]
When this quantity is constant, the molar heat capacity of a monatomic ideal gas is five-halves R.
When fluid speed increases, potential energy or this quantity decreases, according to Bernoulli's
principle. In gases, this quantity arises from (*) molecular collisions with the walls of a container.
Boyle's law shows that it and volume are inversely related. The pascal is the unit of, for 10 points, what
quantity measuring force per unit area?
ANSWER: pressure
This scientist created a forerunner of a eudiometer, using a pneumatic trough to test the "goodness" of air.
While in Calne, this scientist published Experiments and Observations on Diffferent Kinds of Air, a work
which further debunked the classical idea of the four elements and reported on substances like "alkaline
air." It also included an experiment where he focused the sun's rays on mercuric oxide to produce a
substance he referred to as dephlogisticated air. For 10 points, name this 18th century British chemist known
for his discovery of elemental oxygen
ANSWER: Joseph Priestley
This man's development of the "nitrous air test" for air pollution helped improve sanitation. He
devised a way to create soda-water, which he thought could cure scurvy. This man emigrated to
America a few years after his house was destroyed in the Birmingham Riots, due to his support for
the (+) French Revolution and opposition to the Test Act. This Dissenter discovered that charcoal
conducted electricity, and used mercury in a new design for a pneumatic trough. This supporter of
(*) phlogiston theory heated red mercuric oxide and called the resultant gas "dephlogisticated air." For 10
points, name this British chemist who discovered oxygen.
ANSWER: Joseph Priestley
This quantity is equal to L plus one plus the number of radial nodes of the wavefunction. In one model, the
square of this quantity is inversely proportional to energy with a constant of thirteen point six. Transitioning
between two different values of it gives a frequency proportional to the difference between the reciprocals
of the square of two different values of it, via the Rydberg formula. The azimuthal number is bounded by
one minus this value, for which different values also generate the Pfund, Balmer, and Lyman series. This
number determines the energy level of an orbital, and along with spin, angular momentum, and magnetic
quantum numbers completely describe an electron in an orbital. For 10 points, name this quantum number
symbolized n.
ANSWER: principal quantum number [or n before read; accept energy level until mentioned]
The reduction of these particles is assigned zero volts on the scale of reduction potentials. Bicarbonate
ions consist of carbonate ions attached to one of these particles. These particles were discovered when
alpha particles scattered backward in Rutherford's gold foil experiment. pH is calculated as the negative
logarithm of the concentration of these particles. For 10 points, name these particles which are found with
neutrons in the atomic nucleus and have a positive charge.
ANSWER: protons [or hydrons or H+ or H-plus; prompt on H]
Removal of one of these objects from a carbonyl creates an enolate. Their magnetic resonance is
used in the form of NMR that has typical chemical shifts of zero to twelve. One of them is
transformed in electron capture. While they do not exist freely in solution, they can combine with
water to form a (*) hydronium ("high"-DRO-nee-um) ion. The Bronsted-Lowry definition describes acids
as donators of these particles. For 10 points, name this positive particle found in the nucleus.
ANSWER: proton [or H+; or hydrogen nucleus; prompt on hydrogen]
In the Morokuma decomposition, roughly two-thirds of this quantity originates from electrostatic
and delocalized-electron interactions, and the exchange repulsion term is zero. In amines, the
increase in this quantity with increasing alkyl substitution arises mostly from a polarizability term. In
polysubstituted benzenes, increments in this quantity are large and negative for non-methyl
substitution at at the ipso position, and are governed by an additivity rule. In terms of this quantity,
the hydrohelium cation is the strongest known acid. This quantity is the energy released when
benzene is converted to arenium in the gas phase. Constituting part of the (*) Bronsted-Lowry
definition of basicity, for 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of energy released when a hydrogen
cation is added to a molecule or anion in the gas phase.
ANSWER: proton affinity [accept Epa]
When combined with calcium hydroxide, this rock is called pozzolan and has industrial uses as a
form of cement. This rock can form a namesake cone around volcanoes that is similar to a cinder
cone, but is filled with vesicles. These igneous rocks are formed when lava high in (*) volatiles cools
quickly above ground and are sometimes given the name "volcanic froth," and they are one of the few rocks
to float in water. For 10 points, name this light colored spongy rock often used in concrete, but better
known as a powder or an abrasive.
ANSWER: Pumice
The lack of oxidation of this and uranium minerals from Elliot Lake, Canada has been used as evidence
of low oxygen levels during the Paleoproterozoic era. Bravoite is a nickel version of this mineral. In anoxic
sediments, it is believed that this mineral is formed using a greigite intermediate from mackinawite. Ore
bodies of this mineral are colonized and oxidized by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and that oxidation is
one of the main causes of acid mine drainage. This is found in hydrothermal deposits and is one of the most
common sulfide minerals. For 10 points, name this mineral with formula FeS2 and sometimes called "fool's
gold."
ANSWER: pyrite [prompt on fool's gold]
Marcasite is referred to as the "white" version of this mineral. The primary metal found in it is sometimes
displaced by cobalt, nickel, arsenic, or copper, and the copper variety occurs near contact points between
eruptive rocks and slates. It is found as an accessory mineral in quartz deposits, as well as in sedimentary
rocks. Weathering transforms it into goethite or limonite, and it is the most common sulfide mineral. For
10 points, identify this mineral with chemical formula FeS2 commonly known as fool's gold.
ANSWER: Iron pyrite [accept iron sulfide, accept FeS2 until the formula, accept fool's gold until the end]
Large amounts of limonite can be produced by alteration of this mineral and it lends its name to a
geometric form which is one of its two common crystal habits. Its oxidation plays an important role
in the supergene alteration of hydrothermal sulfide deposits. Other features include penetration
twins known as "iron crosses" as well as characteristic 3-fold rotational symmetry-related striations
on crystal faces. Its polymorph marcasite features a distinctive (*) cockscomb shape and this mineral
has a distinctive greenish black streak. It is also the most common sulfide mineral, occurring in almost all
hydrothermal deposits. For 10 points, name this often cubic brassy-yellow mineral with the formula FeS2,
commonly known as "fool's gold".
ANSWER: pyrite [accept fool's gold before read, accept FeS2 before mentioned]
This mineral is commonly used in geothermobarometry in petrometry due to its tendency to form
easily recognizable phenocrysts in many igneous rocks. Hornblendes sometimes form as an alteration
to this mineral, mimicking their crystal shape and making it even harder to distinguish between the
two. Its structure consists of (*) single chains of silicon-oxygen tetrahedra. Spodumene is the only lithium
containing type of this mineral, and augite is a calcium-rich form of this mineral. This mafic silicate mineral
weathers more quickly than amphibole, but more slowly than olivine, and jade is a type of this mineral. For
10 points, name this mineral that, along with olivine, makes up much of the mantle.
ANSWER: pyroxene
This mineral lies at the bottom of Bowen's Reaction Series, and two common varieties of this mineral are
tiger's eye and chalcedony (KHAL-suh-dohn-ee). Many analog wristwatches use the piezoelectric property
of this mineral to keep time. The most common form of this mineral is formed with minute fluid inclusions
and is the "milky" type. When this mineral is translucent gray it is called "smoky". For 10 points, name this
silicate that is the second most common mineral in the Earth's crust after feldspar.
ANSWER: quartz [prompt on "silicon dioxide"]
High temperature polymorphs of this mineral include cristobalite and tridymite. When interwoven with
moganite, it forms chalcedony. It is found at the bottom of Bowen's reaction series. Shistovite, its shocked
form, is found at the K-T boundary. Its rare forms include the "rose" type and amethyst, and it exhibits the
piezoelectric effect. For 10 points, name this second most abundant mineral in the Earth's crust, after
feldspar, that is formed by a tetrahedral configuration of silicon dioxide.
ANSWER: quartz
Varieties of this mineral include onyx, jasper and chalcedony, and it is one of the few minerals to
feature conchoidal fracture. Its piezoelectric properties have resulted in its being used in clocks and
watches. After feldspar, it is the most (*) common mineral on Earth, and it is the most common on the
Earth's surface. Common varieties of it include citrine and amethyst. For 10 points, name this crystalline
form of silica, a mineral with chemical formula SiO2 and a Mohs hardness of seven.
ANSWER: quartz
Despite their name, Herkimer diamonds are actually composed of a double terminated type of this mineral.
When subject to extreme heat, this mineral can be artificially transformed into the mineral citrine, and this
mineral can keep an electronic rhythm when mechanical stress is applied to it. This piezoelectric mineral
can be found at the bottom of Bowen's reaction series, and this second most common mineral in the world
after Feldspar also comes in "smoky" and amethyst varieties. For 10 points, name this mineral that has a
Mohs hardness of 7 and has the chemical formula SiO2.
ANSWER: Quartz
At very high pressure, such as below impact craters, this mineral can metamorphose into coesite
(KO-uh-zite). Evidence of the K-T boundary was provided by a layer of the amorphous "shocked" type of
this mineral. Together with various types of feldspar, this mineral comprises the major ingredient of
granite. Its piezoelectric (pee-AY-zo-"electric") properties make it allows its use in crystal oscillators. For
10 points, name this mineral made up of silicon dioxide, which has a hardness of seven on the Mohs scale.
ANSWER: quartz [before "silicon," accept silicon dioxide; or silica; or SiO2]
A thin layer of one of these minerals placed perpendicular to an electric arc served as both a
transmitter and a receiver in a sonar apparatus designed by Paul Langevin.These minerals are
among the least resistant to weathering. These minerals are found along with moganite in
chalcedony, and they generate a charge when mechanically stressed. Citrine and (*) Amethyst are
varieties of this mineral, and these minerals appear at the very bottom of Bowen's reaction series. These
minerals are piezoelectric, and after feldspars, these are the most abundant minerals on Earth. For 10 points,
name this class of minerals which has the empirical formula SiO2.
ANSWER: quartz [prompt on silicon dioxide or SiO2 until the last word]
At over 867 degree Celsius, this mineral turns into tridymite, and chemical stability above 573 degrees
Celsius differentiates the beta and alpha forms of this mineral. This mineral is located below muscovite at
the bottom of Bowen's reaction series. This mineral, which exhibits piezoelectricity, has a hardness of 7 on
the Mohs scale. Composed of silica, examples of this mineral include citrine and amethyst. Name this
common mineral that comes in "rose" and "smoky" varieties.
ANSWER: quartz
The structure of this mineral is divided into alpha and beta varieties, though both show chiral crystal
structures. The synthetic form of this mineral is produced via the hydrothermal method. Colored types
develop when trace amounts of elements are present, an example of which is manganese contributing the
purple tint of Amethyst. Its crystalline structure makes it the simplest silicate, while it is also the second
most abundant in the Earth's surface. Found on the Mohs scale as a seven, FTP, name this mineral often
found in watches.
ANSWER: quartz
The shocked variety of this mineral is contained in the Barringer Crater and the K-T boundary
contains the shocked variety of this mineral. The "fused" form of this mineral is used in fiber optics.
The piezoelectric properties of this mineral allow it to regulate clocks utilizing electronic oscillators.
This mineral at the (*) bottom of Bowen's Reaction Series has varieties called Tiger's Eye and citrine.
Common in sedimentary rocks, this mineral can be found in sandstone and its namesake metamorphic rock.
With a Mohs' hardness of 7, for 10 points, identify this second-most abundant mineral in the crust, found in
sand, with formula SiO2.
ANSWER: quartz
One form of this mineral exhibits chatoyancy and features golden-brown fibers. A cryptoclinic mixture of
this mineral and moganite has a waxy luster and is called chalcedony. This piezoelectric mineral is found at
the bottom of Bowen's reaction series. Gold ore is sometimes found in veins of this mineral, which is used
in crystal oscillators. Found in granite and sandstone, it consists of silicon dioxide. Other variants of this
mineral include jasper, citrine, and amethyst. For 10 points, name this silicate mineral with a hardness of 7
on the Mohs scale.
ANSWER: quartz
One member of this crystal's namesake group with cubic structure is called cristobalite. Its interweaving
with moganite produces chalcedony, and this material undergoes conchoidal fracture. Stishovite or its
shocked form is found an impact craters. It has the lowest crystallization temperature on Bowen's reaction
series. Pure crystals of this substance exhibit the piezoelectric effect. For 10 points, identify this mineral
formed from tetrahedral of silicon dioxide, which has a value of 7 on the Mohs scale and whose varieties
include "rose," flint, and amethyst.
ANSWER: quartz [accept SiO2 before silicon dioxide]
Artificially, this mineral is manufactured using seed crystals called lascas. This mineral typically
lacks a true crystal shape since it forms within the spaces of other crystals; that feature is due to the
fact that this mineral is the last to crystallize from cooling magma, putting it at the bottom of
Bowen's reaction series. Aluminum 3 plus ions are in the smoky form of this mineral, while traces of
iron gives this mineral an orange hue, a variant called citrine. Amethyst is a form of this mineral, whose
piezoelectric properties allow it be used an electronic oscillator in modern clocks. For 10 points, name this
second most abundant mineral in the Earth's crust, composed of silicon dioxide.
ANSWER: quartz
A rare, green-colored form of this mineral used in jewelry is called prasiolite. This mineral can possess
planar deformation features, and one variety of this mineral is called chalcedony. It is at the bottom of
Bowen's Reaction Series, and this mineral exhibits piezoelectricity, making it useful in watches and radio
transmitters. It is the second most abundant mineral in the Earth's crust, and varieties of it include onyx,
citrine, and amethyst. For 10 points, name this mineral mainly composed of silicon dioxide, with a Mohs
hardness of 7.
ANSWER: Quartz
The alpha type of this mineral crystallizes trigonally and the beta type crystallizes hexagonally. Cristobalite
has the same chemical formula but different crystal structure than this mineral. One type of this mineral
created in high pressures is abundant near the K-T boundary. This mineral is found under muscovite on the
Bowen's Reaction Series, and, like Topaz, this mineral is piezoelectric. Forms of this mineral include
amethyst, and trace amounts of titanium create the rose type of this mineral. For 10 points, name this
mineral that scores a 7 on the Mohs hardness scale, and which is composed of silicon dioxide.
ANSWER: quartz
One variety of this mineral was used to create the most perfect sphere in human history, and another
is found at areas which saw immense pressure, like nuclear bomb tests and the K-T event. In addition
to the "fused" and (*) "shock" varieties, colorful instances of this mineral are sometimes called citrine,
"rose", or the purple amethyst. Composed of one silicon atom for every two oxygen atoms, this is, for ten
points, what second most common mineral in the Earth's crust after feldspar?
ANSWER: Quartz
This mineral is at the bottom of Bowen's reaction series, and its piezoelectric properties make it useful as a
component of crystal oscillators. Common varieties of this second most common mineral in Earth's crust
include citrine, amethyst, and onyx. This mineral is the largest component of granite and is primarily
composed of silicon dioxide. For 10 points, name this mineral with a Mohs hardness of 7.
ANSWER: quartz
Cristobalite and tridymite are polymorphs of this mineral, along with its hexagonal beta variety. A felsic
mineral, it lies below muscovite at the bottom of Bowen's reaction series. One variety with planar
deformation features is often present in nuclear bomb impact sites and at the K-T boundary, the shocked
variety. Like topaz, it exhibits piezoelectricity. Gold ore sometimes occurs in veins of this mineral. It comes
in many colored varieties, including onyx, citrine, agate, and amethyst. For 10 points, name this silicate
mineral with a Mohs hardness of 7.
ANSWER: quartz [prompt on silicate, prompt on silicon dioxide or silica]
Chalcedony is an intergrowth of this mineral and moganite. This mineral is found below muscovite at the
bottom of the Bowen's Reaction Series. The piezoelectric properties of this mineral make it commonly used
for crystal oscillators. This mineral has a value of seven on the Mohs Hardness Scale, and forms of it
include rose, smoky, and amethyst. For 10 points, name this silica mineral that is the second most common
in the crust.
ANSWER: Quartz
High temperature polymorphs of this mineral include tridymite (TRIH-dih-mite) and cristobalite
(KRIS-toe-ball-ite). The alpha form of this mineral has a trigonal structure, while its beta form is
hexagonal. When microscopic crystals of it are intermixed with moganite, chalcedony
(chall-SEE-dun-ee) results. Citrine is a yellow colored type of this mineral, and (*) amethyst is a
purple one. Each of its oxygen atoms is part of two tetrahedrons. This mineral exhibits the piezoelectric
effect. For 10 points, name this mineral that has an overall formula corresponding with silicon dioxide, and
has a hardness of seven on the Mohs scale.
ANSWER: quartz [prompt on silica; prompt on silicon dioxide; prompt on SiO2]
This mineral has the lowest crystallization temperature on Bowen's reaction series. This mineral is
normally the last to crystallize in magma, so it fills the space between other minerals. It has a
conchoidal fracture, and it exhibits the piezoelectric effect when under stress. Although this mineral
is usually (*) colorless and transparent, it has many varieties including onyx, milky, and amethyst, all of
which have different colors. Name this mineral with chemical formula silicon dioxide, a 7 on Moh's scale of
mineral hardness.
ANSWER: Quartz
The "shocked" form of this mineral is found in the K-T boundary. When the suffix "-ite" is added
to the name of this mineral, it names a metamorphic rock that forms from sandstone. This is the only
non-feldspar mineral on the QAPF diagram. It is the second-most-abundant mineral of the
continental (*) crust after feldspar, with which it combines to form granite. This mineral is a seven on the
Mohs scale of hardness. For 10 points, name this mineral made up of tetrahedral silicon dioxide crystals,
which comes in "rose" and amethyst varieties.
ANSWER: quartz
Berlinite is a phosphate mineral which has a structure similar to this mineral, and crystals of this
mineral which are green are known as prasiolite or vermarine. A variant of it, which usually forms in
large, concentric layers, is known as agate. Amethyst and citrine are variants of this mineral, which is the
bottom-most mineral on the Bowen's reaction series. It also has a value of seven on the Mohs hardness
scale. For 10 points, identify this mineral which is less common than feldspar, and is made of crystallized
silica.
ANSWER: quartz [prompt on silica or silicon dioxide]
This mineral has the same structure as berlinite, and it has the lowest relative weathering potential on the
Goldich dissolution series. One form of this mineral is formed from the high pressure of nuclear bomb
explosions and meteor impacts, and is known as its "shocked" variety. Pierre Curie discovered a property of
this mineral that led to its use in crystal oscillators. It combines with moganite to form chalcedony, which
comes in types such as agate and onyx. This piezoelectric mineral made up of continuous silicon-oxygen
tetrahedra is the second most abundant mineral in the Earth's crust. For 10 points, identify this silicate
mineral of hardness 7 on the Mohs scale.
ANSWER: quartz [prompt on "silicon dioxide" or "SiO2"]
Two varieties of this mineral formed at high pressure and found in some meteorite craters are called coesite
and stishovite. One variety's brown-gold fibrous crocidolite inclusions exhibit chatoyancy. That effect, also
called "cat's eye", may be present along with a diasterism when this mineral is backlit. At the bottom of
Bowen's reaction series, this trigonal crystal displays piezoelectricity, the basis for its use in clocks. It
includes onyx, citrine, and "rose" varieties. For 10 points, name this mineral with chemical formula SiO2
and Mohs hardness of 7, which, when purple, is called amethyst.
ANSWER: quartz [prompt on silicon dioxide; prompt on SiO2]
A standard technique used to prepare these molecules involves oxidizing monohydric phenols with Fermy's
salt and is called the Teuber reaction. One member of this group of molecules reacts with acetic anhydride
in the presence of sulphuric acid to form 1,2,4-triacetoxybenzen in the Thiele acylation. Their "o" and "p"
varieties can be synthesized by coupling a phenol to a diazonium salt and reducing the resulting azo
compound with dithionite, and the hydro variety of this type of compound has formula C6H6O2 and is
oxidized in the spray of bombardier beetles. Also including the naptha variety, which encomopasses the K
vitamins, for ten points, identify these compounds distinguished by two carbonyl groups that are adjacent of
separated by a vinylene group.
ANSWER: quinones
This process can mistake improperly located wind turbines for tornados. In this
process, a thermal inversion can cause ducting, leading to anomalous propagation, and range folding occurs
at large distances. Melting snow under this process can show up as a "bright band", and high values of its
Vertically Integrated Liquid product can indicate hail. Attenuation by thunderstorms is a common problem
with using a 5 mm wavelength, and velocity couplets are detected using its Doppler variety. For ten points,
identify this process which uses radio waves to study weather.
ANSWER: weather radar
Laurent used his addition to Dumas' law of substitution to divide these entities into fundamental and
derived types. Two of them form the Gomberg dimer, and the release of nitrogen by azo compounds
results in another two of these. These substances are produced in the initiation stage of a chain
reaction. For 10 points, name these substances usually denoted by a dot to the right of the element or
compound, which have a single unpaired electron and whose neutral variety is known as "free".
ANSWER: radicals
Nitroso examples of these species include Fremy's salt and TEMPO. A persistent example of this species is
the trimethylphenyl one exhibited by Gomberg. These species may be studied via EPR spectroscopy.
Initiators that create these entities include AIBN and peroxides. These species have ground states referred
to as "doublets" and can begin polymerization reactions with initiation, propagation, and termination steps.
For 10 points, name these chemical species that possess a single unpaired electron.
ANSWER: radicals
Synchrotron radiation can generate the hydroxyl variety of these for ultrafast footprinting studies, although
a more common technique involves Fenton's reagent. They are typically short-lived, but may be stabilized
by either HOMO ("hoe-moe") or LUMO ("loo-moe") interactions, or by both, as in the "push-pull" case.
The photocatalyzed production of chloroform is a classic example of their chain reactions, which may also
be initiated by azo-bis-iso-butyro-nitrile or AIBN. Diatomic oxygen is a common variety, as are the reactive
oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide which have been implicated in aging. For 10 points, name these
molecules with unpaired electrons.
ANSWER: radicals
One of these chemical compounds is used as an alternative to DNase I in footprinting assays, and in
NMR sp. ectroscopy, they can be detected using the CIDNP experiment. Fremy's salt produces them,
while RAFT and ATRP living polymerization uses these species as reactive intermediates. A more
common method of detecting them involves using TEMPO as a spin trap and imaging by ESR. Also
produced via homolytic cleavage reactions catalyzed by UV light, the mitochondria generates the
superoxide one, which causes DNA damage. For 10 points, name these chemical compounds which contain
and unpaired electron and are very reactive.
ANSWER: Radicals (accept "hydroxyl radical" until "NMR")
Moses Gomberg discovered an organic type of this molecule, thus founding a field of chemistry named
for them. Superoxide dismutase opposes the action of one of this type of molecule. The action of this
type of molecule is inhibited by antioxidants. For 10 points, identify this term in chemistry that is often
prefixed by "free" and which refers to a molecule has unpaired electrons.
ANSWER: radical
One form of this process is interpreted using the two intercepts of the discordia and concordia lines, and is
often performed on zircon because it rejects lead from its crystal lattice. Pleochroic halos can be observed
using this method, one form of which uses chlorine and is specific to the 1950s. Other forms include
samarium-neodymium, rubidium-strontium, and potassium-argon. Another form of this technique uses the
fact that, every 5,730 years, half of the carbon-14 nuclei decay away. For 10 points, name this technique,
often using uranium-238, that finds the age of an object using radioactive decay rates.
ANSWER: radiometric dating or radioactive dating [accept uranium-lead dating until "chlorine" is read]
The fifth decay stage starting with the most common isotope of this element is Lead 210, and this eventually
decays to Lead 206. This element is created from the decay of thorium or uranium, and it is often found
where the waste products of uranium mining have been buried. This rises from soil and water containing
uranium, and this is the heaviest noble gas. Because it is colorless and odorless, people generally are not
aware of their exposure level to it. Name this gas that emits ionizing radiation and according to some
studies is the 2nd leading cause of lung cancer after smoking.
ANSWER: radon or Rn
The size distribution of the elements of this process is given by the Marshall-Palmer law, and the Z-R
relation is used to correlate the severity of this phenomenon with radar reflectivity. Along with
temperature, the amount of this phenomenon is used to distinguish groups A through E in the
Koppen (*) classification system. This phenomenon can be caused by adiabatic cooling of anabatic wind to
below its dew point. Mountains create a "shadow" in which this phenomenon doesn't occur, and this
phenomenon occurs quite heavily during a monsoon. For 10 points, name this weather phenomenon in
which water vapor condenses into liquid droplets and falls on the ground.
ANSWER: rain [accept precipitation]
This phenomenon will be cold or solid if it results from the Bergeron Process. Orographic lift explains
how this phenomenon can occur at higher elevations but not lower. In the Koppen climate scheme,
differences in this phenomenon are largely responsible for the differentiation of Group A climates.
Mountain ranges cause this phenomenon's namesake "shadow," which leads to the formation of deserts. For
10 points, name this liquid precipitation that falls from the sky.
ANSWER: rain [prompt on precipitation]
A sixth-order one of these phenomena was observed when a HeNe laser beam was shown through a
pendant water drop. These phenomena are thought to also exist on Saturn's moon Titan, as it has a
wet surface and humid clouds, but, because methane, not water, would be (*) refracting the light, its
radius would be 49 degrees instead of 42 degrees, like on Earth. They can be seen near waterfalls or fountains, or in the
spray created by waves, but they are better known for appearing after a storm. For ten points, name this
colorful meteorological phenomenon that appears as a spectrum of light in the sky.
ANSWER: Rainbows
The twinned variety of these objects is hypothesized to be produced by oblate spheroids, and glass beads
make one half of the normal size. Grossmann made a confirmed observation of its third-order variety, which
is often swamped by a zero-order glow. Alexander's dark band is a common feature in these phenomena,
and diffraction produces its supernumeraries. Reflection from a body of water can produce one centered
above the horizon, but usually a high sun cannot produce this. For ten points, name this phenomenon where
light is internally reflected inside raindrops, producing a colorful arc.
ANSWER: rainbows
.This technique is commonly used to detect the G prime band of carbon nanotubes. It is also used to map
three dimensional surfaces in a commonly used type of confocal microscopy. This technique gives a
characteristic reading for benzene at 992 inverse centimeters. 785 and 514 nanometer lasers are typically
used for this technique. The mechanism of this technique occurs if d alpha over d r is greater than zero. This
technique's selection rule requires that a compound's polarizability changes during a vibration. This
technique involves the excitation of a photon to a virtual energy state followed by a Stokes or anti-Stokes
shift. For 10 points, name this form of spectroscopy based on a type of inelastic scattering named for an
Indian scientist.
ANSWER: Raman spectroscopy [or Raman scattering]
Izumi made this material enantioselective by adding optically active amino- or hydroxyl-acids, and
this platinum- and rhodium-free compound can be used to cheaply transform benzene to cyclohexane
on an industrial scale. The formation of sodium aluminate and precipitation of bayerite during
synthesis of this material decreases its utility, and selective leaching is used to remove atoms from
some phases of this material. A common method of removing carbonyls is to transform them into
thioacetals and then apply this material, which results in the corresponding alkane. This material is
commonly used in desulfurization reactions and it is created by reacting a certain alloy with sodium
hydroxide, leaving behind a porous catalyst with very high surface area. For 10 points, name this
hydrogenation catalyst made of aluminum and a namesake metal, named for an American chemist.
ANSWER: Raney Nickel
Pattison and Degering prepared a version of this catalyst using an alloy of magnesium and acetic acid to
remove inactive portions of its structure, and that catalyst improved significantly on Mozingo's W-2
version. Formaldehyde is entirely disproportionated within seventy minutes in the presence of it, and it
catalyzes other Cannizzaro-type pathways effectively. Its preparation involves alloying aluminum and
silicon and dissolving using sodium hydroxide. Its industrial applications include complete reduction of
benzene and desulfurization processes. For 10 points, name this catalyst whose mesh surface structure
allows for high catalytic activity, named for its discoverer and the metal it contains, nickel.
ANSWER: Raney nickel
One value named after this scientist equals mole fraction times activity coefficient, is represented as 'a sub
w', and is referred to as water activity. That value is combined with the Kelvin term to study the behavior of
droplets in cloud formation known as Kohler theory. The related law named after this scientist can be
combined with Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures to find mole fractions, and it uses the same assumptions as
the Ideal Gas Law. Name this French scientist who stated that the vapor pressure of an ideal solution
depends on the vapor pressure of each component and its mole fraction.
ANSWER: Francois-Marie Raoult
Coefficients for fugacity and activity are one way to correct this equation for non-ideal situations. Hydrogen
bonding can cause both negative deviation from this, as intermolecular forces are stronger than
intramolecular forces, and positive deviation, when the opposite occurs. This law carries the corollary that
as the number of components in a solution increases, their individual vapor pressures decrease. For 10
points, name this chemical law which states that the vapor pressure of an ideal solution is dependent on the
vapor pressure of each chemical component and the mole fraction of the component present in the solution,
named after a French chemist.
ANSWER: Raoult's law
A restatement of this equation sets the change of Gibbs free energy to nRT times the sum of each
component's concentration times the log of its concentration. Pxy [P-x-y] diagrams are derived from this
equation. This equation is used to find the bubble point and the dew point. Positive deviations from it occur
in chloroform and ethanol, or other solutions with strong cohesive forces. This law fails to predict
azeotropes. It can only be used at high concentration, or for mixtures of similar compounds like benzene
and toluene. For 10 points, name this law which states that the partial pressure of a gas equals its mass
fraction in the liquid phase times the vapor pressure, named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Raoult's Law
This equation can be obtained by removing the exponential from Margules' equation. It is
derived by equating the chemical potentials of two components and rearranging until the fugacities
remain. This law applies to systems for which the enthalpy of solvation is zero, and common systems
used to illustrate it are mixes of isomers like 1-propanol and 2-propanol. For real systems this law
usually applies to the (*) solvent while Henry's law applies to the solute. This law applies to ideal
solutions only, and positive or negative deviations from this law create difficult-to-break systems called
azeotropes. For 10 points, name this law which states that the partial pressure of a component of a solution
is equal to its mole fraction times its vapor pressure.
ANSWER: Raoult's Law
Duhring plots, which relate the boiling point of a solution to the boiling point of water, can only be applied
in conditions where this relation holds. Its namesake also names the cryoscopic and ebullioscopic constants
used in Van't Hoff's rule. Positive and negative deviations from it are characteristic of azeotropes, and
another formulation of this statement, which applies to components whose concentration limits to zero, is
called Henry's law. For 10 points, identify this eponymous law which states that for an ideal solution, the
vapor pressure can be described as a sum of the products of the pressure for each component times the mole
fraction.
ANSWER: Raoult's law
Solutions that do not follow it over a wide range of concentrations cannot be classified as perfect. Those
that obey it can be classified as ideal, while others deviate from it based on their activity coefficient relative
to one. While a mixture of trichloromethane and ethoxyethane results in a negative deviation, a mixture of
water and ethanol positively deviate, though both are examples of azeotropes. FTP, name this law, which
states that the component vapor pressure of a substance is equivalent to its mole fraction times its vapor
pressure in pure form.
ANSWER: Raoult's Law
The variable whose value is obtained through this law is either higher or lower than expected in the so
called positive and negative deviations from it. For liquid cloud drops, this law is combined with the Kelvin
Effect to form the Kohler equation. The fugacity and activity coefficients are added to this law in the case of
non-ideal mixing. This law acquires its best known formulation when fugacities for ideal substances are
replaced by their pressures. Nitric acid and water have stronger adhesive forces between each other in
contrast with cohesive forces among themselves, so such a mixture would violate this law. For 10 points,
name this chemical law that states that the mole fraction and vapor pressure of each substance in solution
determine the total vapor pressure.
ANSWER: Raoult's Law
This law can be derived by manipulating the equation for chemical potential then substituting fugacity
with a simpler quantity. Deviations from this law can occur with strong interactions between two different
components; in general, substances that deviate from this law are called azeotropes (AY-zee-oh-tropes).
Even in non-ideal conditions, this law holds for the solvent of a very dilute solution. For 10 points, name
this law which states that the total vapor pressure of a solution is equal to the sum of each individual vapor
pressure times its mole fraction.
ANSWER: Raoult's law
This law will not be followed if the intermolecular bonding between two components of a solution is greater
than the intermolecular bonding between the other combinations of components. For instance, a solution of
benzene and ethyl alcohol will not obey this law because benzene and ethyl alcohol are immiscible. If a
solution does not show preferential intermolecular bonding and thus obeys this law, it is considered an ideal
solution. Those that deviate from it have an activity coefficient not equal to one. FTP, name this law which
states that the vapor pressure of a solution is dependent on the vapor pressure of the components and their
mole fraction.
ANSWER: Raoult's law
Along with the Gibbs-Kelvin relation, this relation appears as a b over R cubed term in the Kohler
equation that relates saturation in cloud condensation nuclei. The first practical application of it was
determining molecular weights of compounds through a differential thermometer developed by Ernst
Beckmann. This law is applicable over large ranges for ideal systems like toluene/xylene, but otherwise
requires the limiting condition of low solute concentrations. Similar to a law stating that the pressure of a
gas is proportional to the concentration of a gas, for 10 points, name this law which states that the vapor
pressure of a solvent is proportional to the mole fraction of a solute.
ANSWER: Raoult's law
A mixture of o-xylene and acetone can be used to illustrate this law, which applies best to substances
whose mixing enthalpy is zero. One side of the equation subject to this law can be multiplied by the
fugacity coefficient and the other by the activity coefficient to account for non-ideality. For 10 points, name
this law from solution chemistry, stating that the vapor pressure for a solution is equal to the sum of the
product of the vapor pressure of each component times its mole fraction.
ANSWER: Raoult's Law
Deviations from this law depend on whether the activity coefficient is greater than or less than one. The
success of fractional distillation relies on solutions for which this law holds. Liquids that conform to this
law are called perfect solutions. Deviations from this law occur when mixtures are nonideal and nonbinary,
and liquids deviating from this law form azeotropes. For 10 points, name this law that states that the vapor
pressure of a solution is equal to the products of the partial pressure of each component of the solution and
its mole fraction.
ANSWER: Raoult's law
This result was found to provide an alternative to Couchman and Jesser's thermodynamic methods
in a study of tiny metal particles and of water molecules trapped between lipid bilayers, both
mesoscopic systems. It may be generalized by applying a Margules function, though this statement
only applies specifically to situations where chemical interactions between components are equal in
strength to those within a (*) component, that is, in an ideal solution. Its formulation resembles Henry's
law, and azeotropes are notable exceptions to it. FTP, identify this statement of phase chemistry that holds
that the vapor pressure of the components, weighted by mole fraction, give an ideal solution's vapor
pressure.
ANSWER: Raoult's law
A generalized form of this statement is the DECHEMA model, and it is combined with the Kelvin effect
and modeled to generate a Kohler curve. The fugacity and activity coefficients extend it to solutions without
zero entropy of mixing. Duhring's rule is a consequence of this law, and solutions that obey this statement
at dilute concentrations are termed "ideal." Though it doesn't describe freezing point, the colligative
property that this law describes is lowered for higher van't Hoff factors. Azeotropes do not obey this law.
Name this law that calculates total vapor pressure as a sum of partial pressures multiplied by mole fractions.
ANSWER: Raoult's law
A more general version of this law is the DECHEMA model, which adds activity coefficients. It can be
derived using the definition of chemical potential and substituting in fugacity and the way it can predict
boiling point elevation relates it to Duhring's Law. Its validity for multiple components can be shown using
the Gibbs-Duhem equation while for certain substances; it can be seen as a special case of Henry's Law.
Mixtures of polar components often show a positive deviation from it while mixtures adhering to this law
are known as ideal solutions. Notably exceptions from this law are azeotropes. FTP, identify this chemical
law that states that the total pressure of a system is equal to the partial pressure of each component times it
mole fraction.
ANSWER: Raoult's Law
An important source of these elements is monazite. Common methods of processing them include
oxalate precipitation and ion exchange processes. One of these dopes YAG in an important laser design,
and that same element is found with iron and boron in a powerful permanent magnet. Today most of these
elements are mined in China. This group includes scandium and yttrium, as well as the lanthanides. For 10
points, name this group of elements that despite their name are actually quite abundant in the Earth.
ANSWER: rare earth metal [or rare earth elements; or lanthanides before scandium]
Experiments performed with this quantity frequently examine the way that reaction mechanisms change
upon the substitution of hydrogen with deuterium. Identify this quantity studied in chemical kinetics, which
is enhanced by raising the temperature, since a larger proportion of colliding reactants will have high
energy.
ANSWER: reaction rate
The ratio of this quantity for hydrogen and deuterium is given by the kinetic isotope effect. The Eyring
(EH-ring) equation uses the energy needed to form a transition state to calculate this quantity. Its equals the
pre-exponential factor raised to the negative activation energy over temperature times the gas constant by
the Arrhenius (uh-RAY-nee-uhs) equation. For a first order reaction, this quantity is equals the natural log
of 2 divided by the half life. For 10 points, name this speed of a reaction.
ANSWER: reaction rate
The equation for the BET isotherm can be derived by adding, for the first and second layers, these values
of condensation and evaporation. The Lindemann mechanism accurately correlates the changing
concentration of reactants with this value. Two ratios of constants involved with this value are related by
the Swain equation, which quantifies the differences of this parameter for hydrogen versus deuterium and
tritium, illustrating the isotope effect that affects this parameter. The Eyring equation also quantifies this
parameter, which is related by a power of the concentration of the reactants equal to the order of the
reaction. The Arrhenius equation also determines, for 10 points, what value, the speed of a reaction?
ANSWER: reaction rate [accept reaction rate constant since many clues are referring to equations to obtain it]
One constant involved in this quantity can be calculated from the temperature using the Eyring equation,
or by an equation including a steric factor. The temperature and activation energy are also used to calculate
this quantity. One way of calculating it, the Arrhenius equation, is based on the collision model. In zero
order reactions, it is determined only by a constant, and not by the concentration of the reactants. It can be
calculated by laws that have first and second order varieties. For 10 points, name this measure of the speed
of a reaction.
ANSWER: reaction rate [or rate constant; accept word equivalents]
The RRK theory allows one to calculate this quantity for one type of interaction. The Bronsted-Bjerrum
equation corrects the constant involved in this quantity for a particular effect. It's not equilibrium, but the
log of the ratio of its constants is found in the Hammett equation. Primary isotope effects and the salt effect
alter this quantity. Its constant can be found with an equation that takes an exponential of negative
activation energy divided by RT, the Arrhenius equation. The order of a component is the exponent to
which its component is raised in the laws named for this quantity, which can be increased by a catalyst. For
10 points, name this measure of the speed of a reaction.
ANSWER: reaction rate [or rate constant; or rate law before mentioned]
The kinetic isotope effect involves calculating the difference in this property when an isotope is
substituted on a reactant. Overall reaction order is determined by changing the concentration of the
reactants and measuring the corresponding change in the initial value of this property. It roughly doubles
for every ten degree Celsius increase in temperature, according to the Arrhenius equation, which measures
its namesake constant. This property can be increased by stirring or adding a catalyst. For 10 points, name
this property which measures how fast a reaction occurs.
ANSWER: reaction rate
RP Bell modified one equation for calculating this quantity using a tunneling correction factor.
This value is calculated using the pre-equilibrium approximation. Classically, plotting the log of this
quantity against one over temperature gives a straight line. The ratio of this quantity when replacing
one reactant with deuterium to the original value gives the isotope effect. This quantity is equal to an
(*) exponential of negative E sub a over RT all times the pre-exponential factor; that equation relates this
quantity to the activation energy and is named for Arrhenius. The units of this quantity depend on the order
of the reaction. For 10 points, name this value, which is multiplied by concentrations of reactants in order
to find the speed of a reaction.
ANSWER: reaction rate constant
The ratio of two values of this quantity determines the magnitude of the kinetic isotope effect. Dividing
the natural log of two by this quantity yields the half-life of a first order reaction. In one equation, this
quantity is multiplied by several terms raised to partial orders, and in the Arrhenius equation, this
quantity is related to the pre-exponential factor, the gas constant, activation energy, and temperature.
For a first-order reaction, this quantity has units of inverse seconds, whereas for a zero-order reaction, it
has units of moles per liter per second. For 10 points, name this constant which is used to find the
change in the concentrations of the reactants or products, and is symbolized k.
ANSWER: rate constant [or k until mentioned; do not accept or prompt on "rate" or "reaction rate"]
This constant can be computed at a given temperature and double-dagger Gibbs free energy by means of the
Eyring equation. It is a multiplier of concentration terms raised to exponents in an equation determining the
order of a reaction. This constant times the natural log of 2 gives the half-life of radioactive decay reactions,
and it's found from the pre-exponential factor, activation energy, and temperature in the Arrhenius equation.
The quotient of its values for forward and reverse reactions gives the equilibrium constant. For 10 points,
give this term for a constant often symbolized k which quantifies, and shares its name with, the speed at
which a chemical reaction occurs.
ANSWER: rate constant [accept rate coefficient; prompt "k" or "lambda"; do not accept "rate of reaction" or "r"]
Wilhelm Ostwald developed the "isolation method" for deducing these, which involves adding an excess
amount of one reactant and assuming that the remainder of the components have a pseudo-constant effect.
They are most commonly analyzed using their integrated form. The half lives of reactants are independent
of concentration if these are of the first order, and they relate their namesake quantity to the product of
concentration of various components raised to the power of the order of that component. For 10 points, give
the name for these relations which describe the time derivative of the concentration of the products formed
in a reaction.
ANSWER: rate laws [accept rate equations; accept anything implying that the rate of a reaction is being described]
One type of this chemical turns a transparent violet if amino acids have been formed and is named the biuret
type. Another example turns color between green and dark red depending on the amount of sugar in the
solution, and is named the Benedict's type. The limiting type is the chemical that has the smallest ratio of
the amount of moles present to the amount of moles needed for the reaction. For 10 points, name this type
of substance that can determine to what extent another substance has been created or is used to help produce
other substances.
ANSWER: reagent
A dye called "Oil" this color "O" is used to stain neutral triglycerides, which also indicates a positive
result of the VP test for acetonin. A dye called "Congo" this color is used to stain amyloid fibers. It's not
purple or pink, but in Gram staining, the counterstain safranin has this color. Heating white phosophorous
to 280 C transforms it to an amorphous allotrope with this color. In the CPK coloring scheme used for
organic chemistry modelling kits, oxygen appears this color. Radium, strontium, and calcium all appear this
color under the flame test, and litmus paper turns this color under acidic conditions. For 10 points, name
this color, which is the standard color of both oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin.
ANSWER: red [accept things like crimson]
It was used to predict the closed loop critical behavior between type III and V by Polishuk. One
improvement on it has departure functions that account for non-ideal behavior. That improvement sought to
increase the accuracy of vapor pressure, liquid density, and compressibility factor calculations, and was
done by Peng and Robinson. The introduction of omega, the acentric factor of a species, was a modification
of it made by Soave. It itself improved on its predecessor by proposing a temperature dependence for the
attractive term, and like that predecessor, it retains the terms a and b for species-specific constants. More
accurate than the van der Waals equation, for ten points, name this doubly eponymous equation of state.
ANSWER: Redlich-Kwong equation
Metathesis ones are the opposite of these, which are involved in processes as diverse as combustion and
cellular respiration. Some substitution and single displacement reactions fall under this description as
electron acceptors and donors are involved, resulting in changes to the formal charges of the atoms of the
reactants and products. Electrochemical cells depend on these, which can be analyzed by breaking up a
reaction into its component half-reactions. FTP, name this class of reactions involving changes in oxidation
state of oxidizing and reducing agents.
ANSWER: redox reactions (also accept oxidation-reduction reactions; prompt on oxidation or reduction)
Marcus theory was developed to explain this type of reaction. Henry Taube pioneered using isotope
tracers to study this type of reaction. One major subtype of these reactions are classified by the inner
sphere, outer sphere dichotomy. In cells, many of these reactions are catalyzed by flavoproteins. One way
in which these can occur is hydride transfer. The Nernst equation allows for determining species activities
in one of these reactions at a given potential. These are either atom or electron transfer reactions. One
usually balances these by half reactions. For 10 points, name these reactions that see participants change
their oxidation states.
ANSWER: redox reaction [or reduction-oxidation reaction; or oxidation-reduction reaction; or electron transfer reaction before mentioned]
An example of this type of reaction can be seen in the balancing of certain metabolites in the
chloroplast during photosynthesis; this is governed by the continuous transfer of protons between
NAD+ and NADH. Some of these reactions include chemical reactions involving hydrogen molecules
and halogens, in which the halogen covalently bonds to hydrogen and loses part of its negative charge.
They consist of half-reactions in which electrons travel from one species to another. For 10 points, name
these reactions in which the oxidation number of the reactants change.
ANSWER: redox reaction [or reduction-oxidation reactions; prompt on partial answers]
One indicator for these reactions is methylene blue. Organic reactions of this type include the WolffKishner reaction, and titrations based on these reactions include the iodometric type. Methods for
balancing equations involving these reactions include the (*) half-reaction method, where water and
hydrogen ions are added to each side. One common reagent for these reactions is potassium permanganate,
while a chain of these reactions produces most of the ATP generated during aerobic respiration. The basis
of electrochemical cells, for 10 points, name these reactions that involve one species gaining electrons while
another loses them.
ANSWER: reduction-oxidation reactions
Reactions in which the same compound undergoes the two processes in these reactions to form two products
are called disproportionation reactions. When performed in basic conditions, these reactions are balanced
by adding OH- [O-H-minus] and H2O as needed, while hydrogen atoms are added to the appropriate sides
of individual half reactions when these reactions are performed in acidic conditions. For 10 points, name
these reactions which involve changes in oxidation numbers, which are the subject of the mnemonic "LEO
the lion GER."
ANSWER: redox reactions [accept oxidation-reduction reactions or reduction-oxidation reactions; prompt on partial answer]
Disproportionation happens in this class of reactions when different atoms of the same element act as both
electron donors and acceptors. The electric potential of reactions of this type can be calculated using the
Nernst Equation. Because the net charge remains constant during reactions of this type, they can be
analyzed by writing two half-reactions, which occur in the two halves of an electrochemical cell. For 10
points, name this class of chemical reactions, exemplified by the rusting of iron, which is characterized by a
change in oxidation number.
ANSWER: redox reactions [or reduction-oxidation reactions; or oxidation-reduction; prompt on partial answer]
Its not acid-base, but a type of titration that utilizes this type of reaction uses phenanthroline or
methylene blue as an indicator. Reactions of this type in which more than one species undergoes both of the
namesake process simultaneously is called a disproportionation. One method of balancing these reactions
begins with examining the reaction's net ionic equation and is called the half-reaction method. Also
balanced by finding changes in a species' oxidation number, for ten points, name this type of chemical
reaction characterized by the loss and gain of electrons.
ANSWER: oxidation-reduction reactions [or redox reactions]
Free radicals act as messengers in the namesake "signaling" of these reactions. Disproportionation
(DIS-pro-por-shun-AY-shun) reactions occur when different atoms of the same element undergo both
half-reactions of this class of reactions. The two half-reactions which make up these reactions take place in
the two half-cells of an electrochemical (ee-LECK-tro-KEM-ih-kul) cell. For 10 points, name this class of
reactions which involve a change in oxidation number, named for the fact that they consist of reduction and
oxidation.
ANSWER: redox reactions [or oxidation-reduction reactions before "reduction"; or reduction-oxidation reactions before "reduction"]
The adrenochrome hypothesis states that adrenaline is this type of reaction, causing schizophrenia. In
biology, water, sodium chloride, and nitrogen are the namesake signaling molecules for this type of
reaction. In geology, red, green, and white rock formations are the results of this type of reaction. The
Nernst equation describes galvanic cells, which operate via these reactions, which are divided into two halfreactions in which electrons are transferred. For 10 points, name this class of reactions involving alterations
in oxidation states.
ANSWER: Redox Reaction [accept Oxidation-Reduction Reaction]
Metals mixed with silica gels, called M-SGs, are used for this purpose in chemical reactions.
Malonic and bromomalonic acid act as these species in the Belousov-Zhabotinsky clock reaction. In
the Hall-Heroult process, elemental carbon acts as this species, and in organic chemistry, sodium
borohydride and lithium aluminum hydride are a strong type of them. Alkali (*) metals almost always
act as these species. This species is the reactant with the smaller standard electrode potential. In the
presence of platinum, hydrogen gas acts as this agent when it reacts with alkenes and alkynes. These
compounds will readily give up an electron. For 10 points, name these "agents" which get oxidized in redox
reactions.
ANSWER: reducing agents [or reductant]
One of this type of reaction uses a lanthanoid chloride to convert a ketone to an alcohol and is named for
Luche. Barium sulfate or DIBAL is used in another reaction of this type, which converts acid chlorides to
aldehydes, while another uses a oxazaborolidine catalyst. Besides the Rosenmund and CBS ones, other
reactions of this type include one that forms 1,4 cyclohexadienes, and another has a modification named for
Huang Minlon and converts a ketone to an alkane that has a counterpart named for Clemmensen. For 10
points, name this type of organic reaction exemplified by the Birch and Wolff-Kishner varieties, which is
the opposite of oxidation and involves a gain of hydrogen or electrons.
ANSWER: reduction
Metallic hydrides almost always catalyze these reactions. In line notation, the species which undergoes this
reaction is placed on the right. Protons undergo this reaction in a SHE cell, which sets its namesake
potential equal to zero. In general, that potential is multiplied by Faraday's constant in order to determine
the Gibbs free energy change of one of these reactions. In organic chemistry, they usually result in addition
of hydrogen atoms and removal of oxygen atoms. These reactions occur at the cathode of voltaic cells. For
10 points, name these reactions which occur when a species gains electrons, the opposite of an oxidation.
ANSWER: reductions [prompt on "redox" or "oxidation-reduction" or "reduction-oxidation", but not "oxidation"]
In the Heck and Suzuki coupling, the palladium catalysts are regenerated with an elimination step
that also is this type of reaction. One reaction of this type reacts a carbonyl [kar-buh-NEEL] with
hydrazine ["HIGH"-druh-zeen] and a base, which results in the formation of nitrogen gas and removal
of the carbonyl. Hydrogenation reactions are a special case of this type of reaction. This type of
reaction shares its name with a quantity that is high for fluorine and low for lithium, and is defined
as the change in voltage when this type of reaction occurs on that species. These reactions lower
a target's oxidation state. Name this type of reaction that involves the gain of electrons and is the
opposite of oxidation.
ANSWER: reduction reactions [accept word forms of reduce; prompt on redox reactions or oxidation-reduction reactions before "lower"]
Hydrogenation is a specific form of this process that can turn double bonds into single bonds. Highly
electropositive chemical species serve well as this process's namesake agents. Electrochemical
half-reactions are usually described by the potential for this process to occur. This process happens to the
cationic (CAT-eye-on-ik) metal reactant in a single-replacement reaction, turning it from positively charged
into neutral. For 10 points, name this process of gaining electrons, which is paired with oxidation.
ANSWER: reduction
De-nitri-fication is an example of one of these reactions, which transforms nitrate into nitrogen
gas. In biology, the transformation of NAD+ into NADH is one of these reactions. During
electroplating, metal cations (CAT-eye-onz) undergo this type of reaction. The species which
undergoes this reaction will have a greater standard (*) electrode potential in a galvanic cell, will be
located at the cathode, and will have an algebraic decrease in its oxidation state. For 10 points, name these
reactions in which a species gains electrons, often contrasted with oxidations.
ANSWER: reductions [prompt on redox reactions; prompt on oxidation-reductions; prompt on reduction-oxidations; do not accept or prompt on "oxidations"]
A reaction of this type is coupled with elimination to form the final product after transmetallation in the
Suzuki reaction. Another reaction of this type is often coupled to Friedel-Crafts acylations, to compensate
for carbocation rearrangements during Friedel-Crafts alkylations. The most common method of synthesizing
amines forms them from carbonyls in one of these that uses sodium cyanoborohydride. LAH commonly
catalyzes these reactions. In general, the conversion of aldehydes to alcohols is one of these reactions, in
which the oxidation state decreases and the molecule gains electrons. For 10 points, name these reactions
often contrasted with oxidations.
ANSWER: reduction [prompt on "redox" reactions]
One of these types of reactions sees the formation of a hydrazone intermediate and has a Huang-Minlon
modification. In addition to the Wolff-Kishner version performed on ketones, more common examples
include conversions of aldehydes to alcohols in the presence of lithium aluminum hydride and the
conversion of permanganate ion to a manganate ion, which results in an additional overall negative charge.
For 10 points, identify this type of reaction exemplified by the addition of hydrogens or removal of oxygens
from a molecule, which is often coupled with an oxidation.
ANSWER: reduction [do not accept "redox"]
Sodium borohydride (bohr-roh-HIGH-dride) and lithium aluminum hydride are two compounds used to
perform this type of reaction. Elements like lithium and sodium with low ionization energies act as good
agents for this type of reaction. In an electrochemical cell, this reaction occurs at the cathode. Oxygen gas
undergoes this type of reaction when it reacts with hydrogen gas to form water. For 10 points, name this
type of reaction in which a species gains electrons, the opposite of oxidation.
ANSWER: reduction reaction
One process of this type has an ethanedithiol intermediate, which is then treated with Raney nickel.
The principle of least motion explains why the thermodynamically more stable 1,3-dienes do not form
as much as 1,4-dienes in another process of this type. Mozingo names one type of this process, which
also appears in a reaction where a palladium catalyst is poisoned with barium sulfate.
Cyclohexadiene is formed in one type of this process that involves (*) sodium metal and ammonia. A
strong acid and a zinc amalgam are used to produce alkanes from ketones in yet another process of this
type. Rosenmund names one type of this process, which also appears in reactions named for Birch and
Clemmensen. For 10 points, name this process where a substance gains electrons, as opposed to oxidation.
ANSWER: reductions [accept word forms; do not accept redox or reduction-oxidation reactions]
One of this type of reaction uses a lanthanoid chloride to convert a ketone to an alcohol and is named for
Luche. Barium sulfate or DIBAL is used in another reaction of this type, which converts acid chlorides to
aldehydes, while another uses a oxazaborolidine catalyst. Besides the Rosenmund and CBS ones, other
reactions of this type include one that forms 1,4 cyclohexadienes, and another has a modification named for
Huang Minlon and converts a ketone to an alkane that has a counterpart named for Clemmensen. For 10
points, name this type of organic reaction exemplified by the Birch and Wolff-Kishner varieties, which is
the opposite of oxidation and involves a gain of hydrogen or electrons.
ANSWER: reduction
A chiral one of these reactions is named for Corey, Bakshi, and Shibata, and the addition to a ketone
dissolved in diethylene glycol of hydrazone is the Wolff-Kishner one. Borane can cause it in carboxylic
acids, and in organic compounds this process is the decrease of some carbon's number of bonds to
heteroatoms. Good agents for this process include hydride donors like LAH, as well as alkali metals, as the
latter readily form cations. For 10 points, name this process in which a substance gains electrons and
decreases in formal charge, the complement to oxidation.
ANSWER: reductions
This process happens to water vapor in the water-gas shift reaction. Lithium aluminum hydride
and sodium borohydride are common compounds for carrying out these reactions, which mediate it
via hydride transfer. In the Mond process, nickel undergoes one of them to be extracted from its ore.
This type of reaction readily happens to permanganate and chromate. Electrodes are often ranked by
their electric (*) potential for undergoing this process, of which hydrogenation is a subtype. This reaction
often turns positively charged ions into neutral precipitate, and occurs at the cathode of an electrochemical
cell. For 10 points, name this process in which a species gains electrons, often paired with oxidation.
ANSWER: reduction
Barfoed's test carries out this type of reaction to copper (II) acetate to determine the presence of
monosaccharides. Reagents such as Raney nickel and a palladium catalyst can achieve this type of reaction
in carbon. Hydrochloric acid and a zinc-mercury amalgam are the reagents used in the Clemmensen type of
this reaction. In acidic conditions, potassium hydroxide and hydrazine combine in the Wolff-Kishner type
of this reaction. For 10 points, name this chemical reaction that adds electrons to unsaturated compounds,
opposing oxidation.
ANSWER: reduction
One of this type of reaction uses iron catalysts to produce amines from aromatic nitro compounds, and
azides produce imines when they undergo this type of reaction. In addition to the Bechamp one, another one
of these proceeds by a chiral oxazaborolidine and borane catalyst and produces alcohols from ketones,
while yet another uses a barium sulfate catalyst to produce aldehydes from acid chlorides. In addition to the
Corey-Bakshi-Shibata and Rosenmund ones, another one of these that uses a zinc catalyst deoxygenizes
aldehydes and ketones in acidic conditions and is complementary to another that produces alkanes under
basic conditions. For 10 points, name this class of reactions that includes those named after Clemmensen
and Wolff-Kishner, the opposite of an oxidation.
ANSWER: reductions
In organic chemistry, hydride transfer reagents promote this process, often by converting carbonyls
to alcohols. In the Krebs cycle, NAD+ is converted into NADH by this process. In a galvanic cell, this
type of potential exists at the (*) cathode. This process is undergone by alkali metals to form cations.
Hydrogenation is a form of this reaction, which is characterized by the gain of electrons. For 10 points,
name this half-reaction that is the opposite of oxidation.
ANSWER: reduction (prompt on redox reactions or oxidation-reduction reactions)
One form of these reactions has a modification using ethylene glycol known as the Huang Minlon
modification. Another form of these reactions uses liquid ammonia to convert aromatic rings to
cyclohexane. Another form uses zinc amalgam and is effective for aryl-alkyl ketones and, like a
similar reaction that uses heated hydrazone, has an end product of alkanes. More common examples
use LAH or other hydride donors to turn ketones into secondary alcohols. (*) Birch, Clemmensen, and
Wolff-Kishner, are, for 10 points, types of what reaction in which an atom or molecule gains electrons and
that is usually paired with oxidation?
ANSWER: reduction
Boron-based catalysts for this type of reaction include L-selectrides and oxazaborolidines. DIBAL
induces this type of reaction with remarkable chemoselectivity. One reaction of this type converts a
carbonyl to a hydrazone, then releases nitrogen gas upon treatment with a base. This type of reaction
is often used after the Friedel-Crafts acylation to prevent the polyalkylation caused by the FriedelCrafts alkylation. (*) Hydrides are potent agents to drive this type of reaction in organic compounds, as
exemplified by the conversion of azides to amines, alkenes to alkanes, and ketones to alcohols. This type of
reaction occurs at the cathode of an electrochemical cell. For 10 points, name this type of reaction in which
the reactant gains electrons, as contrasted with oxidation.
ANSWER: reduction [prompt on "redox" or "reduction-oxidation" or "oxidation-reduction," prompt on "hydrogenation" due to the DIBAL clue]
A chiral one of these reactions is named for Corey, Bakshi, and Shibata, and the addition to a ketone
dissolved in diethylene glycol of hydrazone is the Wolff-Kishner one. Borane can cause it in carboxylic
acids, and in organic compounds this process is the decrease of some carbon's number of bonds to
heteroatoms. Good agents for this process include hydride donors like LAH, as well as alkali metals, as the
latter readily form cations. For 10 points, name this process in which a substance gains electrons and
decreases in formal charge, the complement to oxidation.
ANSWER: reductions
In one of these reactions, named after Bouveault and Blanc, the lack of a proton donor results in
acyloin condensation. Borane and a chiral oxazaborolidine catalyst are used in a reaction of this type
for ketones. One of these reactions produces substituted 1,4-cyclohexadienes and is named for (*)
Birch while another converts hydrazine to a hydrazone. For 10 points, name this type of reaction which can
convert aldehydes and ketones to alkanes, example of which include ones named for Wolff-Kishner and
Clemmensen.
ANSWER: reductions
One reagent used in these reactions can be made weaker by replacing one ligand with a cyanide
group, which makes it compatible with aqueous solutions and selective for imines. Conducting one of
these reactions is an easy way to generate an aniline derivative from a nitro compound. One reaction
of this type produced cyclohexadienes and takes place in a solution of an (*) alkali metal dissolved in
ammonia. Reagents like sodium borohydride and lithium aluminum hydride are common reagents used to
affect this transformation because they can donate hydride atoms, and this transformation takes imines to
amines and carbonyls to alcohols. For 10 points, name this type of organic reaction in which the number of
bonds to oxygen is decreased.
ANSWER: reduction
The Reid method is used to calculate the vapor pressure of inputs and outputs for this process. Visbreaking
is the reduction of the viscosity of straight run residues in this process, and those residues are separated in
low pressure chambers via vacuum flashing. Long chain products of this process are broken down via FCC
reactions to yield low boiling, low molecular weight products. After the inputs are passed through a boiler,
this activity involves separating them through a fractional distillation tower, which captures light materials
such as naphtha at the top. For 10 points, identify this activity, which results in the production of kerosene,
diesel, and gasoline from a black liquid.
ANSWER: refining petroleum [or refining crude oil; accept clear knowledge equivalents; accept fractional distillation until mentioned; reverse prompt (i.e. "can you be less specific) on catalytic cracking, thermal cracking, or hydrocracking until "boiler;"]
The energy transfer associated with this phenomenon can be measured using fluorescence detection,
and its scale of nanometers and nanoseconds makes the energy transfer useful for studying biological
processes. This phenomenon is believed to occur in the reaction intermediate of allylic
rearrangement, explaining why the (*) double bond shifts from one pair of carbon atoms to another.
Linus Pauling published it, but its origins come from
Kekule's proposal of the structure of the benzene ring. It is present in stable sulfur dioxide and ozone, and
is depicted with dotted lines between the atoms. The basis of the circle notation of benzene, for 10 points,
name this phenomenon in which a stable molecule cannot be represented with a single Lewis structure.
ANSWER: chemical resonance or delocalization
Hydroquinone is able to stabilize radicals because it can undergo hydrogen abstraction and
experience this other phenomenon. This phenomenon explains why phenol is a stronger acid than
cyclohexanol. In the methoxy- substituent of anisole, this phenomenon is at odds with induction.
Because of this phenomenon, lone pairs are frequently unable to contribute electron density to
aromatic rings. This phenomenon also ensures that the carbonate ion has a charge of (*) -2/3, because
its true configuration lies somewhere between the three namesake degenerate contributors. For 10 points,
name this phenomenon in which a compound is stabilized because its electrons are delocalized, visualized
by drawing double-headed arrows between multiple structures in brackets.
ANSWER: resonance [prompt on delocalization or word forms until mention]
In 1928, Kathleen Lonsdale became the first to confirm this concept using X-ray crystallography, and
alcohol and amine (uh-MEEN) groups contribute to a form of it called the mesomeric effect. The stability of
enolate anions (AN-"eye"-ons) is explained by this concept, and its namesake energy is minimized in the
hybrid structures of the nitrate ion. Because of delocalization, this concept produces fractional bond orders.
This is depicted with two or more Lewis dot diagrams, and a type of this specific to organic conjugated
rings is called aromaticity. Name this concept in which the length of carbon-carbon bonds is between single
and double, a concept exemplified by benzene.
ANSWER: resonance (structures) [accept word forms]
Examples of this property include the norbornyl cation and diborane's three-center two-electron
bonds, and this phenomenon's greater strength as stability decreases makes it more active in excited
states, allowing dyes to function. This property's effect on the electron donating or withdrawing
character of a group is called the mesomeric effect, and its stabilization energy is named for Dewar.
Molecules with this property include the carboxylate ion, which has two bonds of order three halves, and
they are shown as a hybrid of Lewis structures. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, an extreme form of
which is aromaticity, in which electrons delocalize across multiple atoms.
ANSWER: resonance [or delocalization of electrons]
"Mesomerism" is also used to describe this phenomenon. Delocalized electrons are responsible for the
visual depiction of this concept by multiple Lewis diagrams inside square brackets, and this concept
causes the non-integer bond order found in (*) aromatic molecules. Present in nitrate, carbonate and
benzene molecules, for 10 points, name this type of structure in which the length of carbon-carbon bonds is
in between single and double.
ANSWER: resonance
The "shape" variety of this phenomenon occurs when an electron is in a metastable state because of the
shape of a potential barrier. The Feshbach type of this phenomenon allows for the creation of Bose-Einstein
Condensates. Diagramming the chemical type of this phenomenon requires the drawing of more than one
dot structure, as in the case of benzene, which displays this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon, represented by two Lewis structures that diagram a molecule whose properties are an
intermediate of the two, and thus can be thought of as alternating between them.
ANSWER: resonance
One outcropping of this rock type, known as he Leona formation, expands discontinuously for 21 miles in
the Bay Area of California. A group of small quarries of this rock type top Snaggy Ridge at the Carbaugh
Run Quarry site in Adams County, Pennsylvania. One light blue grey variety, called comendite, gets its
color from small crystals of riebeckite and arfvedsonite. A peralkaline variety called Pantellerite has higher
iron and lower aluminum composition that makes it more mafic than comendite. For 10 points, name this
felsic rock, the extrusive equivalent of granite.
ANSWER: Rhyolite
Developed with Beno Gutenberg, it has been superseded by analysis of the moment magnitude, and the
effects are measured on the related Mercalli Scale. Values can be determined by looking at the amplitude of
measured waves, and its values are logarithmic to the amount of energy released. A value less than 2 is
considered to be micro and no value of 10 or higher has been recorded. For 10 points, name this scale that
measures seismic activity including earthquakes named for an American scientist.
ANSWER: Richter Scale
One of these structures that "fails" forms an arm, called an aulacogen, of a larger structure. One of these
features named for the river Rio Grande contains El Paso and Albuquerque. Three of these features meet to
form a triple junction. Grabens and half-grabens, but not horsts, are formed at the edges of these features,
one of which houses the world's deepest lake, Baikal. For 10 points, what geologic features, created by the
separation of crust at the surface, are exemplified by a "great" African valley and series of lakes bearing
their name?
ANSWER: rifts [accept rift valleys or rift lakes; accept triple junction before mentioned; prompt on fault]
An inactive one of these features is termed an aulacogen, and the largest on land is divided into Albertine
and Gregory branches. The topography of these features generally consists of grabens and a notable one
begins at the Afar Triangle. These form when magma heated by mantle decompression fill in cracks in the
Earth's surface. The upper Rhine River, Lake Baikal, and Lake Tanganyika all lie within these features,
which, like mid-ocean ridges, form by dip-slip faults at divergent zones. Including one that marks the
boundary of the Nubian and Somali plates, name these geologic features that occur where tectonic plates are
separating, such as east Africa's Great one.
ANSWER: rift valley [prompt on a partial answer]
Bredt's rule concerns the placement of double bonds in structures with a certain arrangement of
these entities. Molecules containing these entities can display pi-stacking. Degrees of unsaturation
can be used to determine the number of double bonds, triple bonds, and number of these structures
in a molecule. Aromatic compounds are defined by being planar, having a delocalized pi system,
satisfying the 4n + 2 rule, and containing one of these structures. These structures prefer to consist
of five or six atoms to minimize a namesake strain. Name these structures found in benzene, which
when found in aliphatic compounds cause their names to be prefixed with "cyclo-".
ANSWER: rings [accept cyclic molecules or cycles or similar answers containing an underlined term]
Bredt's rule applies to certain molecules with a total of three of these structures. The Diels-Alder reaction
creates one of these with a double bond, and like double bonds, they contribute one degree of unsaturation.
Examples of "hetero" ones are furan and pyridine. These structures place constraints on bond angles,
resulting in their namesake strain, which makes some molecules with these structures less stable than
molecules with an open chain. For 10 points, name these structures found in compounds like cyclobutane
and cyclohexane, which are described as "cyclic."
ANSWER: rings of atoms or cycles [generous prompt on "cycloalkanes" or "cycloalkenes"]
A zinc-copper couple is used with diiodomethane and an alkene to effect this kind of transformation,
and techniques for doing this three different ways with sulfur ylides are named for Corey and
Chaykovsky. A reaction that does this given a divinyl ketone and a Lewis acid is named for Nazarov.
A "butterfly mechanism" describes a reaction using a peroxyacid that does this. Baldwin's rules govern this
process, which is carried out by the Simmons-Smith and Prilazhaev reactions. It is necessary to do this to
synthesize functional groups like lactams and pyrroles. For 10 points, give the common synthetic goal
accomplished by the Diels-Alder reaction and other cycloadditions.
ANSWER: making rings [accept ring formation or other equivalents; also accept cyclization or annulation; prompt on making cyclopropane before "divinyl ketone"; accept making three-membered rings before "divinyl ketone"]
Some of the boundaries that define this construct are the Kermadec, Izu Bonin and Bougainville
trenches. It is more visibly comprised of such arcs as the New Hebrides, the Kuriles (CURE-eye-ulz),
and the Aleutians. Nearly all deep-focus (*) earthquakes, and eighty percent of shallow-focus earthquakes
worldwide, originate in the tectonic boundaries that comprise this structure, which is more formally called
the Circum-Pacific Belt. For 10 points, what is this circular zone at the margins of the Pacific Ocean, named
for its high volcanic activity?
ANSWER: the ring of fire [accept the Circum-Pacific Belt before it is read]
Brahm names the result that the size of particles carried by these entities is proportional to the sixth power
of their velocity. A "riparian zone" refers to the interface between one of these entities and the surrounding
land. These entities transport their bed load by processes like saltation. Meanders in these structures can
become cut off and form oxbow lakes. Younger ones tend to exhibit steeper banks and fewer tributaries,
and these entities terminate in deltas. For 10 points, name these features wherein water flows.
ANSWER: rivers
These entities may be described by their Strahler order, and the Bradshaw model relates the
characteristics of their upper and lower courses. Hack's law relates their length to their basin area,
and Baer's law describes a weak influence on their erosion. Peneplains are low-relief plains that form
due to erosion from these entities. These entities may be guided by (*) channelization and the
construction of embankments. Meanders in these structures can become isolated, forming oxbow lakes. For
10 points, name these water-bearing structures that flow towards the sea.
ANSWER: rivers
The complexity of these bodies is expressed by Strahler order. These bodies carry particles described by the
Exner equation, and those particles induce saltation, which carries the bed load of these bodies. Different
flow velocities cause precipitation to occur mainly one on side of them with erosion occurring on the other
side, and the flow velocity of these bodies is greatest in the center just under the surface. Their gradient
measures how steep they are, and sections of these with a high gradient are known as rapids. Oxbow lakes
are created when these bodies meander. Their end is referred to the mouth, one kind of which is a delta. For
ten points, name these bodies of moving water, such as the Mississippi.
ANSWER: rivers (or streams, prompt on anything about moving water)
Tokunaga extended the Strahler ordering method of these systems to predict mean self-similarity in
topology, which was confirmed by Horton's laws for the numbers and magnitudes of these systems.
Cutbanks and point bars surround portions of these systems that become braided when their carrying
capacity is exceeded. Interfluves lie between these systems if they are adjacent. They form terraces when
their base level changes. If these systems lie in forested areas, they are riparian and they leave behind
alluvium. Oxbow lakes form when a meander is cut off from these systems that form gorges and deltas. For
10 points, name these flowing bodies of water, examples of which include the Mississippi.
ANSWER: rivers [accept equivalents like stream or brook or other similar things; prompt on "tributaries"]
Playfair's Law can be used to model the effects due to one of these entities, which have sizes typically
between first and third order, as determined by the Strahler number. Knickpoints are sharp changes
in the gradient profile of these features, which can also form bifurcations. Their lotic ecosystems are
bordered by (*) bosques and biodiverse riparian zones, and these features can cut off to form oxbow lakes.
They lie adjacent to floodplains and often branch out at their mouth to form a delta. For ten points, identify
these hydrological features exemplified by the Nile and Amazon.
ANSWER: rivers [accept streams]
In addition to measuring register allocation, the Strahler order is used to measure these entities based
on the number of splits it contains. The Bradshaw model shows that the average load of these entities
increases as they continue. The relationship between volumetric discharge of these entities can be
modified by (*) weirs, which may be built across these structures. The discharge of weirs is described by a
structural constant as well as the width of the crest and the height of the head. Erosion of the riparian zones
of these entities can necessitate restoration as grass and soil may be washed away from the bank. For 10
points, identify these bodies of water such as the Delaware and the Mississippi.
ANSWER: River [accept equivalents like creek as long as the flowing movement of water is implied]
These entities can be hierarchically classified based on the Strahler Order. The speed of objects in
this kind of system varies by the sixth power of this system's speed by Brahm's law. Einstein wrote a
paper about Baer's law, which claims that the hemisphere of the earth in which these bodies are
situated affects erosion. When these bodies form underneath glaciers, they create braided ridges
known as eskers. Their cross-sectional area multiplied by their average linear velocity gives their
discharge. These bodies create ox-bow lakes when they cut off a meander. For 10 points, name these bodies
of water exemplified by the Amazon and Mississippi.
ANSWER: rivers [accept equivalents like streams, creeks, etc. that imply flowing water]
When the flow of this substance is too high, over-pressurization may lead to a hard start.
Germany often used a mixture of triethylamine and xylidine as a type of this substance named
"tonka" while Russia used an expensive chemical named "syntin". The amount of work that can be
extracted from the consumption of this substance is given by the Tsiolkovsky equation. If two types
of this substances are hypergolic, they spontaneously ignite when coming into contact. In most
configurations, turbopumps mix this kind of substance with an oxidizer in a cylinder called a (*)
combustion chamber. Examples of this kind of substance, which can be liquid or solid, include hydrazine
and liquid oxygen. For 10 points, name this type of propellant used to provide thrust for spacecraft.
ANSWER: rocket fuel [or rocket propellant until "propellant" is read]
This substance's stress-strain behavior exhibits the Mullins effect and the Payne effect. Unlike other
materials, it stores strain energy in thermal form as well as electrostatic form. In its natural form, it
is a polymer of hydrocarbon monomers called isoprene. It can also be synthesized as a polymer of (*)
isoprene or of various other monomers. It often undergoes vulcanization, a process in which it is heated and
cured with sulfur. It occurs naturally in the sap of certain plants such as the Para tree, figs, and euphorbias.
FTP, name this elastic material used in most pencil erasers.
ANSWER: rubber (prompt on "latex")
Ebonite is a form of this product that is produced in a process which sees the addition of peroxides and
sulfur to increase crosslinking and improve strength. Fritz Hoffman first developed the synthetic form of
this product. This product is composed of monomers of isoprene (EYE-soh-preen) and is derived from
latex. It properties are enhanced by vulcanization, a process developed by Charles Goodyear. For 10 points,
name this strong polymer commonly used to make tires.
ANSWER: rubber
This precious stone typically displays needle-like intrusions of rutile, and like common mimicks of
diamond, this mineral is produced in large scales by the Verneuil process. Synthetic rods of this precious
stone are used as a gain medium in some lasers. Its characteristic color comes from chromium, and its most
valuable shade is called pigeon's blood. For 10 points, name this mineral of Mohs hardness nine, the red
form of corundum.
ANSWER: ruby [accept corundum before mentioned]
To prevent this process, objects can be treated with an oil and coated with magnetite, a process called
bluing. Acids increase the rate of this process, which was explained by Joseph Priestley. Because aluminum
has a higher reduction potential than the products of this process, aluminum foil can be used to remove
them. A layer of chromium-three oxide is responsible for preventing this process on stainless steel, and this
process occurs much more rapidly in the presence of salt or water. A type of redox reaction that results in
hydrated ferric oxides, name this corrosion process of iron.
ANSWER: rusting of iron [accept word forms; accept answers like "the formation of iron oxides" before the end]
This man became Director of the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge in 1919, and under his leadership,
James Chadwick discovered the neutron. This man coined terms common in chemistry today such as
"alpha," "beta," and "gamma," and he formulated the idea of a "half-life." His namesake scattering would
be used by Bohr to create his own model of the atom. He is best known for an experiment with Marsden and
Geiger that involved a sheet made of zinc sulfide, which would light up when alpha particles were deflected
onto it. For 10 points, name this New Zealand-born chemist who carried out the gold-foil experiment.
ANSWER: Ernest Rutherford
This man was the first to formulate the concept of a "half-life" and also coined the terms "alpha",
"beta", and "gamma" rays to describe the types of radiation given off by thorium and radium. He
also confirmed Prout's hypothesis after successfully knocking a hydrogen nucleus out of a nitrogen
atom, but he may be better known for an experiment with Geiger and Marsden involving a (*) zinc
sulfide sheet which lit up when alpha particles were deflected onto it. That experiment lead him to conclude
that the atom was mostly empty space with a dense nucleus, replacing J. J. Thompson's plum pudding
model. For ten points, name this British chemist famous for carrying out the gold-foil experiment.
ANSWER: Ernest Rutherford
An earlier method to measure this relied on the saturable absorption technique. An idea proposed to
measure this seeks to eliminate the error caused by "virtual photons" by using atomic nuclei stripped of all
but one electron in a high energy level. Its value is defined as electron mass times elementary charge to the
fourth power, all divided by eight times the permittivity of free space squared times the speed of light times
Planck's constant cubed. For ten points, identify this constant with a value of approximately 10.97 million
inverse meters that relates atomic spectra to that of hydrogen, named after a Swedish physicist.
ANSWER: Rydberg constant
This letter denotes the lowest unfilled electron subshell in copper, and while a subshell denoted by
this letter is filled in manganese, the 3d subshell is not. Palladium is unique in that it (*) lacks
electrons in this subshell at the fifth energy level. This subshell corresponds to a second quantum number of
zero, and is the only one that exists at the first energy level. For 10 points, name this spherical electron
subshell, whose name is an abbreviation for its historical name, "sharp."
ANSWER: s
These entities have one fewer radial node than their energy level, and a pair of occupants of these
entities remains unreactive in the inert pair effect. The fact that gold is yellow colored is due to an
effect that occurs when the principal quantum number of one of these entities reaches six or seven;
that effect is relativistic contraction. Two of these combine to form a (*) sigma bond, and the alkali and
alkaline earth metals form the "block" named for these entities. Plotting the electron density function of
these entities shows them to be spherically symmetric. For 10 points, name this type of atomic orbital which
holds two electrons.
ANSWER: s-orbital
The gold color of gold occurs due to the relativistic contraction of the 6th of these entities. The
occupants of the outermost one of these tend to stay unpaired in the inert pair effect. Their angular
wavefunction is a spherical harmonic in which the second parameter is 0 and is equal to one over the
square root of four pi. They have a number of radial nodes equal to one less than n, and never have
any (*) angular nodes. For the simplest one of them, no nodes pass through the nucleus because its
azimuthal quantum number is 0. These constructs overlap to form sigma bonds. They're the first orbitals to
completely fill for an energy level. For 10 points, name these spherically symmetric atomic orbitals which
can hold two electrons.
ANSWER: s orbitals [prompt on "atomic orbital" or "orbital"; do NOT accept "molecular orbital"]
The angular wavefunction of these orbitals is a constant. They contain a central anti-node and a
number of radial nodes one fewer than their principal quantum number. These orbitals have
magnetic quantum number zero and azimuthal quantum number zero, meaning they are the only
type of orbital that can have a principal quantum number of (*) one. For 10 points, name these orbitals
that can hold only two electrons each, in contrast with p, d, and f orbitals.
ANSWER: s orbital [prompt on atomic orbitals or orbitals, do not accept or prompt on molecular orbitals]
According to ligand-field theory, in a strictly octahedral environment, this object it is described by a
one g symmetry. A slight perturbation of reaction rates is can be observed due to the fact that selfinteraction causes the energy of one of these to be higher by a quantity proportional to the fifth
power of the fine structure constant times the electron rest energy than the energy predicted by
Dirac theory. Relativistic contraction of this structure in gives rise to the inert pair effect. The (*)
wavefunction associated with this orbital displays a central anti-node and exhibits perfect spherical
symmetry. FTP, name this type of orbital characterized by vanishing magnetic and azimuthal quantum
numbers, orbitals filled by the first electron with a given principle quantum number before the p orbital.
ANSWER: s orbital [prompt on orbital]
These entities cause no volume changes since they have a dilatation of zero, and when they interact with the
surface they can give rise to Love waves through their horizontal components. They cannot pass through the
Gutenberg discontinuity because their velocities are directly proportional to the rigidity of their medium,
preventing travel through liquids. Hence these waves are unable to move to the outer core, creating a
shadow zone beyond 104 degrees from their source. Slower and more destructive than their counterparts,
for 10 points, identify these seismic waves that move the earth perpendicular to their direction of travel
unlike P waves.
ANSWER: S-Waves [accept secondary waves; accept shear waves]
These entities are a solution to a three-dimensional wave equation which itself is defined on the curl of the
vector field of strain displacement. Because of this, their propagation obeys the continuity equation for
incompressible media, and they cause no changes in volume. According to the Adams-Williamson
equations, these waves have velocity equal to the square root of the shear modulus over the mass density.
These waves can give rise to Love waves through interaction with a low-velocity surface zone. These waves
cannot cross the Gutenburg core-mantle discontinuity; hence, their shadow zones after earthquakes provided
evidence for a liquid outer core. For 10 points, name these transverse body waves generated during an
earthquake that arrive after P-waves.
ANSWER: S-waves [or secondary waves or shear waves; prompt on "transverse waves"]
A crisis named for this quantity took place during the last stage of the Miocene, the Messinian.
Differences in temperature and this quantity drive the ocean conveyor belt. The Mediterranean
notably has a (*) higher value for this quantity than the Atlantic. Brackish water has an intermediate value
for this quantity. Coastal aquifers are often subject to intrusion by water with a higher value for this
quantity. A steep vertical gradient of this quantity defines the halocline. For 10 points, name this measure
of the salt content of water.
ANSWER: salinity
Diapirs of this substance plus other evaporites form namesake structural traps, and are thus valued by
petroleum engineers. Soil rich in this substance because of irrigation is typically leached to make the soil
suitable for agriculture. Gradients in temperature and in the concentration of this substance drive the socalled "global conveyor belt" current. Endorheic lakes, which are rich in this substance since they have no
outflows, may eventually become playas, which are "flats" named for this substance. The mineral form of
this cubic crystal compound is called halite. For 10 points, name the most common dissolved substance in
the oceans, a diatomic ionic compound.
ANSWER: salt [or table salt; or sodium chloride; or NaCl; or rock salt; or halite before it is read; prompt on "minerals"]
The Mannheim process synthesizes one of these compounds containing sulfate, known as a "cake" of this
class. The "effect" named for this class of compounds describes how their interionic interactions affect the
ionization of related weak electrolytes. The solubility of these compounds can be calculated by the
solubility product constant, while the pH of solutions of them is governed by the strengths of the two
reactants which create them. They often contain the anion of a halogen and the cation of an alkali metal. For
10 points, name this class of ionic compound, the product of an acid-base neutralization, exemplified by
magnesium bromide and sodium chloride.
ANSWER: salts [prompt on "ionic compounds" before mentioned]
One of these compounds, the heptahydrate of magnesium sulfate, is a common edible example. In
electrochemical cells, these substances maintain separate electrolyte solutions in a namesake "bridge." The
halogens are so named because they form the anionic halves of these types of compounds. The presence of
these compounds in water is measured via conductivity to give a value of salinity. FTP, name these common
compounds, including an Epsom variety and one often including iodine, with formula NaCl, known as the
"table" variety.
ANSWER: Salts [do not accept Sodium Chloride or NaCl as there aren't types or varieties of them]
An iron-containing double one of substances is named for Mohr. Molten ones can be used as coolants
in nuclear reactors. One of these that exhibits piezoelectricity is named for Rochelle. Another one of these,
magnesium sulfate, is used medicinally. Electrochemical cells are often connected using a bridge made of
these. These ionic compounds result from an acid-base neutralization reaction. For 10 points, name these
substances, the "table" one of which has formula NaCl.
ANSWER: salts
In redox experiments, a porous cup is often substituted for this device, which is hindered by its low surface
area. These devices can be made of fritted glass or by soaking chemicals such as potassium nitrate in string
or paper. Potassium chloride and sodium chloride are also common chemicals used to fill these objects,
which are often made with an inverted U-tube. Containing an electrolyte, these allow the flow of electrons
between two containers of different chemicals. Name these connections between the half-cells in a galvanic
cell.
ANSWER: salt bridges [prompt on bridge]
This compound was originally developed as a derivative of atoxyl by Sahachiro Hata, and a neo- version
of this compound differs from it by the addition of a methyl sulfoxide group. The monomer of this
substance contains an aminated phenol ring attached to an arsenic atom. Originally known as compound
606, this substance was developed to treat syphilis. For 10 points, name this early chemotherapeutic agent
developed by Paul Ehrlich.
ANSWER: Salvarsan [or arsphenamine or the magic bullet or compound 606 before mention]
Feldspar-rich varieties of this rock are called "arkose". Classifications of this rock work from
QFL diagrams, which often include an extra dimension for the percent of matrix, which must be at
most 75%, to broadly divide them into "arenite" or "wacke". A prominent example of cross-bedding
can be found in the walls of this rock at Zion Canyon. "Spiral rock arches" of this rock are famously
found in Antelope Canyon. When a type of this rock undergoes metamorphosis, it forms quartzite,
and after (*) shale, it is the most abundant sedimentary rock. The namesake of this rock is a granular
material whose grain size is larger than silt but smaller than a pebble. For 10 points, name this rock that is
made up of material that one finds at the beach.
ANSWER: sandstone [prompt on sedimentary rock]
The pinkish-orange type of these is called padparadscha, derived from the Hindu term for lotus
blossom. The star type exhibits a phenomenon known as an asterism, and the Black Star of
Queensland is the largest star type. Madagascar leads the world in (*) production of this gem, and most
of the North American deposits are found around Helena, Montana. The Verneuil process is a way to create
them synthetically, and these gems are made from the same mineral as rubies, corundum. For ten points,
name this precious stone that is most famous for its blue shade.
ANSWER: Sapphire (Prompt on Corundum before Verneuil Process)
The start of the Bolling-Allerod interstadial coincided with the MWP-1A event that caused a
rapid change in this quantity. The first global, precise measurements of this quantity were done
by the joint NASA/CNES TOPEX/Poseidon mission, whose followup is the currently-operating
OSTM/Jason-2 mission. The zero level of this quantity - due only to the influence of Earth's
gravity and rotation - is represented by the geoid. The displayed atmospheric pressure on weather
maps is benchmarked to this level rather than the local elevation. Local changes in this quantity
occur in transgressions and regressions, while its global change is known as "eustasy". For 10
points, name this elevation that is "rising" due to global warming.
ANSWER: mean sea level [or sea surface height; or mean ocean surface]
Cryospheric degradation contributes to this process, which causes inundation of atolls and eliminates
habitats for anadromous animals. Tectonic movement and wind contribute to this process locally but the
global mean for this process is also increasing. Erosion, storm surges, destruction of barrier islands, and salt
intrusion are caused by this process which is influenced by El Nino and La Nina. Thermal expansion and
glacial melt are the two primary causes of this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this elevation of the
oceans caused by global warming.
ANSWER: sea level rise [or SLR; accept logical equivalents]
With John Livingood, this man discovered the isotopes Iron-59 and Iodine-131, and he attempted to
produce gold from bismuth by using nuclear physics. He isolated a weighable amount of plutonium
from uranium when working with Enrico Fermi to produce the first controlled chain reaction. This
scientist proposed a series of (*) superheavy elements with g orbitals, which are below another series he
proposed, actinides. Edwin McMillan shared the 1951 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with, for 10 points, which
American nuclear chemist who discovered ten transuranium elements which include his namesake, Element
106 with symbol Sg.
ANSWER: Glenn Theodore Seaborg [accept Seaborgium]
He started his academic career at the University of California at Berkeley in 1937. After only nine
years, he was made a full professor of chemistry. During the Second World War, he worked on the
Manhattan Project, isolating plutonium from reaction products. His actinide concept (*)
revolutionized the organization of the periodic table. Between the years of 1940 and 1955, he added ten
elements to the table. FTP, name this man, who until his death in 1999 was the only living person to have
an element named in his honor.
ANSWER: Glenn Theodore Seaborg
The central axis associated with this process can be preserved in undeformed ophiolite complexes.
Evidence supporting this hypothesized process, whose name was coined by Robert Dietz, includes an
observed upper age limit of 200 million years for the associated material and observations supporting the
Vine-Matthews hypothesis. Harry Hess hypothesized this process, which produces zebra-stripe lineations in
combination with reversals of the Earth's magnetic field and cooling of its associated material below the
Curie point shortly after extrusion at a ridge. FTP, name this process that combined with continental drift to
spur the formulation of plate tectonics, in which new crust is produced and moves out from a mid-oceanic
ridge.
ANSWER: seafloor spreading
The development of the theory behind this process followed the description of fracture zones
by Henry Menard, and its discoverers studied the analogous process of the development of
ophiolite [OH-fee-oh-"light"]-containing peridotite [puh-RIH-doh-"tight"]. Measurements of heat flow
and seismic wave velocity have supported the theories behind this process, and further support was
given by stripe-shaped anomalies in the Earth's magnetic field. Robert Dietz and Harry Hess are
credited for discovering it. This process is considered the opposite of subduction, and it involves
magma forming new crust. Name this part of plate tectonics that takes place at the center of
mid-ocean ridges.
ANSWER: seafloor spreading [accept variations that include both underlined words or forms thereof; prompt on plate tectonics]
Benioff zones counterbalance this process that Dietz described independently of Hess. When this process
moves slowly, fracture zones and pseudofaults are created. Paleomagnetism studies have demonstrated that
this process produced stripes of alternating magnetic alignments as the Earth's magnetic field shifted.
Continental drift is a result of this process in which basaltic magma rises due to convection forces near midoceanic ridges and is subducted at trenches. For 10 points, name this process of the creation of new crust in
the ocean.
ANSWER: Seafloor spreading [accept continental drift until it is mentioned]
The sea level highstand during the mid-Cretaceous period can be attributed to this process's namesake
pulse. The Vine-Matthews-Morley hypothesis states that this process causes evidence for Earth's reversing
magnetic field through the appearance of alternating stripes in polarized rock. Robert Dietz's model of this
process assumed that a sliding surface was present at the base of the lithosphere. This process was first
described by Harry Hess, and it is caused by the asthenosphere's convection currents, which propel basaltic
magma to the Earth's surface. For 10 points, name this process responsible for continental drift that creates
new oceanic crust at mid-ocean ridges.
ANSWER: seafloor spreading [prompt on "continental drift" before mentioned]
This process results in the creation of rock formations displaying alternating stripes corresponding to the
Earth's normal and reversed magnetic fields. The theory of this process was supported by the confirmation
of the Vine-Matthews hypothesis and helped explain an earlier theory of Alfred Wegener. Theorized by
Harry Hess, this process occurs when basaltic magma forms new crust at a divergent boundary between two
tectonic plates. For 10 points, name this process which explains continental drift and by which the ocean
floor expands.
ANSWER: Seafloor Spreading
The fact that the sea level had a highstand in the mid-Cretaceous can be explained by "pulse" in this
process. This theory was first tested in measurements attempting to confirm the Vine-Matthews
Hypothesis. Arthur Holmes presaged this model by postulating that convection cells could drive this
process, which was confirmed by looking at the magnetic striping of rocks around ridges. Harry
Hammond Hess helped confirmed this mechanism, which apparently functions more through slab pull than
ridge push. This process occurs through upwelling of magma at mid-oceanic ridges, which are
accommodated by subduction. For 10 points, name this process that drives continental drift.
ANSWER: Seafloor Spreading
This process can lead to the formation of back arcs. Evidence for this process includes low seismic
wave velocities along ridges, as well as anomalously high heat flow values. This process first proposed
by Harry Hess. The existence of this process is further supported by (*) magnetic striping, as well as
the fact that the oldest sediment affected dates only to the Jurassic Period. It is thought to be behind the
separation of Africa from East Asia, and older material involved in this process is gradually recycled
through subduction. This process is most likely caused by convection in the asthenosphere. For 10 points,
name this process that explains continental drift and by which the ocean floor expands at places like the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
ANSWER: seafloor spreading
The Morley-Vine-Matthews hypothesis predicted that this phenomenon would result in symmetric patterns
in rocks at certain locations, providing the first strong support for this notion. These patterns record the
reversals of the earth's magnetic field. First proposed by Harry Hess, it describes a process that can occur at
a triple junction or a divergent boundary. FTP, identify this now widely-accepted theory that helps explain
continental drift, a process in which new oceanic crust is formed at mid-ocean ridges.
ANSWER: seafloor spreading
This theory describes a process in which excess material is disposed of in Benioff (BEHN-ee-off) zones.
This theory was supported by the confirmation of the Morley-Vine-Matthews hypothesis of a "striping"
pattern due to reversals of the earth's magnetic field. This theory was proposed by Harry H. Hess, and this
theory expands on Alfred Wegener's (VEG-uh-ners) theory of continental drift. For 10 points, name this
geological theory describing how new oceanic crust is formed by upwelling magma at mid-ocean ridges.
ANSWER: seafloor spreading [accept word forms]
This geological process saw increased activity during the mid-Cretaceous in its namesake "pulse." The
Vine-Matthews-Morley hypothesis predicted that, because of reversals in the Earth's magnetic field, this
process should result in alternating bands of magnetically polarized rock. Caused by asthenospheric
convection currents, this process occurs at triple junctions where basaltic magma emerges from a divergent
boundary between two oceanic plates. For 10 points, name this process contributing to continental drift, in
which new oceanic crust is formed at mid-ocean ridges.
ANSWER: seafloor spreading
The Morley-Vine-Matthews Hypothesis cited geomagnetic reversals in igneous rock as proof of this
phenomenon. This phenomenon generally involves passive upwelling from the mantle and is not found at
active margins or convergent boundaries. This phenomenon was first proposed by Harry Hess, and it is
currently explained by convection in the asthenosphere. For 10 points, name this occurrence in which
tectonic plates are formed at mid-ocean ridges, notably occurring at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
ANSWER: Seafloor Spreading
One example of this type of structure is Kick 'Em Jenny, which is located north of Grenada in the
Caribbean Sea, while some near Indonesia form the Emperor of China-Nieuwkerk ridge. Examples of them
with flat tops are called guyots, including the Bear, which is part of the New England chain southeast of
Massachusetts. They are larger than sea knolls, and have much in common geologically with islands. Like
oceanic trenches, the study of these is a major part of bathymetry. Name these sometimes-extinct
underwater volcanoes that are not tall enough to reach the water surface.
ANSWER: seamount [prompt on submarine mountain or underwater mountain]
Traps named for this material are deployed to collect both it and marine snow. Turbidity
currents carry this material. The portion of this material that does not touch the bed of a river is
called the suspended load. When it contains high proportions of skeletal material, it is called biogenic
(*) ooze. Classes of this material include boulders, pebbles, silt and clay. For 10 points, identify this
material that is deposited by water, wind, or glaciers and forms a namesake type of rock.
ANSWER: sediment
A well-known transport model of this substance was developed by Hans Albert Einstein; others were
developed by Meyer-Peter and Muller. A mobility number encountered in the modeling of this substance is
the Shields parameter. The burst-sweep cycle occurs in the context of its transport. G.K. Gilbert conducted
studies of this substance using a flume. Found in bed load, two characteristics of this substance are
angularity and sorting, in which it is "sorted" according to grain size when transported. For 10 points,
identify this term for loose particulate material produced by the weathering of rocks.
ANSWER: sediment [accept bed/loose particles before "particulate" is read]
Flysch (FLISH) and molasse are terms for cycles of this type of material, found in deep-water and
shallow-water facies (FAY-sees), respectively. These materials can be characterized by lamination. Coquina
(coe-KEE-nuh) is an example of this class of material made up entirely of shell fragments. These materials
are classified as clastic, organic, or chemical. This is the only class of rock that can contain fossils, and
common examples include shale, limestone, and sandstone. For 10 points, identify this type of rock, made
up of layers of gradually-deposited particles.
ANSWER: sedimentary rocks [prompt on rocks]
Top-level categories of this type of rock includes rudites, arenites and lutites. This type of rock includes
conglomerates and breccia. The last stage in the formation of this type of rock is cementation, the opposite
of which is dissolution, which can lead to the formation of stalagmites and stalactites. They contain the
fossil record and are formed after the weathering of pre-existing rock. For 10 points, identify this type of
rock paired with igneous and metamorphic.
ANSWER: sedimentary rock [prompt on limestone]
Udden and Wentworth's research on this type of substance yielded their namesake grain size scale, which
gives the scientific definitions of terms like "silt" and "clay." Biochemical examples of this type can include
aragonite or calcite. The majority of clastic rocks are of this rock type, and most of these are clastic.
Subtypes of this with large grains include conglomerates, and it is found in layers by age known as strata.
Examples of this rock type, produced by compaction of particulate matter, include chalk, limestone,
sandstone, and shale. For 10 points, identify this type of rock which is distinct from metamorphic and
igneous.
ANSWER: sedimentary rocks [prompt "sediment" until "clastic" is read; prompt "rock" throughout; why not?]
The stages of formation for this general class of rock are diagenesis and lithification, and the law of
superposition governs age relations for these rocks, whose subtypes include clastic. One deposit of
one rock of this type is a bed of Cambrian Explosion fossils found near Mt. Burgess; that rock is well
known for a kerogen-rich "oil" variety. In addition to (*) shale, examples of this type include sandstone
and limestone. Formed from accumulation of settled particles, name this rock type, contrasted with
metamorphic and igneous rocks.
ANSWER: Sedimentary rocks
The symbols I and K are used for a type of these things when it is present in the inner and outer
core. The two most common surface types of these things are named for Rayleigh and Love. A
shadow zone results from one type of these things not penetrating the outer (*) core and another type
of them being refracted by the core-mantle boundary. Those two types are P and S. For 10 points, identify
these things whose travel time is used to determine an earthquake's hypocenter.
ANSWER: seismic waves
One type of this device partially consisted of a boom with an attached mass suspended by a pivot and a
silk thread; that type of this device was the horizontal pendulum one devised by John Milne. A primitive
version of this device created by the astronomer Zhang Heng had eight dragon heads that dropped a ball
into the mouth of eight frogs beneath them. A more modern type scratches out a wave pattern with a
needle. For 10 points, identify this device that detects or records the waves created by an earthquake.
ANSWER: seismograph [or seismoscope; or seismometer]
The "tele" version of this device uses a feedback circuit to keep a mass steady, and
the amount of force required can be used to measure location and strength. John Milne,
Thomas Gray, and James Ewing created the first modern one of these devices while in
Japan, and Zhang Heng built one during the Han dynasty. The design consisted of eight
dragons holding brass marbles in their mouths. The dragon that dropped the ball would
indicate the direction of the epicenter. For ten points, name these instruments used to detect
seismic waves and earthquakes.
ANSWER: Seismometer (Aceept Seismoscope or Seismograph)
In mass spectrometry, an aromatic cation with this many carbon atoms often appears at m over z equals 91.
The signal for the central proton of an isopropyl group will have this many peaks in proton NMR. A violetcolored strong oxidizing agent has a metal in this oxidation state. That compound is potassium
permanganate. This is the number of elemental gases that are diatomic at standard conditions. This integer
is equal to the negative log of hydronium concentration of pure water at 25 degrees Celsius, and is also the
number of valence electrons possessed by the most electronegative element, fluorine. For 10 points, give
this number equal to the neutral pH value.
ANSWER: seven [or +7]
A formation in Texas of this type of sedimentary rock is named for John Barnett. This rock is laminated and
fissile [FIH-sil], which means that this breaks into chips rather than clumps, and differentiates this from
mudstones. This turns into slate when it is hardened. This rock and dolomite make up the Bakken formation
in Montana and North Dakota. Name this rock that often contains kerogen [KER-uh-jen], which can be
turned into a substitute for crude oil.
ANSWER: shale
Albertite is a type of asphalt formed from this type of mineral. The Green River formation of this
mineral is a potential source of crude oil. Types of this argillaceous mineral include the "black" type,
which contains a large amount of carbonaceous material and is also especially rich in organic
material. It is similar in composition to marl and (*) mudstone, containing clay minerals and silt-sized
fragments of other minerals, but unlike mudstone, it is highly fissile, splitting easily along cleavage lines.
Over the last decade, the use of fracking to obtain natural gas from formations of this mineral has become
increasingly common. Metamorphism can turn this mineral into slate. For 10 points, name this flaky
sedimentary mineral, which makes up a fossil field in British Columbia named for the Burgess Pass.
ANSWER: shale
On Venus, the largest one of these structures is found in Alta Regio and is named after the goddess
Ma'at. On Mars, some of these structures can be found in the Elysium Province, but the largest one
of these structures on Mars is surrounded by a four kilometer tall escarpment. These structures
typically emit an aphanatic liquid in the fashion of a (*) "fountain." These structures are formed from
seamounts that may accumulate enough material to become a type of island; typically they are built up from
layers of basaltic lava. Olympus Mons is one of these mountains. For 10 points, name these broad structures
exemplified by Mauna Loa, which are named for a warrior's defensive weapon.
ANSWER: shield volcanoes [Prompt on volcanoes and mountains.]
Pahoehoe is produced by many of these geological features, which generally do not generate pyroclastic
flows. A fissure in one of these geological features can create a curtain of fire. These features are usually
formed through effusive eruptions and have very low-viscosity, fluid lava that can spread over long
distances, making some of these features the largest mountains on earth. For 10 points, name these gently 
sloped volcanoes that include Mauna Loa and Kiluaea.
ANSWER: shield volcanoes
The Sif-Gula region of Venus forms complexes of these structures, where these objects do not observe the
linear patterning they do on Earth. The lava that forms them tends to form rocks without gas bubbles, and
when they erupt, frequently a fissure along their sides will form, creating spatter ramparts in a phenomenon
called a curtain of fire, though on the whole their eruptions are characterized as relatively calm. For 10
points, identify these volcanoes formed by low-viscosity basaltic lava, exemplified by Mauna Loa and
Mauna Kea, best known for their broad, shallow sides.
ANSWER: shield volcano [prompt on volcano]
This phenomenon was found to increase nuclear fusion rates in the interior of neutron stars due to
their dense plasmas in an October 2013 paper by A.Y. Potekhin. The constant related to this effect
includes many contributions of values equal to 0.30 and 0.35, is named after Slater and though not in
units of mass, is 57.9 for iron. This effect is responsible for the decrease in ionization energy and
increase in atomic radius in francium and other alkali metals through a reduction in the effective nuclear
charge of an atom. For ten points, name this effect in which electrons near the nucleus repel valence
electrons, partially cancelling the attraction between the valence electrons and the nucleus.
ANSWER: Electron Screening [or Atomic Shielding] effects
One common reagent used to do this action is produced by reacting isocyanate groups with ethylenimine.
Plasma-based methods for doing this, such as one that uses oxygen plasma, are being explored as
alternatives to the Hercosett process, which produces chloramines waste products. One early method of
doing this used divinyl sulfone to achieve cross-linking of cellulose fibers. The end products of another
process are called Sanforized. This action is often done to counteract felting, or the unwanted entanglement
of fibers. For 10 points, name this method of treating fabrics, such as cotton or wool, so that they do not
become smaller when washed.
ANSWER: shrink-proofing [or other similar answers indicating imparting resistance to shrinking; prompt on pre-shrinking or word forms]
The Cope rearrangement and hydrogen shifts are examples of reactions categorized by the relocation of
these. These do not have a nodal plane containing the internuclear axis, but they do posses cylindrical
symmetry. These have a region of overlap directly between the atoms. As alkanes are singly bonded, this is
the type of bond between atoms. This bond can be formed from overlap of two s orbitals. For 10 points,
name this strong bond that is contrasted with a pi bond.
ANSWER: sigma bonds
One family in this mineral class exhibits an optical effect where light refracts in layered ingrowths that
formed during the cooling process. That is the Schiller effect. The mineral at the base of the two branches of
Bowen's reactions series belongs to this class and is plagioclase. One monoclinic group of this class is
called micas. All of the minerals in Bowen's reaction series belong to this class. Some minerals in this class
include microcline, a type of feldspar, and quartz. These minerals make up most of the earth's crust. For 10
points, name this class of minerals that contains oxygen and silicon.
ANSWER: silicate [prompt on feldspars before mentioned]
One of this kind of mineral, whose crystals also contain magnesium and iron, is at the top of Bowen's
reaction series, while zircon contains this mineral class's characteristic group and zirconium. In addition to
olivine, an ortho- one, one variety of a group of these was the source of the first rubidium to be discovered,
while another is best known for its perfect basal cleavage and the thin sheet into which is breaks: those
varieties are known as lepidolite and muscovite. Their best known subclass is the tecto-ones, all of which
contain aluminum save the best known group of them. Examples of the alumino-ones include zeolites and
feldspars. For 10 points, identify this class of minerals, like quartz and mica, all of which include oxygen
and silicon.
ANSWER: silicates
Alternatives to the most common method for producing this element include one developed by REC that
converts 3 atoms of its tetrachloride to one atom of its pure form. Different kinds of that pure form include
upgraded metallurgical-grade and solar-grade. This element is reacted with methyl chloride to create
precursors to synthetic polymers in the Muller-Rochow process. Those precursors contain this element and
oxygen as their backbone and include PDMS. The photoactive region of most charge-coupled devices
consists of a layer of this element. After oxygen, it is the second most abundant element in Earth's crust,
and quartz is composed of its dioxide. For 10 points, name this element found directly below carbon on the
periodic table, which is most commonly used in semiconductor devices such as microchips.
ANSWER: silicon [or Si]
An atom of this element, substituted with methyl groups, is used as a primary standard in proton NMR.
Modern calculations of Avogadro's number utilize X-ray crystallography of this element. This element's
band gap is 1.1 electron-volts, which is smaller than all other elements except germanium. Naturally, this
element is used by diatoms. Quartz is formed when oxygen bonds to it. This tetravalent element is the
second metalloid and is found directly below carbon on the Periodic Table. For 10 points, name this
element commonly used in semiconductors with atomic number 14.
ANSWER: silicon [or Si]
C18 HPLC columns use octadecyl alkyl chains attached to this element as a stationary phase. Zeolites
are comprised of the oxides of aluminum and this element. In column chromatographies, the
stationary phase often consists of a "gel" of this compound. This element makes up (*) twenty-eight
percent of the Earth's crust by weight, only behind oxygen. It's not germanium, but this metalloid is
"doped" in order to increase its properties as a semiconductor. For 10 points, name this member of the
carbon family often used in computers..
ANSWER: silicon (accept Si)
The poly-crystalline form of this element is made by the Siemens process. Berzelius discovered this element
by heating its tetra-fluoride with potassium metal. A common reference compound for proton NMR
contains four methyl groups surrounded by one atom of this element. Found directly below carbon on the
periodic table, this element is the second most abundant in Earth's crust. The mineral quartz is composed of
oxygen and this element. For 10 points, name this chemical element that names a valley in California home
to many companies in the semiconductor industry.
ANSWER: silicon [prompt on "Si"]
A method of producing this element at high purity is the Czochralski process. Like carbon-containing
compounds, compounds containing this element can undergo catenation and can exhibit chirality due to this
element's tetrahedral structure. A compound containing carbon, hydrogen, and this element is the standard
for calibrating chemical shift in NMR spectroscopy. This semiconducting metalloid, which is found in
TMS, has an atomic number of 14. For 10 points, name this element that, like germanium, is commonly
used in computer chips.
ANSWER: silicon [or Si]
The availability of phosphorous and this element was limited in Dave Tilman's experiments which led to
the development of the resource competition model, which were done on organisms such as Asterionella. It
is not aluminum, but a compound containing this element is often used as the stationary phase for various
chromatographies. A compound in which this element is bonded to four -CH3 groups is used as an internal
standard for NMR, and the dioxide of this element makes up a mineral which is commonly used in glass.
For 10 points each, name this element which is found in the cell walls of diatoms, which has symbol Si.
ANSWER: silicon [accept Si before mentioned; accept silica gel]
One protecting group incorporating this element is frequently removed by the quaternary
ammonium salt TBAF. Convenient variations on the aldol and Michael reactions developed by
Mukaiyama employ this element in replacing the nucleophilic intermediate with a stable reagent.
Rods of this material may be grown using the (*) decomposition of its trichloro acid, in the Siemens
process. This element is substituted with four methyl groups in an internal standard for NMR spectroscopy.
Its dioxide forms crystals called quartz. For 10 points, name this element used to manufacture computer
chips.
ANSWER: silicon
This element appears at the center of a compound that is used as a standard in NMR; that compound has
four methyl groups attached to this element. Large, ultra-pure ingots of this element are industrially
produced using boules in the Czochralski process, which sees this element melted in a crucible and suitably
doped before being drawn into a wafer. Diatoms integrate this element into their cell walls. It appears in
minerals like pyroxene, mica, and quartz, and it is the second-most-abundant element in the crust.
Astrobiologists take an interest in this material as an alternate to carbon in extraterrestrial life. For 10
points, name this semiconducting metalloid with symbol Si.
ANSWER: silicon [accept Si until it is read; do not accept "silica"]
This element, when attached to four methyl groups, is the calibration standard for NMR; that
compound is TMS. The Czochralski process is used to form crystals of this element, and it is
chlorinated in the Seimens process. Like carbon, this element forms four single bonds. This element
is the second most abundant one in the earth's (*) crust, and is the second lightest metalloid. For 10
points, name this element commonly used in transistors and computer chips, with atomic number 14 and
symbol Si.
ANSWER: silicon
One common method for calibration in NMR uses the tetramethyl compound of this element. Types of
minerals that contain this element bonded to oxygen are known as pyroxenes and olivine. It is used to make
a protective shell by diatoms (DYE-uh-tomz). N and P type substances can be made by adding arsenic and
gallium to it in a process known as doping. Its dioxide is found in quartz, and this element is useful for
making the semiconductors used in computer chips. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number
14 and symbol Si.
ANSWER: silicon [accept Si before it is read]
Some of the mineral types in which this element is found with oxygen include amphiboles, humites, and
olivines. It combines with magnesium in serpentine minerals and with aluminum in many clay and mica
minerals. This element also combines with aluminium and fluorine in topaz, and it combines with zirconium
in zircon. It also is a central element in agate, amethyst, and other types of quartz. After oxygen, this is the
second most abundant element in the earth's crust. Name this metalloid often found in sand and glass, a
common semiconductor with chemical abbreviation Si.
ANSWER: silicon
A molecule with an atom of this element bonded to four methyl groups is used as the standard in NMR.
This element's carbide is often used as an abrasive. The second-most abundant element in the Earth's crust,
it is, like carbon, often found bonded to four other atoms. A dioxide of this element makes up the cell wall
of diatoms and is commonly found in sand and quartz. This element is highly used as a semiconductor in
electronics. For 10 points, name this metalloid element with atomic number 14 and symbol Si.
ANSWER: silicon [accept Si until the end of the question]
One compound containing this element with negative valence can be reacted with HCl to form a
macromolecule named for Kautsky. Though it is not boron, Alfred Stock prepared several hydrides of this
element. The first purifications of it were done by zone melting, which today is replaced by the Siemens and
Schumacher processes. The Czochralski process creates most of the crystals of this element, which is tetramethylated in a standard used in all NMRs. Soro, phyllo-, and cyclo- are prefixes referring to a class of
minerals containing this element. It is the most common element to appear in integrated circuits and
microchips and the second most abundant in the Earth's crust. For 10 points, quartz contains what
semiconducting element with atomic number 14?
ANSWER: silicon [or Si]
When alpha to a sulfoxide group, groups containing this element migrate in a common variation of the
Pummerer rearrangement. Transmetalation of groups from this element to palladium is a key step in the
Hiyama cross-coupling. When groups containing this element are geminal or vicinal to hydroxyl groups,
they rearrange to ethers of this element in the Brook rearrangement. Enol derivatives of those ethers of this
element are reacted with aldehydes or formates in the Mukaiyama aldol reaction, and ethers of this element
are generally useful protecting groups for alcohols. The tetramethyl derivative of this element is defined to
have a chemical shift of 0 ppm in proton NMR, and its dioxide is the main component of glass. For 10
points, name this tetravalent element used in microchips.
ANSWER: silicon
Trichlorosilane reacts with this element in the Siemens process. This element reacts with methyl
chloride to form pre-synthetic polymers in the Muller-Rochow process. It is binded to oxygen in
olivines, and the cell walls of diatoms are comprised of this element binded to a (*) dioxide. That oxide
of this element can also create the piezoelectric mineral quartz. Another of its many benefits is its use in
producing computer chip semiconductors. For 10 points, name this metalloid with atomic number 14 and
symbol Si.
ANSWER: Silicon [accept Si before mentioned]
Four methyl groups are attached to this element in a compound used as a standard for chemical shift
calibration in NMR. This element is doped with boron in p-type devices. The most common rock-forming
minerals contain this element. A hydrated dioxide of this element forms the cell walls of diatoms. An
extremely purified form of this element is used in integrated circuits and semiconductors. This
second-lightest of the metalloids has a valence of four. For 10 points, name this element found in quartz,
which gives its name to a hi-tech "valley" in California.
ANSWER: silicon [or Si]
Boules of this element are cut into wafers to form the most common semiconductor substrate. Biogenous
sources of this element include the frustules of diatoms. A framework of this element's dioxide, as well as
aluminum and potassium, sodium, or calcium, characterizes feldspars. Soda-lime glass majorly consists of
this element's dioxide. Minerals composed of this element and oxygen make up the vast majority of the
Earth's crust and include quartz. For 10 points, identify this element with chemical symbol Si.
ANSWER: silicon [or Si until it is read]
This element's nitrate, once called "lunar caustic," can be used to test for the presence of halide ions
because it forms cream-colored halide precipitates. The light-sensitive material used in daguerrotypes was
this element's iodide, which today is used to seed clouds. By far, its most common oxidation state is plus-1,
and it is the second "noble metal." It has the greatest thermal and electrical conductivity of any element. For
10 points, name this element with atomic number 47 and symbol Ag.
ANSWER: silver [or Ag until it is read]
This element's sulfide can build up on the inside of electronics in a phenomenon called "whiskering".
Electrum is an alloy of gold and this element. A test that distinguishes aldehydes from ketones uses a
nitrate of this element dissolved in ammonia, called Tollens's reagent. This transition metal, which has the
lowest electrical resistivity of any element, is below copper and above gold on the periodic table. For 10
points, name this precious metal which forms an alloy with copper named sterling, an element with atomic
symbol Ag.
ANSWER: silver [or Ag until it is read]
In the Stern-Gerlach experiment, particles of this metal were sent through an inhomogenous
magnetic field. A diammine complex of this element is used in Tollen's test, which produces a mirror
of this metal. Argentite is a mineral containing a compound of this and sulfur. This is the element
with the highest electrical (*) conductivity, and its the only element who's hydroxide and chloride are both
insoluble. For 10 points, name this metal with atomic number 47 and chemical symbol Ag.
ANSWER: silver [accept Ag before mentioned]
Ethylene is oxidized to ethylene oxide using a catalyst of this element. Alexander Borodin helped discover
that carboxylate salts of this element react with bromine to form alkyl bromides. In basic solutions, this
element's cation is reduced by aldehydes, but not ketones. Chloride ions can be detected by the creamcolored precipitate formed when this element is added, usually in the form of its hand-staining nitrate.
Halides of this metal are used in cloud seeding and photography. It has the greatest electrical conductivity
of any element. With copper, it forms the alloys shibuichi, Britannia and sterling. For 10 points, name this
element with symbol Ag.
ANSWER: silver [Accept Ag before mention.]
Because this element unusually has a 4d10 5s1 valence configuration, rather than the expected 4d9 5s2
configuration, it is almost always found in the +1 oxidation state. That property led to its use in the SternGerlach experiment. Like mercury and lead, its chloride is insoluble. It is sometimes found as a native
metal, or in an alloy with gold known as electrum. Its iodide is used in artificial cloud seeding, and its halide
salts are generally photosensitive, allowing their use in photographic media. It is more conductive than all
other metals, including copper. For 10 points, name this metal whose chemical symbol is Ag.
ANSWER: silver [or Ag until it is read]
One common example of this type of reaction is the thermite reaction used in welding. Whether or not this
type of reaction will occur can be determined by a metal's place in the activity series. This type of reaction
is exemplified by active metals, such as calcium and magnesium, reacting with water to form metal oxides
and hydrogen gas. For 10 points, name this type of reaction, in which a more active element replaces a less
active element in a compound.
ANSWER: single displacement reaction [or single replacement reaction]
The first synthetic noble gas compound was composed of xenon, platinum, and this many atoms of
fluorine. An octahedral coordination complex has at most this many ligands. This is the oxidation
number of chromium in the dichromate (die-CROW-mate) ion, and also of sulfur in the sulfate ion.
A p subshell can hold up to this many (*) electrons, as it has three atomic orbitals. For 10 points, give the
number of valence electrons possessed by neutral oxygen, which is also the atomic number of carbon.
ANSWER: six
A molecule with this many carbon atoms has chair and boat conformations. Attaching a methyl
group to a molecule with this many carbons produces toluene. In one step of enriching uranium, each
atom of it is bonded to this many fluorine atoms. August Kekule had a dream of a snake eating its tail
to explain the structure of that compound with this many carbons named (*) benzene. This many total
electrons can be contained in the three p orbitals. For 10 points, identify this atomic number of carbon.
ANSWER: six
An organic molecule with this many carbon atoms is defined to have zero ring strain and comes in
"chair" and "boat" configurations. A group on the Periodic Table designated with this number
contains elements which lose an electron from the s subshell to half fill the d shell. The n = 1 case for
Huckel's rule states that compounds with this many pi electrons will be aromatic. Although it is not
eight, (*) octahedral compounds have this many ligands. Kekule had a dream about a cyclic compound with
this many carbon atoms named benzene. For ten points, name this number which is also the atomic number
of carbon.
ANSWER: six
The size of particles that can be carried by a river is proportional to this power of the flow
velocity. The deuterated version of DMSO has this many deuterium atoms, and the DnaB
helicase in eukaryotes is an oligomer with this many subunits. A common nonpolar solvent is a
mixture of isomers of the alkane containing this many carbons. In transition metal chemistry,
fac-mer isomerism occurs in complexes containing this many ligands, which have d-orbitals split
into t sub 2g and e sub g levels. In the first step of glycolysis, this position of glucose is
phosphorylated by glucokinase, and glucose, fructose, and galactose all have this many carbons.
For 10 points, give this number, which is also the number of ligands in an octahedral complex
and the atomic number of carbon.
ANSWER: six [or 6]
According to VSEPR ["vesper"] theory, this is the steric number of square pyramidal and square planar
compounds. The products from a diene and a dienophile in the Diels-Alder reaction have this many
members, as do the "chair" and "boat" configurations. One metallic carcinogen is chromium with this
oxidation state. One exception to the octet rule, boron, is most stable with this many shared electrons, which
is also the number of electrons in a full set of p-orbitals. For 10 points, give this number, the number of
carbons in benzene and cyclohexane and the atomic number of carbon.
ANSWER: six [accept 6]
The Fellenius and Bishop routine solutions are extensions of the method of slices, all of which are
used when modeling these structures. The three models of the evolution of these structures are
decline, replacement, and parallel retreat. Weathering-limited and transport-limited are the two
major varieties of these structures, which can suffer from rotational, translational, or compound slip.
Internal frictional resistance and particle cohesion affect the shear strength of these structures, which are
subject to mass wasting. The angle of repose is the steepest that one of these structures can be without
losing stability. The continental shelf transitions to a "continental" one of structures, which itself transitions
to the continental rise. For 10 points, identify these inclined surfaces.
ANSWER: hillslopes [or grades; or gradients; or pitchs; or rises; or inclines until "inclined surface" is read]
Westacott used it to investigate the effects of supercritical water density, and Winstein developed the
Intimate Ion Pairs theory for this reaction, which often uses solvents of high dielectric constants. This
ionization mechanism generates a racemic mixture of products after passing through a planar intermediate
that contains only the substrate molecule. This two-step mechanism follows first-order kinetics and usually
occurs with tertiary alkyl halides. For 10 points, name this type of nucleophilic substitution.
ANSWER: SN1 [accept substitution nucleophilic unimolecular]
In 2008, a roundabout mechanism for this type of reaction was observed in gas phase interactions between
chloride ions and methyl iodine gas. The Finkelstein reaction, which involves two halides, proceeds through
this mechanism, as does a common method of producing primary and secondary amines. It is greatly
enhanced in the presence of crown ethers due to solvation effects freeing up anions, and this mechanism's
transition state is trigonal bipyramidal as a change in the stereochemistry of the system occurs known as the
Walden Inversion. For 10 points, identify this type of reaction in which a nucleophile forces out a leaving
group and takes its place in a single step.
ANSWER: SN2 Reaction [or bimolecular nucleophilic substitution (accept in any order)]
This material's deep layers are home to solid formations called depth hoares that can cause structural
weakness in formations of it. At high altitudes, this material can form spike-like objects known as
penitentes. When it is denser than 550 kilograms per cubic meter, this material is known as firn, and its
compacted, resolidified form is called neve and formed via nivation. The calculation of mass balance
compares the accumulation of this material to the rate of ablation; a positive measure indicates glaciation.
For 10 points, name this form of solid precipitation that generally falls in white flakes during the winter.
ANSWER: snow [do not accept "ice"]
Studies of the acoustic properties of this phenomenon have shown that loud sounds, such as that of a
pistol firing, can be used to measure this phenomenon, and the Lake-effect kind of this phenomenon
occurs when cold winds move across long expanses of warmer lake water. Photokeratitis, or
blindness caused by this phenomenon, is due to the fact that it can (*) reflect 90% or more of ultraviolet
radiation, which explains why Inuits wear special goggles. This meteorological phenomenon occurs when
tiny, supercooled cloud droplets freeze into six-armed crystals, no two of which are the same. For ten
points, name this type of powdery winter precipitation.
ANSWER: Snow (accept synonyms like snowfall, but do not accept sleet, hail, or any other type of precipitation)
The ionic form of this element when combined with borohydride will become a powerful reducing agent
that can turn aldehydes to ketones and ketones to alcohols. Its elemental form was first isolated in 1806 by a
Sir Humphrey Davy who ran molten caustic soda through an electric current. This was certainly an
accomplishment since its high reactivity does not allow it to exist in nature. In the flame test this element
will burn yellow. When it combines with chlorine one can see its most common form in nature. With the
atomic number eleven, FTP name this most common alkali metal which has the symbol Na.
ANSWER: sodium
This element can be used by itself or in an alloy with potassium for liquid metal cooling in submarine
nuclear reactors. Its spectrum is notable for its two D-lines, and it can be created along with hydrogen in
carbon fusion. Its hypochlorite is bleach, and its hydroxide is caustic soda. Three ions of this element are
pushed out of a cell for every two potassium ions pulled in to maintain resting potential in animal cells by
their namesake pumps. It is more dense than potassium despite being located above it on the periodic table,
where it is below lithium. Name this alkali metal that bonds with chlorine to form table salt.
ANSWER: sodium
A type of gas discharge lamp that has high and low pressure varieties is named for this element. A
compound consisting of this element and boron is used in the borax bead test. The D-lines in stellar
spectra indicate its presence, and this element burns bright yellow in flame tests. Like other alkali
metals such as lithium and (*) potassium, this element reacts violently with water. For 10 points, name
this element whose chloride is commonly known as table salt and whose atomic symbol is Na.
ANSWER: sodium [accept Na before it is read]
This element, which Humphry Davy isolated by running current through the molten form of its
hydroxide, produces the D-line of the Fraunhofer lines. It was formerly manufactured by the Castner
process, and currently a cell with a carbon anode and iron cathode, the Downs cell, is used to
manufacture it. (*) Baking soda is the bicarbonate of this element, which burns yellow in a flame test. For
10 points, name this element whose chloride is consumed as table salt, symbolized Na.
ANSWER: sodium [or Na]
The non-degeneracy of s and p orbitals in the Zeeman effect was first demonstrated by this element's
589-nanometer doublet, which forms a characteristic spectral D line. That line, along with this
element's flame test, produces a bright yellow color. This element, once formed in the Castner
process, is industrially produced today by (*) Downs cells. Most soaps contain this element's cation
attached to one or more fatty acids. This element, the first one to have a ground state electron at the n=3
energy level, is so reactive that it will catch fire when placed into a container of water. For ten points, name
this alkali metal found with chlorine in table salt, which has symbol Na.
ANSWER: sodium (or Na before mention)
This element is the namesake of a doublet at the D1 and D2 lines in the Fraunhofer line spectrum. This
element was used as the ligand in an electride salt used as a reducing agent in the original development of
the Birch reduction. The metallic form of this element is formed in the Downs process. The carbonate of
this element is formed in the Solvay process, and lye is the hydroxide of this element. It produces a bright
yellow flame in a flame test, and the bicarbonate of this element is baking soda. Name this alkali metal with
atomic number 11, and whose plus-charged ion is bound to the chloride anion in table salt.
ANSWER: sodium [accept Na]
This element was once produced via electrolysis (ee-leck-TROH-lih-sis) of its hydroxide in the Castner
process. The Solvay process produces soda ash, the carbonate salt of this element, which is a water
softener. Lye is the hydroxide of this element, which burns bright yellow in a flame test. The body has a
pump to regulate levels of potassium ions and ions of this elements, whose bicarbonate salt is called soda.
Its chloride is table salt. For 10 points, name this element symbolized Na.
ANSWER: sodium [accept Na before mentioned]
This element has a characteristic D line at 589 nanometers and is produced in the electrolytic Castner
process. The movement of this element is counteracted by the movement of potassium in a namesake
"pump" based off of active transport. A strong base containing hydroxide and this metal is known as lye
while baking soda consists of a compound containing this metal and bicarbonate. For 10 points, name this
alkali metal found along with chlorine in table salt.
ANSWER: sodium [or Na]
Though not lithium or potassium, this element is commonly used with an alcohol to reduce ammonia in
the Birch reduction. This element's carbonate is produced by the Solvay process and is called soda ash. This
element's hydroxide, a common ingredient of soap, is called lye. Burning bright yellow in a flame test, this
element has a bicarbonate called baking soda and a chloride called table salt. For 10 points, name this
element symbolized Na.
ANSWER: sodium [or Na before it is read]
This element's namesake "fusion test" is used to determine the presence of halogens, nitrogen, or sulfur in
organic compounds, and it is commercially produced from the Downs process. Often stored under oil, this
element was first isolated by Sir Humphrey Davy through the electrolysis of lye, which is this metal's
hydroxide. This highly reactive element produces a bright yellow flame in flame tests, and its bicarbonate is
baking soda. For 10 points, name this alkali metal with symbol Na, whose chloride is table salt.
ANSWER: Sodium [accept Na before mention]
This element is commonly used to reduce benzophenone to the diphenylketyl radical used in hydrocarbon
purification, and either it or lithium, along with alcohol in ammonia, provides electrons necessary for a
Birch reduction. The Solvay process produces soda ash, this element's carbonate salt, which is used in
water softeners. First isolated by electrolysis of lye, which is this metal's hydroxide, this element burns
yellow in a flame test, and baking soda is its bicarbonate. For 10 points, name this element whose chloride
forms simple table salt and which is symbolized Na.
ANSWER: sodium [or Na before mentioned]
An amalgam of mercury and this element is used in the Emde modification of the Hofmann degradation to
reduce quaternary ammonium salts. The splitting of its doublet lines at 588 and 589 nanometers upon the
application of a magnetic field was the first observation of the Zeeman effect. An electride complex formed
by ammonia, an alcohol, and this element attacks a benzene ring to produce a cyclohexadiene in the Birch
reduction. Aldosterone promotes the uptake the of ions of this element in the distal tubules of the kidneys,
and 3 atoms of this element are exchanged for 2 atoms of potassium by a namesake "pump." For 10 points,
identify this element which produces a bright yellow color in a flame test.
ANSWER: Sodium [or Na; or natrium]
The Fraunhofer lines of the Sun's electromagnetic spectrum contain a D-line, sometimes known as
a "doublet," produced by transitions in this element's family but traditionally named after this
element. This metal is currently made using the Downs Cell. When it is used as a coolant in nuclear
reactors, the radioactive 24 isotope of this element is formed. It produces a bright (*) yellow flame
when heated. This is the second-lightest alkali metal after lithium. For 10 points, identify this metal whose
chloride is table salt.
ANSWER: sodium [or Na]
This element can be produced via fusion of two carbon atoms at 600 megakelvins in a star with at least
three solar masses, or in a Downs Cell or by electrolysis in the Castner process. Vapor lamps made of this
element are used for street lighting and give off a distinctive yellow light, and it was discovered through
electrolysis by Humphry Davy. This soft, silvery metal is exchanged with potassium in a namesake pump.
For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 11, which forms a common condiment with
chloride.
ANSWER: sodium or Na
Produced electrolytically via the Downs process, this substance is used in a qualitative "fusion test" for
nitrogen, sulfur, and halogens. This element's atomic spectrum features two lines at 589.0 and 589.5
nanometers, called the D-lines, which give it a bright yellow flame test. Often stored under oil because it
oxidizes quickly in air, this element is a soft, silvery metal. Its bicarbonate is known as baking soda, its
hydroxide is a strong base known as lye, and its chloride is called table salt. For 10 points, name this alkali
metal with symbol Na.
ANSWER: sodium [accept Na until mentioned]
The iron cathode of a Downs Cell produces this element by reducing its cation (CAT-eye-on). Lamps
powered by vapors of this element, visible at about 590 nanometers, have replaced mercury vapor lamps.
This element's cation is pumped outside of a cell while potassium is pumped inside a cell to produce a
voltage gradient. This element's hydroxide is a highly-corrosive substance called lye. For 10 points, name
this element that forms table salt with chlorine.
ANSWER: sodium [prompt on Na]
This metal is used in the reduction of benzene to 1,4 cyclohexadiene, known as the Birch Reduction and
also appears in Rongalite. Its spectral lines are classified as D1 and D2 and this metal is produced in an
electrolytic process known as the Castner process. In addition, this metal is used to produce hard soaps in
saponification and a tetraborate compound with this metal is known as Borax. It forms a namesake pump
along with potassium and its hydroxide is commonly known as lye. FTP, name this element that bonds with
chloride ions to form table salt.
ANSWER: Sodium or Na
The thiosulfate of this element can be used to extract gold and to help develop paper. Its emission
spectrum is characterized by the D-line, and this element is produced at the cathode of a Downs cell.
This element is found in the minerals kernite and halite, and the bicarbonate of this element is also
known as nahcolite and can be used to treat dyspepsia. This alkali metal produces an extremely bright
yellow result in the flame test. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 11 and symbol Na.
ANSWER: sodium [accept early Na]
This element is used in liquid ammonia as a reducing agent in the Birch reduction. This element used
to be produced in a process that utilized this element's molten hydroxide called the Castner process
but is now produced commercially by the electrolysis of its chloride in the Downs process. It is
normally stored in an inert gas or oil because of its extremely [*] violent reaction with water and this
element gives a yellow color in a flame test. This element's hydroxide is also called lye and its bicarbonate
is called baking soda. For 10 points, name this alkali metal that is below magnesium in the periodic table
that has symbol Na and is paired with chloride in table salt.
ANSWER: sodium [accept Na before mentioned]
The Castner process produces this metal via the electrolysis of its hydroxide, and the Solvay process
produces soda ash, this element's carbonate. This metal reacts violently with water, sometimes explosively
bursting in flames upon contact. Lye is the caustic hydroxide of this element, and this element burns bright
yellow in the flame test. Baking soda is its bicarbonate, while common table salt is its chloride. For 10
points, name this chemical element symbolized Na.
ANSWER: sodium [accept Na before mentioned]
This compound reacts with acetic [uh-SEE-tik] acid to form a compound that can then be combined with
acetic acid to form a common buffer. This and ammonium chloride are created directly by exposing a
solution of brine to ammonia and then carbon dioxide. This compound is then calcinated to produce several
gases and soda ash to finish off the Solvay process. Also known as thermokalite or nahcolite, it is used as a
toothpaste whitener, as a leavening agent, and in fire extinguishers. Name this compound with chemical
formula NaHCO3.
ANSWER: sodium bicarbonate or sodium hydrogen carbonate [accept NaHCO3 before the end; accept bicarbonate of soda; prompt on baking soda, bread soda, cooking soda; do not accept or prompt on "sodium carbonate"]
This compound is found naturally in minerals such as nahcolite, and it precipitates out of a reaction
between carbon dioxide, water, and soda ash. Along with ammonium chloride, this compound is the
product of an intermediary step in the Solvay process, and it is used in dry chemical fire
extinguishers because it can undergo a dehydration reaction to produce carbon dioxide. Found
dissolved in (*) bile, this substance is used to neutralize the stomach acid, and is also a common leavening
agent. A volcanic eruption can be visually represented by adding vinegar to, for ten points, what white
powder with chemical formula NaHCO3?
ANSWER: sodium bicarbonate (accept sodium hydrogen carbonate or baking soda or NaHCO3 before read; do not accept or prompt "sodium carbonate" or "baking powder")
A 10% solution of this substance is used to assay for flavonoids in a namesake test. The lysis buffer in
plasmid preparation kits contain around 0.2N of this substance. The anhydrous form of this
substance is used to catalyze the transesterification of methanol and triglycerides in the formation of
biodiesel. A hot solution of this substance is used to wash bauxite in the first step of the Bayer
process. Along with chlorine gas, this substance is produced from the electrolysis of brine in the (*)
chloralkali process. Dividing the Koettstorfer number by 1.403 gives the number of equivalents of this
substance needed to break down one gram of fat. Stock solutions of this substance are typically stored at
10N. This substance is commonly used to cleave esters in saponification, and it is also found in drain
cleaners. For 10 points, name this strong base, which formula NaOH.
ANSWER: sodium hydroxide [or caustic soda; or NaOH until it is read]
In the original scheme of the Jacobsen epoxidation, this compound donates an oxygen atom to the
manganese reagent. Its conjugate acid is formed by the enzyme that is mutated in a disease which is
similar to chronic granulomatous disease but shows a normal NBT test; that enzyme is
myeloperoxidase. A mixture of this compound and boric acid is found in Dakin's solution. It's not
ethanol or HCl, but a 0.1% solution of this substance is commonly used to destroy (*) DNA and
decontaminate lab surfaces used for PCR. This substance is generated in situ by reacting sodium hydroxide
with chlorine gas in processes used to decolorize wood pulp. 3 to 6 percent solutions of this compound are
found in Clorox. For 10 points, name this compound, the active ingredient in bleach.
ANSWER: sodium hypochlorite [or hypochlorous acid; or bleach until it is read]
The most widely used classification system for this substance is a taxonomy published by the USDA.
Pedologists study this substance. During an earthquake, this substance can lose stability by a process
known as liqeufaction. Nutrients can be leached from this substance and redeposited in lower horizons by
precipitation. This substance can be classified based on the amount of silt, sand, and clay. For 10 points,
identify this layer of finely ground particles that overlays bedrock and is colloquially known as dirt.
ANSWER: soil [or regolith; prompt on dirt until it is read]
One of the precursors to this substance is saprolite (SAH-pruh-lite). This substance is classified according
to its constituents in its namesake texture triangle. Increasing the pH of this substance is usually
accomplished with lime. This substance usually forms three to four distinct layers called horizons and it is
also known as regolith (REG-uh-lith). A minor constituent of this substance is humus. For 10 points, name
this substance that includes sand, silt and clay and is formed from bedrock.
ANSWER: soil
This material is classified into namesake orders that include histosols and aridisols. The first three layers of
this substance are labeled O, A, and B, respectively. Those layers are classified as this substance's
namesake horizons, which together produce this substance's namesake profile. Most of this material on
Earth is younger than the Pleistocene epoch, and cellulose is the most abundant plant residue in this
material. Five percent of this material's volume is composed of humus. For 10 points, name this material,
comprising the first few feet of the crust, that contains the root systems of plants as well as nutrients needed
to support them.
ANSWER: soil [or topsoil]
The WDPT measures the water repellency of this substance, whose color is measured by the Munsell
system. Its structure can be classified as columnar, blocky, platy, or granular. This substance studied in the
field of pedology occurs in O, A, B, C, and R horizons. A porous, carbonate-containing type deposited by
wind or glaciers is called loess. This material may contain organic matter called humus, and its texture is
classified by its proportion of sand, silt, and clay. Hydroponics is the practice of raising crops without this
substance. For 10 points, name this earthen material in which plants grow.
ANSWER: soil [prompt on dirt]
Ammonium acetate extraction can be used to measure the cation exchange capacity of these materials. The
composition of these materials distinguishes edaphic communities. They are formed through pedogenesis,
and have layers called horizons. These materials contain decayed organic matter called humus, and are
classified by composition of silt, sand, and clay. For 10 points, name this kind of material formed from
weathered rock, in which plants grow.
ANSWER: soil [prompt on "dirt" or "regolith"]
Pedology is the study of this substance. A namesake taxonomy of this substance with twelve "orders"
was developed by the USDA. Detritus in this substance is called humus. Bedrock underlies this substance
and is its source. Its texture can be classified into clay-ey, sandy and loamy. Distinct layers of this
substance are called horizons. For 10 points, name this substance whose uppermost layer is called "top" and
which is commonly called dirt.
ANSWER: soil [prompt on dirt]
An important measure of this material is its cation-exchange capacity and its color is notated using the
Munsell system. WDPT is one measure of the water repellency of this substance. One important taxonomic
scheme for it includes great groups and a lowest rank of series. Its Atterberg limits include liquid and plastic
limits, which are related to its porosity. Its structure can be columnar, platy, or granular. Layered in
horizons, it can aggregate into structures called peds. Examples of this substance formed from decomposing
organic matter is called humus and its grains are classified by size into sand, silt, and clay. For 10 points,
name this material in which plants can grow.
ANSWER: soil
Types of this material include chernozem (CHAIR-no-zem) and solonetz (so-low-NETS). The formation
of this substance is known as pedogenesis (PEH-doh-JEN-uh-sis). A yellowish type of it is known as "loess"
(LOW-us). Another type of this substance contains a high percentage of humus (HUE-muss), and is known
as nutrient-rich loam. This material becomes saline, nutrient-poor, and dry during desertification. For 10
points, name this material made up of biodegraded substances and disintegrated rock.
ANSWER: soil [accept earth; do not accept "dirt" or similar answers]
The term regolith can refer to this, although it mostly applies to those found on the moon. Colluvium and
alluvium are forms of this. Another form, podsol, is found in boreal forests. It can be separated into O, A,
B, and C layers, which are differentiated by their composition. Humus consists of decayed organic matter in
this, while it is classified by horizons. Formed from weathering and erosion of rock, components of it
include clay, loam, and silt. For 10 points, plants grow in what kind of ground?
ANSWER: soil [accept dirt; accept earth; prompt on "ground"]
One classification system for these constructs adds to their names letter suffixes, like c, e, h, p, and s, the
latter of which denotes sesquioxide accumulation. The three most popular classifications for these
constructs are the American, Australian, and Stellenbosch University ones. The smaller "E" type of these
constructs is present when there is pronounced eluviation of iron and aluminum. Boundaries between these
regions are difficult to detect in so-called laterite or oxisol materials. Calcium carbonate characteristically
accumulates in the second-highest of these regions in substances called pedocals, and ones smaller than two
inches thick are sometimes called "pans." They are most basically arranged in the sequence of O-A-B-C-R
from top to bottom; the topmost "O" stands for "organic" contains plant and animal life. For 10 points,
name these strata of varying organic and mineral composition in dirt.
ANSWER: soil horizons [prompt on horizons; don't accept specific ones]
This phase names a theory describing materials which may have a Fermi level which lies in a gap of the
available energy levels for its electrons, and that theory explains how overcoming a small gap may be aided
by doping. That theory, the band theory of this phase, is derived from the "nearly free electron" model for
this phase, which expands on the simpler "free electron" model. A mixture of compounds assumes this
phase below the eutectic point, and a gas transitions to this phase via deposition, the opposite of
sublimation. For 10 points, name this state of matter exemplified by ice.
ANSWER: Solid
A differential in this property for two different phases gives the partition coefficient. A decrease in this
quantity, one measure of which is a substance's K sub sp value, for ionic compounds can be explained by
the common ion effect. Henry's law relates this quantity for a gas to the partial pressure of the gas. All
common metal nitrates have this property, but most hydroxides, oxides, and phosphates do not. Usually
measured with respect to water as a solvent, for 10 points, name this degree to which a substance can
dissolve in another substance.
ANSWER: solubility [accept miscibility]
The Hofmeister series originally ordered substances by their ability to change this property for
proteins. The square root of the cohesive energy density gives the Hildebrand parameter for it. For
an ionic compound, this property is lowered due to the formation of ion pairs. The ratio of this value
for two phases is given by the partition coefficient. Its namesake constant is the product of (*) ionic
species. It is reduced for two substances that produce the same charged species according to the common
ion effect. Rules governing this property state that acetates and nitrates always have it, but barium sulfate
does not. A saturated mixture by definition does not have any more capability for it. For 10 points, name
this property of a substance to dissolve in a solvent.
ANSWER: solubility [accept hydropathy, hydrophobicity, and hydrophilicity up to "Hildebrand", prompt after]
This property is approximated by a method that evaluates the relative energy difference of a system,
given energies from dispersion forces, intermolecular forces, and hydrogen bonds. This property is
measured by a parameter equal to the square root of the heat of vaporization minus RT over the
molar volume, which is named for Hildebrand. The salt, temperature, and pressure effects influence
an equilibrium constant linked with this property that notably doesn't have a denominator. The (*)
common ion effect reduces this property. This property of a gas is directly proportional to the gas's partial
pressure in Henry's Law. Whereas aluminum hydroxide doesn't have this property, sodium nitrate does. For
10 points, name this property that is the degree to which a substance dissolves in solution.
ANSWER: solubility [or word forms]
The Hansen parameters are used to predict this property of a substance. Cerium sulfate is anomalous in that
this property decreases as its temperature increases. The common ion effect is a decrease in this property for
certain ionic compounds. Henry's law states that for a gas, this quantity is directly proportional to the partial
pressure of that gas. Supersaturation occurs when the value for this quantity under normal conditions has
been exceeded. For 10 points, give this measure of the amount of a substance that can dissolve in another
substance.
ANSWER: solubility [accept word forms]
Extraction is a procedure used to separate compounds based on their relative values for this
property. Phase-transfer catalysts can be used to speed up chemical reactions in which one species
doesn't have this property. For ionic compounds, this property can be calculated by setting up an
equilibrium using this property's namesake (*) "product constant." At increasing temperature, it is
higher for solids and lower for gases. Henry's Law states it is proportional to partial pressure above a liquid.
Polar substances have this property in other polar substances. For ten points, name this property which
determines if a substance can dissolve in another.
ANSWER: solubility (accept word forms; accept more specific answers like soluble in water; prompt on polarity or nonpolarity before mentioned; accept miscibility, mixibility, or word forms of those)
A coefficient symbolized alpha and named for Bunsen measures this property for gases. The
Hume-Rothery rules determine whether or not two solids mutually have this property. In order for a
recrystallization to work, the product should have this property when hot, but not when cold. Liquid-liquid
extractions take advantage of the difference in this property between three species. Addition of a common
ion will reduce this quantity according to Le Chatelier's principle. On a chart with temperature on the x-axis
and this property on the y-axis, solids have a positive slope and gases have a negative slope. Henry's Law
gives this property for gases as a function of temperature. For 10 points, name this property measuring how
much of a substance can dissolve in another.
ANSWER: solubility [accept word forms; or dissolving; prompt on "miscibility" or word forms]
The partition coefficient describes differences in this quantity for a hydrophobic and hydrophilic
(HIE-drow-FILL-ick) substance. The common ion effect describes a situation in which this quantity is
decreased. When this quantity is exceeded, crystallization can be induced by the addition of a seed. Henry's
Law relates this value for a gas with its partial pressure. Everything with a chloride anion has a high value
for it in water. For 10 points, name this measure of how much a substance can dissolve in a solvent.
ANSWER: solubility [or ability to dissolve before mention; accept word forms like "how soluble a substance is"]
Hildebrand gives his name to a parameter that characterizes this which is property and which is used in a
theory co-named with Scatchard. For polymers this property can be modeled using Flory-Huggins theory.
A compound with different values of this property for different phases will see the difference reflected in
the partition ratio. The equilibrium constant for this property and the product can be used to find the related
molar version. Compounds of group one and nitrates have this property in water, which are a part of the
namesake rules of it. For 10 points, name this property that relates how well one substance will dissolve in
another.
ANSWER: solubility
This quantity decreases when a strong acid is added to the anion of a weak acid. The common ion
effect explains another situation in which this quantity decreases. For a gas, this quantity is directly
proportional to the gas's partial pressure above a liquid according to (*) Henry's law. Most sulfates,
nitrates, and acetates have higher values for this quantity than hydroxides, carbonates, and phosphates since
they tend not to precipitate. For 10 points, name this measure of the extent to which one substance
dissolves in another.
ANSWER: solubility
Sieverts' Law predicts this property of gases in metallurgy. Henry's Law measures this property in
relationship to its partial pressure, and the common-ion effect can reduce it. The maximum limit for
this property is determined by Ksp [K sub s p]. If (*) equilibrium is surpassed, supersaturation can
occur. Immiscible substances like oil and water do not possess, for 10 points, what property, the ability of a
substance to dissolve in another substance?
ANSWER: solubility (accept word forms)
The equilibria associated with this concept has a constant denoted Ksp, and this property can be calculated
with the Ksp and an ICE table. The common-ion effect reduces the extent of this property. The formation of
complexes greatly increases this property with certain metal ions, such as with silver ions in the presence of
ammonia. Precipitation occurs when the maximum value of this has been reached. For 10 points, name this
property that describes how much of a solute will dissolve into a homogeneous solution.
ANSWER: solubility
Recrystallization is based off of differences in this property at high and low temperatures. The common
ion effect describes a lowering for this property while Henry's law quantifies this property for a gas. All
nitrate salts posses this property for water while this property is possessed when both substances have
similar polarities. Exceeding the limit of this property produces a supersaturated solution. For 10 points,
name this property defined as the ability of one substance to dissolve in another.
ANSWER: solubility [or soluble or other word forms]
Differences of this quantity are represented by specific ratios in the partition coefficient. Substances with an
infinite value of this quantity in relation to each other are miscible, and the addition of a compound
containing the precipitate leads to the decrease of this quantity in the common ion effect. This quantity for a
gas in a liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas above the liquid according to Henry's law.
The value of this quantity under normal conditions is exceeded during supersaturation. For solids in liquids,
this quantity is usually proportional to temperature. For 10 points, name this measure of how well a
substance dissolves in another.
ANSWER: solubility
The square root of the cohesive energy density gives the Hildebrand parameter for this property, and the
ratio of this value for two phases is given by the partition coefficient. It decreases with the addition of
certain species as described by the common ion effect, and this property for a gas in liquid is directly
proportional to its partial pressure according to Henry's law. The extent of this of a substance in a specific
solvent is measured as the saturation concentration. For 10 points, name this chemistry term which measures
the ability of a substance to dissolve into a solvent.
ANSWER: Solubility
This constant is the equilibrium constant for a reaction where the products are aqueous and the reactant is
solid; accordingly, in equilibrium with excess reactant, this constant equals the product of the
concentrations of the products raised to the number of times each ion appears per formula unit. When the
ion product equals this constant, the solution is saturated. Identify this constant that determines the extent to
which a solid turns into aqueous ions in the presence of water.
ANSWER: solubility product constant (or K-sp)
One model of the polymeric type of these entities is named after Flory and Huggins. They are not pure
gases, but when the enthalpy of mixing of one of these is zero, it is known as an "ideal" one. The vapor
pressure of an ideal one is determined by Raoult's law. Some properties of them are independent of
properties of their constituent molecules, and are called colligative properties. They can be characterized by
their degree of saturation or their molarity. For 10 points, name these homogeneous mixtures of two or
more substances.
ANSWER: solutions
Electrolytes are usually an example of these substances. One type of property of these substances
depends only on the number of particles, not their identity, and are colligative properties. The vapor
pressure of these substances can be found with (*) Raoult's law. They can be supersaturated, and one
measure used with them is molality. For 10 points, name this mixture that consists of a solvent and a
substance dissolved in it.
ANSWER: solutions [prompt on homogenous mixtures]
A certain characteristic property of these systems can be expressed using a distribution ratio, which
determines the efficiency of liquid-liquid extraction. When one of these includes a perfect electrolyte, a
factor denoted i will be an integer. That factor, named for van 't Hoff, is one factor that determines the
extent to which freezing-point depression and other colligative properties exist in these substances. Henry's
law describes the composition of these substances as a function of gas pressure. When the heat of formation
for one of these is nonzero, deviations from Raoult's law are observed. For 10 points, name these
homogeneous mixtures that consist of a solute in a solvent.
ANSWER: solutions [generously prompt on "solvents" until "colligative" is read, but do not prompt or accept afterwards]
One model of this process treats the medium as continuous instead of as individual molecules, and
is its implicit or continuum model. The generalized Born model describes this process, but fails
to account for interactions such as hydrogen bonds. This process requires the formation of an
entropically [en-TRAH-pik-lee] unfavorable cavity, but ends up leading to a decrease in entropy as
this process results in a more ordered system. Ionic species in this process tend to form a complex
known as its namesake "shell". This process is sped up by stirring or shaking, and partial pressure
varies with how much this process occurs in Henry's law. Name this process of solutes and solvents
associating, which often sees the dissociation of the solute.
ANSWER: solvation [accept dissolution or dissolving or word forms]
Deep eutectic ones incorporate quaternary ammonium salts, while a theta one allows polymers to behave as
ideal chains. Systems of several of them assume properties most similar to their more polar component, so
common combinations include nine parts hexanes to one part ethyl acetate. Many organic reactions are
accelerated by the use of polar aprotic ones, and the properties of these partially control the nature of
colligative properties. When water acts as one of these, reagents are called "aqueous." FTP, identify these
substances paired with solute in a solution.
ANSWER: solvent
DMF and DMSO are "polar aprotic" examples of compounds which serve this purpose for organic
syntheses. Although once used as an anesthetic, diethyl ether is now most often used as one of these.
Compounds which are used for this purpose should have a high volatility and low boiling point, so that they
can easily be distilled or evaporated out. For 10 points, name these compounds which make up the majority
of a solution's volume, and which dissolve solutes.
ANSWER: solvents
SN1 reactions are sometimes referred to as [this substance]-lysis because the nucleophile is often one
of these substances, and polar aprotic ones like THF are used to conduct SN2 reactions. The partition
coefficient is the relative (*) affinity for a species for two different examples of these substances. The
polarizability and dipole moment of these substances determines their strength, and molecules of these
substances form a shell around ions found within them. Water is considered the universal one. For 10
points, name these substances which dissolve a solute in order to form a solution.
ANSWER: solvent
DMSO is a polar aprotic one. Partition coefficients are used compare the concentrations in two phases
created by two of these. Acetone is an organic one which is used to clean lab equipment and is found in nail
polish remover. In freezing point depression, the constant is a property of this component of the system.
The mass of one of these is the denominator in molality, while the volume of one is the denominator in
molarity. Water is often called the universal one. For 10 points, name these substances that dissolve solutes.
ANSWER: solvents
One model for this quantity predicts a low-temperature dependence proportional to the temperature cubed
and treats atomic vibrations as phonons in a box. Both the Einstein and Debye models recover the Dulong-
Petit law at high temperatures. Defined as the ratio of an increment of heat to an increment of temperature,
its value for water is used to define the calorie. For 10 points, name this quantity, which indicates how much
heat energy would be required to increase the temperature of an object.
ANSWER: Specific heat capacity or Specific heat
This value for thermally excited electrons can be obtained from Fermi-Sommerfeld theory. This
value is proportional to the square of the Einstein temperature in the Einstein (*) model. According to
Debye's theory of this value, it is proportional to the cube of the temperature below the Debye temperature.
This value is 3 times the gas constant divided by the molar mass according to the Dulong-Petit-law. For 10
points, name this quantity that equals the ratio of the heat absorbed by a material to its change in
temperature.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity
Debye (DEB-yay_ fixed the maximum phonon frequency for a theory of this, which works better at low
temperatures than the Einstein model. It is equal to three times the gas constant divided by the molar mass
according to Dulong-Petit law. The calorie is defined in terms of this for water, which is about 4.186
kilojoules per kilogram kelvin. 10 points, name this amount of energy to raise a unit amount of a material by
one degree.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity
At thermal equilibrium, this quantity for a gas is proportional to one-half the gas constant times the number
of degrees of freedom available to the particle. The adiabatic index is the ratio of this intensive quantity
measured at constant pressure to this quantity measured at constant volume. For an ideal diatomic gas, it is
proportional to seven-halves the gas constant at constant volume. This quantity is often the subject of
calorimetric investigation, and it is approximately 4.18 joules per gram kelvin at STP. For 10 points, name
this quantity which quantifies the amount of energy required to cause a given mass to undergo a given
change in temperature.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [prompt on "heat capacity"]
One law modeling this quantity, which uses the vibration of phonons to predict a cubic temperature
dependence, is named for Debye and corrects the Dulong-Petit law at low temperatures. It is defined
thermodynamically as delta Q over dT. Because this quantity for water is very large, the climate near large
bodies of water is often mild. This quantity may be found by a calorimeter, though an analogous mass-
independent factor must be used to account for the heat absorption of the calorimeter. For 10 points, name
this quantity, the amount of heat required to increase the temperature of one gram of a substance by one
degree Celsius.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [or heat capacity]
The Fermi energy explains why electrons do not significantly contribute to this material property at
high temperatures, and the Debye temperature appears in an equation that shows a cubic dependence of this
property on temperature at low temperatures. At constant volume, the molar form of this property is equal
to about twenty-five Joules per mole Kelvin by the Law of Dulong and Petit. For 10 points, name this
material property typically defined as the amount of heat needed to raise the temperature of one gram of
substance by one degree Celsius.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [prompt on heat capacity until "gram"]
One treatment of this quantity sees a lattice as a series of independently-moving quantum harmonic
oscillators, while another considers a crystal as a bunch of phonons in a box. Those are the Debye and
Einstein models for measuring this in a vibrating lattice. At high temperatures, this quantity approaches
three times the ideal gas constant according to the Dulong-Petit Law, and it can be thermodynamically
thought of as the derivative of energy with respect to temperature. For 10 points, name this quantity which
measures the amount of energy needed to change a substance's temperature by a degree.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [prompt on specific heat]
All metals have values for this quantity near 25 Joules per mole Kelvin by the Law of Dulong and Petit. If
the "molar" type of this quantity is used, then it is multiplied by the number of moles and the change in
temperature to find the heat energy. For water, it is defined as one calorie per gram degree Celsius, which is
higher than that for any other substance. For 10 points, name this quantity that equals the amount of heat
needed to raise a unit of mass of a substance by one degree.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [accept molar heat capacity until "molar"; prompt on heat capacity]
The adiabatic index is the quotient of this quantity at constant pressure and this value at constant
volume, which for an ideal monatomic gas are respectively 5/2R and 3/2R. It equals 3R for crystalline
solids according to the Dulong-Petit law, while Einstein proposed atoms were harmonic oscillators in
his model of it for a material. It can be expressed as (*) energy inputted divided by the mass times the
change in temperature. Due to hydrogen bonding, it is extremely large for liquid water, approximately 4.18.
For ten points, name this value, which measures the amount of heat required to change one gram of a
substance by one degree Celsius.
ANSWER: specific heat (or heat capacity)
At low temperatures, the phonon contribution to this quantity is equal to temperature cubed
according to the Debye correction to the Einstein model. The first explanation of this quantity was
done by applying the equipartition theorem and Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics to crystalline solids,
deriving it as the partial with respect to temperature of 3 k T times Avogadro's number. That is the
Dulong-Petit law. It can be found with a (*) calorimeter. For water, this quantity is equal to 4.18 Joules
per gram Celsius. For 10 points, name this quantity defined as the heat required to raise the temperature of a
unit mass of a substance by one degree Celsius.
ANSWER: molar specific heat capacity [prompt on heat capacity]
The Einstein-Debye model divides this quantity into electronic and vibrational types. This quantity is
equal to roughly 25 joules per mole kelvin for all metals around room temperature by the Law of
Dulong and Petit, and it can be found by dividing the amount of heat added to a substance by that
substance's mass and the resulting change in temperature. For 10 points, name this amount of heat
needed to raise the temperature of one gram of a substance by one degree Celsius, which is defined as
one calorie per gram degree Celsius for water.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity
Unlike the Einstein model, the Debye model properly models how this quantity changes for a
substance as temperature decreases, though for higher temperatures it may be derived from a crystal's
lattice vibrations through the Law of Dulong and Petit. For a monatomic ideal gas, it is three halves
times the ideal gas constant, while that factor is seven-halves for a diatomic ideal gas. For 10 points,
identify this quantity, the amount of energy necessary to increase the temperature of a unit quantity of
a substance by a unit amount.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity
This value can be defined as the derivative of enthalpy with respect to temperature. One model of this value
states that it approaches zero exponentially fast at low temperatures but was corrected to show that
temperature and this value have a cubic relationship. That aforementioned correction was made by Debye
on the Einstein model of this quantity. The Dulong-Petit law states this quantity is equal to about three times
the ideal gas constant for a mole of a substance. For 10 points, name this value defined as the amount of
heat required to change the temperature of one gram of a substance by one degree.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity
An equation named for Julius von Mayer can be used to find this quantity for ideal gases at constant
volume and pressure. For a solid, this quantity can be calculated by multiplying three by the gas
constant and then dividing by the molar mass, accounting for vibrations according to the (*) Dulong-
Petit law. Because of the strength of its hydrogen bonds, water's value for this is relatively higher than many
substances and is 4.18 Joules. For 10 points, name this quantity defined as the amount of energy that is
needed to raise the temperature of one gram of a substance by one degree.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [accept thermal capacity; prompt on C]
This quantity is proportional to the temperature cubed at low temperatures according to the Debye
model, which was corrected by Einstein. This quantity is three times the gas constant divided by molar
mass at high temperatures according to the Dulong-Petit law. A calorimeter can be used to find this
quantity, which is one calorie, or 4.184 joules, for water. For 10 points, name this amount of heat needed to
raise the temperature of a substance by one degree Celsius.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [or specific heat capacity]
The Debye model of this quantity determines the effect of vibrations in a solid on this quantity. For a
fluid, this quantity can be calculated differently in the cases of constant pressure or constant volume. The
relation of this quantity to molar mass is determined using the Dulong-Petit law. Written in units of
kilojoules per kilogram-Celsius, this quantity is 4.184 for water. For 10 points, name this quantity, the
amount of heat needed to raise the temperature of a system by one degree Celsius.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [accept heat capacity]
For an ideal gas, the dimensionless form of this quantity is the derivative of the entropy per particle
with respect to the natural logarithm of temperature. In one model, this quantity is proportional to
one over the hyperbolic sine squared of epsilon over 2kt, a formula derived by noting that it has 3N
degrees of freedom. Plotting this quantity versus temperature for a superfluid around the lambda
point gives a lambda shape. The aforementioned model derives this quantity by visualizing solids as a
(*) lattice of harmonic oscillators. This quantity was given a T-cubed dependence in a model by Debye,
which Einstein improved upon. For an ideal gas, the constant volume and constant pressure versions of this
quantity differ by the number of moles times R. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of heat
needed to change an object's temperature by one degree.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [or specific heat]
A theory which accurately predicts this quantity at low temperatures is based on the assumption that
vibrational modes exhibit a linear relationship at longer wavelengths; that model gives this quantity as
proportional to the cube of temperature below a namesake threshold. The difference between the molar
forms of this quantity at constant pressure and at constant temperature give the ideal gas constant, while
calculations by Dulong and Petit showed that the dimensionless form of this quantity is limits to 3 at high
temperatures. For 10 points, identify this quantity which describes the rate of change in the thermal energy
of a system with respect to temperature, and which is 4.18 Joules per gram per Kelvin for water.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [accept specific heat]
This quantity is often plotted on the y-axis of a DSC output, and a sudden discontinuity in it usually
characterizes the glass transition of a polymer. Calculation of sensible heat requires integrating this
quantity, usually to an empirical polynomial fit. For a monoatomic ideal gas, this quantity is 2.5R at
constant pressure and 1.5R at constant volume. At constant pressure, the derivative of enthalpy with respect
to temperature equals a form of this quantity. Hydrogen bonding in water gives it a value of 4.18 Joules per
Kelvin for this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of energy required to raise a
substance's temperature by one degree.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity [prompt on "C" or "CP" or "CV"]
One formula for this value considered each atom oscillating about its mean position with a single frequency.
A modification to the Einstein formula concluded that this value for a solid at low temperatures is
proportional to the temperature cubed, and was made by Peter Debye. This value for metals is three times
the gas constant divided by the molar mass, according to the Dulong-Petit law. This value for water is one
calorie, or 4.184 joules. For 10 points, name this amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of one
gram of a substance by one degree Celsius.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity
Plotting this quantity against temperature for helium at the Lambda point gives a graph that looks
like the letter lambda. In an adiabatic process, pressure times volume raised to a ratio of two types of
this quantity is constant. The Debye model predicts a cubic dependence on temperature at low
temperatures for this value, and that model works better at lower temperatures than the Einstein
model. For solids, it is approximately equal to three times the (*) ideal gas constant divided by molar
mass according to the Dulong-Petit Law. This value for water is 4.18 joules per gram per kelvin. For 10
points, name this quantity, the amount of heat needed to raise the temperature of one gram of a substance by
one degree Celsius.
ANSWER: specific heat capacity
One effect that affects these things can be investigated with a Lummer-Gehrcke plate. When these things
are affected by impact pressure, quasistatic pressure, and the Doppler effect, they can be modeled by a
Voigt profile. The distance between two of these things due to that effect is proportional to the magnetic
quantum number multiplied by the Bohr magneton. Kirchhoff's laws govern the production of these things
by hot and cold gases. The D1 and D2 examples of these things created the "sodium doublet" in a series
named for Fraunhofer. During a solar eclipse, examination of these things led Jules Janssen to discover
helium. For 10 points, identify these series of light and dark bands that appear in an element's spectrum.
ANSWER: spectral lines [or absorption lines; or emission lines; prompt on energy levels]
Association constants for host-guest complexes are calculated using this technique on
Benesi-Hildebrand plots. This procedure is done to aniline derivatives to determine extent of
protonation using the Hammett acidity function. The Woodward-Feiser rules for this technique
estimate the influence of conjugated dienes on (*) lambda-max. Samples for it are often placed in glass
or fused quartz cuvettes. An equation used in this technique is often expressed as "A = abc", where a is the
extinction coefficient, b is the linear path length, and c is the molar concentration. For 10 points, name this
technique governed by Beer's Law, which measures a compound's absorbance of ultraviolet and visible
light.
ANSWER: spectrophotometry [or word forms; or using a spectrophotometer; or UV-vis spectroscopy or ultraviolet-visible light spectroscopy before it is read; prompt on it afterwards]
One form of this process was developed in 1974 by Martin Fleischman using pyridine on rough
silver; that form, which can detect quadratic stretching modes in single molecules, is the surface-enhanced 
Raman form. Another measures the isomer shift due to the fraction of relatively low energy gamma rays that are
absorbed without recoil and is named for the (*) Mossbauer effect. Common types can have 3J ["three jay"] 
coupling constants described by the Karplus equation and can be applied only to nuclei with odd total spin.
For 10 points, name this field that studies the way molecules interact with radiant energy, particularly 
in order to identify compounds, common forms of which are NMR and IR.
ANSWER: spectroscopy
One kind of this technique exposes the sample to a magnetic pulse and measures electron density on a
plot with chemical shift versus absorption strength. Another kind of it measures the relaxation of vibrations
within a molecule after excitation with light that has a wavelength longer than visible light. These
techniques gather information about a molecule through interaction with light energy. For 10 points,
identify this kind of laboratory technique which has NMR and infrared types.
ANSWER: spectroscopy [or NMR spectroscopy; or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy; or IR spectroscopy; or infrared spectroscopy]
In combination with electron microscopy, the Auger type of this technique produces the most accurate maps
of material surfaces, while iron-57 is the most common gamma ray source for the Mossbauer type. Liquid samples
analyzed by another form of this technique are trapped between two salt plates, and the Beer-Lambert law 
models how the results of these techniques vary with concentration. Alcohol groups are identified in the 
range of 3200 to 3500 in the infrared form of this technique, while a neon light yields three green, three 
orange, and seven red lines when viewed by this technique. Used by Bunsen and Kirchhoff (KIR-kawff) to 
identify elements in the sun, name this technique that classifies matter by its absorption and emission of light.
ANSWER: spectroscopy
Complexes with this geometry are stabilized by an energy of 2.44 delta. Their d orbitals are split into
four levels, with the d sub xz and d sub yz orbitals being degenerate. Compounds with this shape can
have geometric but not optical isomers, and it's not trigonal bipyramidal but addition to compounds
with this geometry has an (*) intermediate that undergoes Berry pseudorotation. Low-spin d-8 complexes
have this geometry, which is shared by Wilkinson's catalyst, Vaska's complex, and cisplatin. Removing two
ligands from an octahedral complex gives this geometry. For 10 points, name this geometry, which has a
central atom with four ligands attached at right angles to each other
ANSWER: square planar
The central carbon atom of fenestranes has this molecular geometry, and reactions of substituents of
complexes with this geometry are greatly accelerated when the trans ligand is a good pi acceptor. In
crystal field theory, the d-orbitals of these complexes are split into four levels, giving it larger
stabilization energy than the octahedral configuration. This geometry is occupied by low-spin d-8
complexes like Vaska's complex, the chemotherapy drug cisplatin, and a hydrogenation catalyst with a
central rhodium atom and a series of triphenylphosphine ligands named for Wilkinson. According to
VESPR, xenon tetraflouride occupies this configuration since it has 2 lone pairs and 4 ligands. For 10
points, name this molecular geometry which is flat with four sides.
ANSWER: Square planar
In molecular orbital theory, the d orbitals either bond weakly or not at all in complexes assuming this
molecular geometry, examples of which include complexes of palladium (II), iridium (I), and platinum (II).
Name this four-ligand molecular geometry exhibited by the platinum atom in Zeise's salt which
results from removing two of the ligands from an octahedral complex.
ANSWER: square planar
These geologic structures can be distinguished from similar phenomena because they lack a central canal,
and calcite pearls often grow under conditions that do not support the formation of these structures. Rare
basalt examples of these structures fill a chamber in Iceland's Arnahellir lava tube, while the ice-type is
common in mines where temperatures are markedly higher at the ceiling than the floor. Most of these
structures occur in karst topology, like the Hall of Giants and Witch's Finger in Carlsbad Caverns, and they
are the only dripstone formations that cannot collapse under their own weight. Name these structures that
grow from the dripping of calcium carbonate-rich water onto the floor of a limestone cave, sometimes
forming the bottom half of a column with a neighboring stalactite.
ANSWER: stalagmite [do not accept or prompt on "stalactite"]
Pressure and viscosity are an intensive example of this for a thermodynamic system. The change in
enthalpy and entropy are both extensive examples of this along with isochoric-isothermic potential. The
change in Helmholtz and Gibbs free energies is an example of this kind of function. Work is not an
example since one calculates it using initial and final conditions. For 10 points, name this kind of function
that depends only on the current conditions of the system.
ANSWER: state function [or state variable or state quantity]
Robert Mushet improved on a process to create this material by adding a compound called
"spiegelsein," made partially from manganese. Karl Siemens developed the open-hearth process to tightly
control the carbon content in this material. One method of creating this material uses a converter to blow
compressed air through molten pig iron and is named for Henry Bessemer. For ten points, identify this alloy
of carbon and iron, whose production gave a nickname to Pittsburgh.
ANSWER: steel
These compounds are called "killed," "semikilled," "capped," or "rimmed" depending on the degree of
oxidation. One type of these compounds can be divided into austenitic (OS-ten-it-ick), ferritic (fer-RIT-ick),
or martensitic (MAR-ten-zit-ick) types depending on the chromium and nickel content. Inexpensive
production of these compounds was first obtained by using an air blast to remove impurities; that process
was named after Henry Bessemer. For 10 points, name these metals that are produced by adding elements to
pig iron.
ANSWER: steels
The phase diagram for this substance contains an eutectoid point where pearlite forms from austentite
during cooling. A metastable, strong form of this substance is martensite. Calcium oxide and magnesium
oxide are used to form this substance in the oxygen converter process. Impurities in this substance, which is
made by removing carbon from pig iron, can be extraced using the Bessemer process. For 10 points, name
this alloy commonly used in structural support for buildings, a combination of iron and carbon.
ANSWER: steel
Norman Gross proposed that one form of this material has optimum conduction properties in the rolling
direction due to its highly ordered crystals. A "rimmed" form of this material is characterized by a highly
segregated ingot. Equilibrium forms of this material include cementite and austenite, which form lamellar
structures in its pearlite microstructure. Rapid cooling of austenite can produce forms not found on its phase
diagram, such as martensite. Historical methods of production resulted in the sponge, crucible, and Wootz
varieties of this material. Adding tungsten prevents the degradation of this material at high temperature,
while the addition of chromium to this material greatly improves its corrosion resistance. For 10 points, the
Bessemer process allowed the mass production of what alloy of carbon and iron?
ANSWER: steel
Crystallographic data on amyloid shows that they contain regions of tightly interdigitated beta
sheets, which are zippers named for this type of interaction. R. W. Taft studied linear free energy
relationships in aliphatic esters by adding a term to the Hammett equation to account for this type of
interaction. (*) Tert-butoxide is a stronger base than ethoxide but is less nucleophilic due to this type of
effect, and this type of effect prevents tertiary alkyl halides from undergoing SN2 reactions. The totally
eclipsed conformation of butane is less stable than the other eclipsed conformations because of this type of
effect. For 10 points, name this type of effect in which are caused by interference between bulky functional
groups.
ANSWER: steric effects or hindrance
Minimizing this effect by heating increases the yield of Cope rearrangements. Flagpole interactions
increase the strength of this effect. Bridgehead carbons on compounds like norbornene do not have
sp2 hybridization because of this effect, according to Bredt's rule. The Prelog type of this effect is
also called its "transannular" type, and the deviance of a compound's planar dihedral angles are
measured by its Baeyer type. To minimize a type of this effect, "puckering" forms (*) "envelope"
conformations in cyclopentane. A staggered conformation minimizes this, whereas an eclipsed
conformation
maximizes it, in Newman projections. Epoxides differ from ethers in having large values of the "ring" type
of
this effect. For 10 points, name this effect that raises the energy of burdened compounds.
ANSWER: strain [or hindrance; or strain energy; or steric effects]
The Harris Matrix makes use of the laws of this scientific field. This field was advanced by the laws of
Nicholas Steno, who theorized that assuming original horizontality and lateral continuity were important in
this field. Terms in this field include "anticline" and "sincline." The first work in this field was the Law of
Superposition, which assumed that the oldest material was on the bottom and the youngest material was on
top. The iridium-rich K-T boundary was discovered using this discipline. For 10 points, name this branch of
geology, the study of layers of rock.
ANSWER: stratigraphy [prompt on geology]
The anisotropy of the composition of this region can be explained by vertically propagating Rossby
waves causing a circulation partially named for Brewer. In this region, nitric acid and water
condense into iridescent nacreous clouds around temperatures of -80 degrees Celsius. This is the
lowest layer in which the lapse rate becomes negative, leading to a temperature (*) inversion, leading
to a stable atmosphere with low vertical convective mixing. In this region, chlorine radicals react to produce
chlorine monoxide and diatomic oxygen. The lower boundary of this region is the tropopause. Lying just
below the mesosphere and above the troposphere, for 10 points, name this layer of Earth's atmosphere
which contains the ozone layer.
ANSWER: stratosphere [if they buzz with "ozone layer," prompt them by asking them to be less specific]
Its lower reaches experiences quasi-biennial oscillation and it is the upper home of the Brewer-Dobson
circulation. Quasi-horizontal mixing is the main method of air exchange in this layer. Dobson units are used
to measure a triatomic molecule abundant in this region. It features a thermal inversion, due to ultraviolet
absorption by the ozone layer. For 10 points, name this layer of the atmosphere, sandwiched between the
mesosphere and the troposphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere
It ranges from an altitude of 10 kilometers to 50 kilometers above the surface of the earth. It is characterized
by temperatures that increase with increasing altitude and reaches a maximum temperature of around 270
Kelvin. The upper reaches of this layer are heated by ultraviolet radiation absorbed by the ozone layer,
which is located in it. Found above the troposphere and below the mesosphere, for ten points name this
layer of the atmosphere that contains the cruising altitudes of most commercial airliners.
ANSWER: Stratosphere
A model of circulation that occurs here proposed by Brewer and Dobson attempts to explain a
disparity in this region's distribution, with respect to latitude, of a certain substance. A proposed
solution to global warming involves seeding this region with sulfur aerosols. This atmospheric
region's namesake property arises because of the absorption of (*) UVB and UVC rays by ozone here.
Airplanes cruise here because of the reduced parasitic drag. This part of the atmosphere is named for its
lack of regular convection, creating dynamicly stable sub-layers. For 10 points, name this layer of the
atmosphere that lies below the mesosphere and above the troposphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere
A 2003 paper by Chandra Wickramasinghe suggested that the SARS virus could have come from this
location, while a substance found in abundance in this location is measured in Dobson units. The fact that
bacterial life, as well as some birds, are able to exist in this region makes it part of the biosphere, and the
aforementioned abundant compound found in this location forms in the middle of this region because the
lower incidence of UV rays there make O and O2 more able to combine. For 10 points, name this layer of
the atmosphere directly above the troposphere, that contains the ozone layer.
ANSWER: stratosphere
Quasi-biennial oscillation and Brewer-Dobson circulation occur in the tropical regions of this part of the
Earth. Sulfur aerosols can accumulate in this area after volcanic eruptions, leading to cooler climates. The
lower part of this layer contains triatomic molecules that absorb ultraviolet light. Its lower boundary is the
tropopause and the mesosphere lies above it. For 10 points, name this layer of the atmosphere that includes
the ozone layer.
ANSWER: stratosphere
This region of the atmosphere contains nacreous [NAY-kree-us] clouds, which are typically near the poles
during cold seasons. Some scientists believe they can control climate change by injecting sulfate aerosols
into this layer. Convection does not occur because of temperature inversion in this layer, whose coldest part
is at its bottom, near the tropopause. The upper part of this region, which absorbs most of the ultraviolet
light from the sun, is the ozone layer. Name this region between the troposphere and the mesosphere where
most airplane flight takes place.
ANSWER: stratosphere
The generation of long Wavenumber 1 or 2 Rossby waves causes namesake "sudden warmings" in
this region, and a set of winds in this region alternate between east and west every 13 months. Those
winds, the Krakatoa winds, constitute the quasi-biennial oscillation encountered in this layer. It is
situated below a region containing Appleton and Kennelly-Heaviside layers, the ionosphere. For 10
points, name this layer of the atmosphere where commercial airlines fly, located 6 to 31 miles above sea
level, just above the troposphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere
The name of this region stems from its relative lack of convection. In this region, air temperature increases
with altitude, a phenomenon known as thermal inversion. That phenomenon in this layer is mainly caused
by the absorption of ultraviolet light by a triatomic compound of oxygen, ozone. The lower boundary of this
layer is called the tropopause. For 10 points, name this layer of the earth's atmosphere located between the
troposphere and mesosphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere
The Paris Gun, used by Germany in World War I, was designed to shoot projectiles into this region, where
they encountered almost no drag. Since 1979, the temperature of the lower part of this layer has decreased
by 0.5 degrees Celsius per decade. No regular convection occurs in this layer. This is because, as in the
thermosphere, temperature in this layer increases as altitude increases. This layer contains the Antarctic
ozone hole, and it is located below 50 kilometers in altitude and above 10 kilometers. For 10 points, name
this second major layer of Earth's atmosphere, located below the mesosphere and above the troposphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere
The quasi-biennial oscillation exists between easterly and westerly winds in this region, and the reason why
polar air has higher concentrations of ozone than tropical air in this region can be explained by the Brewer-
Dobson circulation. It is not the thermosphere, but air temperature actually rises with increases in altitude in
this region, a phenomenon known as thermal inversion. The hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica is
present in this layer, and the tropopause separates this layer from the lowest layer of the atmosphere. For ten
points, name this layer of the atmosphere, the second highest, located between the troposphere and
mesosphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere
Kelvin waves and Rossby gravity waves produce this regions Quasi-Biennial zonal wind Oscillation, which
accounts for the conflicting observation of Krakatau easterlies and Berson's westerlies in this region. The
sudden warming of this region in winter is known as the Berlin Phenomenon. Molecules within this region
can absorb radiation in Hartley- Huggins ultraviolet absorption band. Photodissociation can occur within
this region when molecules absorb photons in the Chappuis visible light absorption band, which results in
the formation of oxygen gas and a molecule of oxygen from ozone. For 10 points, name this region of the
atmosphere located below the mesosphere and above the troposphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere [prompt on ozone layer]
One feature in it is an oscillation of equatorial zonal wind between easterlies that is known as the
quasi-biennial oscillation, or QBO. Rossby waves that it absorbs can cause sudden warmings in it,
and bacterial life can survive within it, making it part of the biosphere. (*) Commercial airliners
typically fly in the lower part of this layer of the atmosphere, and the heating in it is caused by the ozone
layer, which absorbs ultraviolet radiation in its upper parts. Its border with the troposphere is known as the
tropopause. For ten points, name this layer of Earth's atmosphere located below the mesosphere.
ANSWER: Stratosphere
During the winter, polar vortices may form clouds with a characteristic mother-of-pearl color in this region,
known as nacreous clouds. Krakatoa easterlies, now known as the quasi-biennial oscillation, are found in
this layer of the atmosphere. However, traditional clouds are typically found in the layer immediately below
this one. This layer experiences no regular convection because of thermal inversion, in which temperature
increases with altitude as one moves away from the tropopause. For 10 points, name this layer of Earth's
atmosphere, found between the troposphere and mesosphere, the site of jet planes and the ozone layer.
ANSWER: stratosphere
When the polar vortex slows, this region can undergo sudden warming. This layer is subject to the
quasi-biennial oscillation. The distribution of water and another substance in this layer and an associated
sublayer are explained by the Brewer-Dobson circulation. Like the thermosphere, its temperature increases
with altitude. This layer contains the ozone layer. Its bottom boundary is called the tropopause, below
which is the troposphere. For 10 points, name this second layer of the atmosphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere
According to Reichler et al, changes in wind patterns known as polar vortices in this area can cause a shift
in deep sea circulation. During the winter, PSCs can be found in this area, which is also where blue jets
reside. This area gets its name from a characteristic which is caused by the breakdown of ozone into atomic
and diatomic oxygen in the presence of UVB and UVC radiation. These reactions cause this area to be
warmer towards the top and colder towards the bottom, at an area called the tropopause. Aircraft often
reach the lower levels of this atmospheric layer. For 10 points, identify this atmospheric layer that lies
above the troposphere.
ANSWER: Stratosphere
Temperature trends in this layer of the atmosphere are periodically increased by volcanic eruptions,
but in the past 25 years have shown a decrease in 0.5 degrees Celsius. Dobson units were created to
measure one substance in this layer. This is the lowest layer in which temperature (*) inversion begins,
and it has no regular convection. Felix Baumgartner made his skydive from this layer, in which free radicals
created from CFCs have depleted molecules responsible for protecting the earth from UV light. For 10
points, the ozone layer is found in what layer of the atmosphere just above the troposphere?
ANSWER: stratosphere (prompt on "ozone layer")
One study of this region involved Lindzen and Holton's examination of the dissipative effects of its
quasi-biennial oscillation. This region is the subject of a model partially named Brewer, and the other
namesake of that model was Gordon Dobson, who names a unit for the atmospheric density of a (*)
substance found in one portion of this layer of the atmosphere. The lower boundary of this region is the
tropopause, and thermal inversion takes place due to the absorption of ultraviolet rays by the ozone layer
contained within it. For 10 points, identify this layer of the atmosphere, which is above the troposphere and
below the mesosphere.
ANSWER: stratosphere
Young sediment that has undergone this process has a high beryllium-10 to boron ratio due to
cosmic rays. During this process, eclogite is formed from basalt. Sutures are used to infer the polarity
of instances of this process. This process is responsible for generating the slab-pull force, and it can
result in orogenesis. Places where this process is occurring are noted by arrays of earthquakes
originating from (*) Wadati-Benioff zones. This process is responsible for generating volcanic arcs when
it occurs at an oceanic convergent boundary. This process begins at trenches, which mark areas of descent,
and it consumes crust. For 10 points, name this process where one tectonic plate slides underneath another,
which occurs in namesake zones.
ANSWER: subduction [prompt on things like "one plate moving under another", but a word form of subduction is needed]
This process leads to the formation of a slab window, and volatile areas known as Wadati-Benioff
(wah-DAH-tee BEN-ee-off) Zones are found in places where this process occurs. This process can
cause orogeny, the formation of (*) mountains, as well as the formation of an island arc. It was
responsible for the start of the 1960 Chilean earthquake, the largest ever recorded, as well as eight others of
similar magnitude. This process occurs at convergent boundaries. For 10 points, name this process by
which one tectonic plate sinks into the mantle underneath another tectonic plate.
ANSWER: subduction
The flat-slab type of this process can cause flux melting, while its "steep-slab" type occurs at areas of
little to no buoyancy. It can lead to forearcs and the formation of back-arc basins. A deep region that
can be formed because of it is the Wadati-Benioff zone, and another result of this process is the (*)
lowering of the lithosphere. This process can occur in Cascadia and the Ring of Fire. For 10 points, name
this geological process in which a plate tectonic slides under another plate tectonic.
ANSWER: subduction
Blueschist and eclogite are characteristic minerals formed by this process, which is labeled "flat-slab"
at angles less than 30 degrees. Before the Yucca Mountain site opened, Nevada considered using
this process to dispose of nuclear waste. The Aleutians form an arc because of this process, which
generates earthquakes in Wadati-Benioff zones. This process explains why the Farallon Plate, named
for San Francisco islands, no longer exists. It only occurs at convergent boundaries and is responsible
for forming the "ring of fire" volcanoes. Name this geologic process in which one tectonic plate slides
beneath another.
ANSWER: subduction [prompt on tectonic shifts or continental drift]
One of these entities near the Tokai district of Honshu had been studied by Kiyoo, who together with
Caltech professor Hugo were the namesakes of the Wadati-Benioff regions. The cities of Victoria,
Vancouver, Portland, and Seattle lie on one of these entities named Cascadia. Volcanic arcs are produced
by these regions where the lithosphere enters the asthenosphere. Taking place at convergent plate
boundaries, for 10 points, name these geological regions or processes where one tectonic plate sinks into the
Earth's mantle by moving under another tectonic plate, thus causing violent volcanic eruptions and
destructive earthquakes.
ANSWER: subduction zones [prompt on plate boundaries; prompt on fault lines; prompt on trenches]
These regions feature areas of extreme activity called Wadati-Benioff zones, and back-arc basins are found
above these regions. Accretionary wedges and slab suction and pull forces originate in these areas, often
found near forearcs and volcanic arcs. Because basalt is denser than granite, oceanic plates tend to sink in
these areas. One of them occurs between the Pacific and Philippine Sea plates, coinciding with the Mariana
Trench. Located at convergent boundaries, for 10 points, name these geologic areas where one tectonic
plate slides under another.
ANSWER: subduction zones
It is theorized that these formations cannot occur in LIPs, and they are arc-shaped and can often
create back-arc basins. Seismic action in these regions is confined to the Wadati-Benioff zone, and these
areas typically cause orogeny. A similar process to that which dominates these areas occurs when an
oceanic plate thrusts over a continental plate, and is called obduction. For 10 points, name these regions
in which the oceanic plate goes under the continental plate, causing lots of volcanic activity.
ANSWER: subduction zones [prompt on convergent plate boundary]
Some kinds of these locations are named for Benioff and Wadati. A type of volcano that can be found
near these regions composes the Ring of Fire. These regions are the opposite of divergent boundaries. For
10 points, name these regions that are formed when an oceanic plate slides beneath another tectonic plate,
pressing the lower plate deeper into the Earth.
ANSWER: subduction zones
The corner flow induced by these structures, and their migration through rollback, are two processes
that may form or enlarge back-arc basins. In these regions, flux melting following metamorphic
dewatering can lead to volcanic arcs, examples of which include the Aleutians and Andes. One of
these structures stretches from northern Vancouver Island to (*) California, forming the boundary
between the Juan de Fuca and North American plates. The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami was generated by a
megathrust earthquake at one of these regions between the India and Burma plates. For 10 points, identify
these convergent plate boundaries in which a dense oceanic plate sinks under a continental plate.
ANSWER: subduction zones [or subducting slabs; or answers indicating that oceanic lithosphere is subducting until "California" is read; prompt on "convergent (plate boundaries)" until it is read]
Seismic activity in these regions originates in a deep location known as a Wadati-Benioff zone, and
volcanoes that occur above them often form in arcs. These areas are frequently the sites of orogeny and lead
to a dominant source of mantle convection via the sinking of the lithosphere. The process which occurs at
these convergent boundaries is contrasted with the process of an oceanic plate moving over a continental
plate, obduction. For 10 points, identify these regions at which an oceanic plate slides under another
tectonic plate.
ANSWER: subduction zones
A type of ophiolite is named after a "supra" form of these regions. One part of these regions can
undergo tearing known as STEP faults. They consist of an updip zone and a seismogenic zone.
Accretionary prisms are formed on one part of these regions. Nankai and Cascadia are two notable ones.
Although not island arcs, one area associated with them can be affected by "roll-back" and is a back arc.
Earthquakes can occur deep in them in areas called Benioff zones. The primary driving force behind these
regions is slab pull. For 10 points, name these regions in which an oceanic plate is driven under a
continental plate at a convergent margin.
ANSWER: subduction zones [prompt on convergent boundaries or convergent margins]
The apparatus used to make this occur in the lab uses a "cold finger." Naphthalene and iodine are two
substances that are easily purified by this technique. It is integral to lyophilization
(LIE-oh-fill-ih-ZAY-shun), and it can be used to infuse paper with dye in a namesake type of printing. In
Antarctica, it can be induced by katabatic winds. For most compounds, it usually occurs at low pressure. It
is a transition below and to the left of the triple point on a phase diagram. For 10 points, name this phase
transition, commonly seen in dry ice, in which a solid directly becomes a gas.
ANSWER: sublimation
A substance that has undergone this process can be purified using lab equipment known as a cold finger.
One substance that undergoes this process was first observed by Charles Thilorier, and has been mostly
replaced by silver iodide in cloud seeding. Food is freeze-dried through this phase transition, which is only
possible below the triple point, and also causes freezer burn. The reverse of this phase transition is known
as deposition. For 10 points, name this process that dry ice undergoes, in which a solid changes directly to a
gas without passing through the liquid phase.
ANSWER: sublimation
This process is what makes mothballs effective, due to the properties of naphthalene. This process
occurs when a substance is heated below its triple point. The end result of this process can be used to
create (*) fog when working with solid carbon dioxide, or dry ice. For 10 points, name this process in
which a solid turns directly into a gas without going through a liquid phase, and which is the reverse
process of deposition.
ANSWER: sublimation [accept word forms; accept evaporation before "triple point"]
A group at Penn State recently created sheets of graphene from silicon carbide using this process.
The primary drying phase of lyophilization occurs via this process since the pressure of the sample is
lowered, and in most laboratory syntheses of ferrocene, the final product is purified using this
process. Napthalene undergoes this process at room temperature, and in most laboratory
apparatuses for performing this technique, it occurs on the surface of a cold finger. This process
occurs at pressures and temperatures less than the triple point, and the enthalpy of this process is the
sum of the enthalpies of fusion and vaporization. The opposite of deposition, for 10 points, name this
process that occurs in solid iodine and dry ice, the direct transformation of a solid to a gas.
ANSWER: sublimation
Fingerprinting can be done by carrying this process using iodine crystals. Caffeine extraction often
utilizes this process. It occurs when temperature or pressure increases while both quantities remain below
the triple point. The enthalpy of this process can be calculated by adding the enthalpies of vaporization and
fusion. The opposite of this process is deposition, and one example is the conversion of dry ice into carbon
dioxide. For 10 points, name this type of phase transition in which a solid converts directly into a gas.
ANSWER: sublimation
This process is used by some printers to transfer dye, and is used to purify substances with high vapor
pressures such as yellowcake uranium. It also occurs with napthalene, the key component in moth balls, at
room temperature. The enthalpy of this process is the sum of the enthalpies of fusion and vaporization.
Most famously occuring with dry ice, it can only occur at temperatures and pressures which are below a
substance's triple point. The opposite of deposition, name this phase change, the transition from solid
directly to gas.
ANSWER: sublimation [accept word forms]
The selective version of this process is used to produce semiconducting thin films. Anhydrous [aan-HY-drus] 
zinc chloride can be purified by this process in a stream of hydrogen chloride gas, followed by heating
to it 400 degrees Celsius in a stream of dry nitrogen gas. This is used for electronic cooling and heat
transfer with naphthalene, with which it can also be used to create a purified form of caffeine collected on a
cold surface as it condenses. It is the opposite of deposition, and notably occurs to carbon dioxide in the
form of "dry ice". Name this process, the direct transformation of a solid to a gas.
ANSWER: sublimation [accept word forms]
One way to study heat transfer involves analyzing this process in naphthalene, and a cold finger is
commonly used in an apparatus involving this process. Caffeine is commonly purified using this
process, and the enthalpy of this process equals the sum of the enthalpies of fusion and vaporization.
This process occurs when temperature increases at pressures and temperatures (*) below the triple
point, and the reverse of this process is deposition. For ten points, identify this process that occurs in dry
ice, in which a solid changes directly into a gas without entering the liquid phase.
ANSWER: sublimation (do not accept deposition at any point)
The reversal of this process is known as deposition, and it occurs at temperatures and pressures below the
triple point. Its enthalpy for a given substance is the sum of the enthalpy of fusion and the enthalpy of
vaporization for that substance. Its best-known example is the 'disappearance' of dry ice. For 10 points,
name this process that involves a solid directly becoming a gas, without going through the liquid phase.
ANSWER: sublimation
This type of reaction is subject to Kornblum's rule, and alkyl halides undergo this type of reaction in the
Kolbe nitrile synthesis and the Finkelstein reaction. Copper (I) salts catalyze one of these reactions for
aromatic amines in the Sandmeyer reaction. Alkoxide ions participate in one of these reactions with an
alkyl halide in the Williamson ether synthesis, and reactions of this type compete with elimination reactions
with similar mechanisms. For 10 points, name this class of reaction in which one functional group replaces
another which includes SN1 and SN2 varieties.
ANSWER: Nucleophilic Substitution
One type of these compounds can be shortened in length by one structural unit in the presence of
Fe(III)/Hydrogen peroxide. When they are cyclic, they undergo mutarotation or the interconversion between
the alpha and beta types of a particular form of isomerism. The Haworth projections are three-dimensional
structures used to visualize these compounds, and when they differ at exactly one chiral center, they are
called epimers. Depending on the presence of aldehyde or ketone groups, they are called aldoses or ketoses.
For 10 points, identify these compounds which are exemplified by maltose, fructose, and glucose.
ANSWER: sugars [accept monosaccharides at any point]
Lead acid batteries commonly contain a salt of lead with this anion, which is ionic-bonded to copper in
blue vitriol. Although it normally forms soluble compounds, a white precipitate of this ion with barium is
used in X-ray imaging. This polyatomic ion is found in gypsum and Epsom salts. It is the anion of the only
common diprotic strong acid. For 10 points, name this anion with a minus-two charge and formula SO4.
ANSWER: sulfates [or SO42- before mention]
Epsom salts contain magnesium bound to this anion. Anhydrites such as gypsum are comprised of
the calcium type of these salts. Along with water, a compound where lead is bound to this anion is
created in a (*) lead-acid battery. Vitriol salts contain this compound. It is formed after the complete
dissociation of sulfuric acid. For 10 points, name this anion with a two minus charge, which consists of a
sulfur atom bound to four oxygen atoms.
ANSWER: sulfate [do not accept "bisulfate"; do not accept "sulfite"]
Joseph Gold claimed in the 1970s that hydrazine bonded to this ion could combat cancer. When copper is
bonded to this anion, it can be reduced in the presence of aldehydes to an oxide, turning from blue to red in
a reagent named for Benedict. This anion bonded to barium can be used to poison a Lindlar catalyst, and its
sodium dodecyl version is used on proteins before the PAGE technique. Gypsum is composed of calcium
bonded to this anion, and when it is combined with magnesium, it yields Epsolm salts. For 10 points, name
this polyatomic anion formed by ripping two hydrogens off of sulfuric acid, with chemical formula S-Ofour-two-minus.
ANSWER: sulfate [accept SO4 2- before mentioned]
The hormone DHEA usually is connected to this ion, and a test measuring their level together is used
to monitor adrenal gland function. Turpentine with this ion is generated by the Kraft process, which
is sometimes named for this ion. This ion combines with magnesium to form Epsom salt, or with
calcium to form gypsum. This ion combines with barium to form barite, and that same combination
is used as an X-ray contrast agent. The most common iron supplements combine iron with this ion.
Acids with this ion have become a problem in many lakes due to acid rain. Name this ion that
combines with hydrogen to form sulfuric acid.
ANSWER: sulfate ion [accept SO2- 4 or SO-2 4; do not accept "sulfur" or "sulfite"]
A chondroitin salt of this anion is used along with glucosamine to treat arthritis. Ferrous and
ammonium cations are found along with this anion in Mohr's salt, and its barium salt is coated with
quinoline poisoned palladium in Lindlar's catalyst. Hydrated magnesium salts of it are called Epsom salts.
This anion's calcium salt is frequently used as a desiccant, and a hydrated form of that salt is found in
minerals like gypsum. For 10 points, identify this anion whose copper salt is called "blue vitriol" and has
formula SO42- (S O four 2 minus).
ANSWER: sulfate [accept SO42-before it is read; do not accept "sulfite"]
The drug rocecoxib contains an atom of this element double-bonded to two different oxygens and is
better known by the trade name Vioxx. This element is harvested by forcing steam through the
outermost of three concentric pipes and compressed air through the innermost, thus allowing the
molten form of this element to rise through the third. The most stable form of this element, which is
yielded by the Frasch (*) process, consists of either orthorhombic or monoclinic crystals of eight-atom
cyclic molecules. Used to form cross-linked bridges in vulcanization, this element can expand its octet like
its neighbor, phosphorus. For 10 points, name this element found directly below oxygen on the periodic
table and symbolized S.
ANSWER: sulfur [accept S before mention]
A common class of antibacterial drugs contains this element forming two double bonds to oxygen. A
triatomic form of it forms the blue color of lapis lazuli. It is most commonly found in nature in an
eight-membered ring. Organic compounds analogous to alcohols but containing this element are
called thiols. Pyrite consists of (*) iron bonded to this nonmetal. It contributes to the tertiary structure of
proteins by forming namesake "bridges" between the two amino acids it is present in, methionine and
cysteine. This element is a yellow powder at room temperature. For ten points, name this element which
forms a gas which smells like rotten eggs.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S]
This element forms cluster compounds with iron, and those cluster compounds are important to enzymes
like coenzyme Q-cytochrome c reductase (CO-EN-zime "Q" SY-toe-krome "C" ree-DUCK-tase). Bonds
between two of this element, which form between cysteine (SIS-teen) residues, are critical to protein
conformation. This element has an isotope that forms an eight-atom ring. For 10 points, name this element
associated with the smell of rotten eggs, with atomic number sixteen.
ANSWER: sulfur
A mineral containing this element and lead was one of the earliest semiconductors and is commonly
called galena. This element is extracted by the Frasch process, and the only amino acids containing this
element are methionine and cysteine. The odors of onion, garlic, and skunk spray are caused by compounds
of this element called thiols. A compund consisting of this element and two hydrogen atoms notably smells
like rotten eggs. For 10 points, name this element, a yellow nonmetal with atomic number 16 and symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S]
One process used to obtain this element involves melting it using heated water and is called the Frasch
process. This element is reacted with oxygen to start the contact process. This element, in pure form, can
come in monoclinic and orthorhombic types. It is bonded to hydrogen in the thiol functional group, and it is
located below oxygen on the periodic table. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 16 and
atomic symbol S.
ANSWER: Sulfur [prompt on S before mention]
A method for obtaining this element from solid materials using three concentric pipes is named for
Frasch. Its best-known solid allotrope is an eight atom ring. This element is isolated from a binary
compound it forms with hydrogen via the Claus process. It is the most common additive in a process that
cures rubber, called vulcanization. This element heavily influences protein structure by forming bonds to
itself between different cysteine residues, and it is also present in methionine. For 10 points, name this
element also known as brimstone.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S; prompt on brimstone before it is read]
Lead is found alongside this element when it is mined as galena, while fool's gold contains iron and
this element. Thiols are an organic group analogous to alcohols that contain this element. The amino
acid cysteine allows two atoms of this element to form a diatomic bond prevalent in a protein's (*)
tertiary structure. A compound containing this element and hydrogen is known for its rotten egg smell. For
10 points, name this chemical element found below oxygen on the periodic table with symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur
Ylides of this element are important intermediates in the Corey-Chaykovsky reaction. This element forms
cluster cofactors with iron in enzymes such as aconitase and ferredoxin. It catenates into its monoclinic
form at high temperatures, and it is stable in its cyclic rhombic form at room temperature. Cystine residues
in proteins form a bond that is named for a dimer of this element and thiols are organic compounds
containing this heteroatom. The binary compound formed from reaction of hydrogen with this element has a
repulsive odor and is released by rotting eggs. For 10 points, name this chalcogen that is below oxygen on
the periodic table and has the atomic symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur
This element clusters with iron in Roussin's [ROO-sins] red and black salts and several proteins such as
nitrogenase [nye-TRAH-jen-ase]. In mercaptans [mer-CAP-tans], it plays the same role that oxygen plays in
alcohols. Mercaptans, which are also known as thiols [THEE-ols] and found in cysteine [SIS-teen], often
have strong odors. This also is the central element in an acid produced in the lead-chamber or contact
processes that was formerly called oil of vitriol [VIT-ree-ol]. Manmade production of its dioxide [dye-OKS-
ide] is a major cause of acid rain. Name this element located under oxygen in the Periodic Table
which has chemical symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur
This element is doubly bonded to oxygen and singly bonded to two methyl groups in the least
toxic of the polar aprotic solvents. Recovered from the Claus process, this element is bonded to
hydrogen in the mercaptan functional group. The best-known compound to contain this element,
whose elemental form includes (*) eight atoms, is produced via the contact process and is the only
diprotic member of the six strongest acids. For 10 points, name this element with a foul odor of rotting
eggs.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S]
This element and oxygen bond to molybdenum in the center of xanthine oxidase, and it binds to
another metal in the P cluster of nitrogenase. This element can be added to organic compounds using
Lawesson's reagent. Alcohols can be prepped for SN2 reactions by converting them into a better
leaving group containing this element known as a tosylate. This element, which bonds to (*) iron in
aconitase and the ferredoxins, is typically found as an orthorhombic crystal containing 8 atoms of it. This
atom is replaced with selenium in an alternate version of cysteine. Bridges of this element are created in
polymers in vulcanization. For 10 points, name this element which bonds to carbon in a thiol which is
known for its bright yellow color and is symbolized S.
ANSWER: sulfur [prompt on "S"]
Replacing the central carbon in acetone with this element produces DMSO. A compound containing this
element is transformed into the elemental form via the Claus process. It is found in the amino acids cysteine
(SIH-steen) and methionine (meth-IY-oh-neen). One group of archaebacteria require compounds from this
element produced from vents in the ocean. An odor of rotting eggs is produced from a compound with two
hydrogens and this element. For 10 points, name this element found just below oxygen, with atomic
number 16.
ANSWER: sulfur [prompt on S]
Proteins that are named for clusters incorporating this element and iron include Rieske proteins and
aconitase. Reaction with a molecule with two atoms of this element, followed by a base, is one
common method of umpolung with carbonyls. This element's most common allotrope is an (*) eight 
atom ring. The fuming form of one oxoacid of this element is an equilibrium between its trioxide and its
diprotonated tetraoxide. A lead salt of this element is galena, and an iron salt of this element is the mineral
pyrite. An atom of this element, found in the amino acid cysteine, replaces oxygen in a thiol. For 10 points,
name this element with atomic number sixteen.
ANSWER: sulfur
In the Gulf Coast, this element is extracted by superheating water to about one hundred seventy
degrees Celsius in what is known as the Frasch process and, in the U.S., nine million tons of this
element are recovered by burning via the Claus process. Proteins stabilize themselves when two of
these elements combine to form a namesake (*) bridge. The scent of freshly chopped onions and skunks
are caused by this element's presence, which is also responsible for the smell of rotten eggs. For 10 points,
name this element with atomic number 16 and chemical symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur
The durability of rubber is increased when this element is added during vulcanization. It is found in
the amino acids methionine [meh-"THIGH"-oh-nin] and cysteine [SISS-teen]. The hexafluoride
molecule of this element is a major (*) greenhouse gas; it also affects the climate in that its oxides lead to
acid rain. This element gives hot springs and natural gas leaks a pungent odor. For 10 points, name this
yellow-colored element with symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur (prompt on "S")
This element, whose most stable form is the rhombic (ROM-bick) allotrope (AL-oh-trope), is extracted by
pumping superheated steam into deposits in the Frasch (FRASH) process. Thiols (THY-olls) are alcohol
analogs with oxygen replaced by this element. A platinum or vanadium (vuh-NAY-dee-um) catalyst is used
in the contact process, which synthesizes a compound consisting of oxygen, hydrogen, and this element.
Although blue in flame test, it is yellow as a solid and a liquid. This element forms cross-links in rubber
vulcanization. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 16.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S]
This element extracted in the Frasch process is bonded to a hydrogen atom in a functional group once
called a mercaptan. In nature, this element is most commonly found in an eight atom ring. This element is
only found in the amino acids methionine and cysteine; in cysteine this element forms a type of bridge that
links polypeptide chains. A compound containing this element bonded to two hydrogen atoms is notable for
smelling like rotten eggs. For 10 points, name this element found below oxygen on the periodic table with
chemical symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur
Carbonyls bonded to this element are reduced to aldehydes by silyl hydride and a palladium catalyst
in the Fukuyama reduction. Compounds of this element are removed from sour gasoline in the
Doctor Sweetening Process. In both the Shapiro and Bamford-Stevens reactions, ketones are
converted to alkenes after a leaving group consisting of hydrazine bonded to a group with this
element at its center are kicked off; that group is a (*) tosyl, which has this element bonded to three
oxygens. At its center, Lawesson's reagent has two phosphoruses bonded to three of these elements. Natural
gas has a smell because compounds of this element called mercaptans or thiols are added. For 10 points,
what is this element whose compounds produce the smell of rotting eggs, with chemical symbol S?
ANSWER: sulfur
The Claus process can produce this element from raw natural gas, and in ancient times the Sicilian process
was used. The Frasch process uses boiling water to extract it from underground deposits. When rapidly
cooled from a molten state, this element becomes "plastic." It can form the functional group thiol with a
hydrogen atom, and it forms the bonds in tertiary protein structures when formed between cysteine residues.
Used in vulcanizing rubber, for 10 points, identify this element that can form a smelly gas when combined
with two hydrogen ions, an element with atomic number 16 and symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur
Acyl carbons may achieve umpolung reactivity using a compound of this element in the Corey-
Seebach reaction. Along with chromic trioxide, an acid containing this element comprises the Jones
reagent, and it features in ethyl and grapefruit mercaptans. The Claus process can produce its elemental
form from natural gas, and it forms the most stable and best-known hexafluoride. One functional group
containing it is thiol, and its most common allotrope is yellow and orthorhombic. For 10 points, name
this element with atomic number 16 and symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur
This element, whose most stable form is the rhombic (ROM-bick) allotrope (AL-oh-trope), is extracted by
pumping superheated steam into deposits in the Frasch (FRASH) process. Thiols (THY-olls) are alcohol
analogs with oxygen replaced by this element. A platinum or vanadium (vuh-NAY-dee-um) catalyst is used
in the contact process, which synthesizes a compound consisting of oxygen, hydrogen, and this element.
Although blue in flame test, it is yellow as a solid and a liquid. This element forms cross-links in rubber
vulcanization. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 16.
ANSWER: sulfur [or S]
This compound and ammonium molybdate make are the components of Splittgerber's reagent, which is used
to detect the presence of phosphates in water. When it is combined with a dichromate ion, it produces an
oxidizing agent that can turn a primary alcohol into a carboxylic acid, and is called Jones reagent. This
compound is able to dehydrate sucrose, and often acts as a catalyst for the Fischer esterification reaction. A
solution of this compound and the gas that generates it is called "oleum" or the "fuming" form of it.
Originally mass produced via the lead chamber process, it is now produced using a Vanadium oxide catalyst
through the Contact process. For 10 points, identify compound also known as oil of vitriol, this strong acid
with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept early buzz with "H2SO4"]
It was used in the first step of an obsolete process to transform sodium chloride to hydrogen, chlorine
gas, and sodium carbonate, the Leblanc process. It was originally created with the use of Glover
towers; though now produced by the [*] contact process, that method was known as the lead chamber
process. Its pure form was formally known as oil of vitriol and, along with carbon dioxide and water, it is a
main component of Venus' atmosphere. For 10 points, name this strong component of acid rain with
formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept oil of vitriol early; accept H2SO4 early]
This compound reacts with sodium chloride in the Mannheim process, and this substance is used in
the Beckmann rearrangement to produce caprolactam, the precursor to Nylon 6. This compound is
used to protonate nitric acid, and is produced after a vanadium(V) oxide ("va - NAY - dee - um five
oxide") catalyst facilitates the central oxidation step in the contact process. Also called (*) "oil of
vitriol," a dilute form of this substance is created by the atmospheric oxidation of sulfur dioxide by water,
producing acid rain. Lead-acid batteries contain a lot of, for ten points, what highly corrosive substance
with chemical formula H2SO4?
ANSWER: sulfuric acid (accept "oil of vitriol" and "H2SO4" before read)
This compound is introduced to nitroparrafins in an early step of the Nef reaction. In an early method of
producing this compound, oxides of nitrogen were used in the conversion of a certain dioxide into a
corresponding trioxide. A more modern method involves burning pyrite in the excess air, and the second
step of that process uses a vanadium oxide catalyst. A compound called oleum is reacted with water to
produce this compound. The former process was done in a chamber lined with lead, and the latter process
is the contact process. For 10 points, name this diprotic acid has chemical formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 until mentioned; accept oil of vitriol at any point]
This compound is reacted with hydrogen iodide to release hydrogen gas in the final step of a certain
process, and three equivalents of this compound are used to treat tricalcium phosphate in the wet-method to
produce phosphoric acid for fertilizers. An early method of producing this compound relied on a nitrogen
dioxide catalyst. This compound is now produced in a process that uses a vanadium oxide catalyst, and
when at high concentrations, this compound can be used to dehydrate other compounds. In a common
demonstration, this compound is added to sugar, which results in the formation of a dark tower, and it is
generally made by the contact process. For 10 points, name this diprotic acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 before mentioned; do not accept sulfurous acid]
In a device invented by Gaston Plante, this compound reacts to oxidize lead and reduce lead oxide. Since
this compound is capable of dehydrating sugars, when mixed with sucrose, it forms pure black carbon. A
superacid must have a lower pKa than this compound. This compound is formed industrially using a
vanadium compound in the contact process. Of the common strong acids, it is the only one which is
diprotic. For 10 points, name this acid found in car batteries with formula H2 SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or H2 SO4 until it is read]
This chemical is used to protinate a second compound that then electrophilically attacks and
esterifies glycerol; thus, the addition of glycerol to a mixture of nitric acid and compound creates
nitroglycerin. The treatment of exuded viscose with this chemical yields rayon fibers. This solvent in
the (*) Jones reagent can be produced by purifying its gaseous precursor from air, hydrating, drying with
this compound itself, highly endothermic oxygen oxidation, and finally high-temperature protinaton over a
platinum of vanadium oxide catalyst. The aforementioned series of reactions for making this chemical is the
contact process. For 10 points, name this strong diprotic acid.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept permutations of H2SO4; accept vitriol; do not accept or prompt on "sulfurous acid"]
This compound is produced in a process that uses Glover towers to remove nitrogen oxide called the lead
chamber process. This compound and a gas that generates it are found in a solution called oleum, which is
formed with a vanadium pentoxide catalyst in the contact process. Also called "oil of vitriol," it is a major
component of car batteries, Venus's atmosphere, and acid rain. For 10 points, name this acid with formula
H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or oil of vitriol it is read; or H2SO4 before it is read]
Along with pure iodine, this chemical is the input of the first step in a cycle that could produce
hydrogen for fuel cells. This compound is produced in a three-step process, the second step of which
uses a vanadium oxide catalyst to create a trioxide product. That process replaced the lead chamber
process for making this compound, and is called the contact process. For 10 points, name this
mostsynthesized
industrial chemical in the United States, an acid once known as oil of vitriol, which has
chemical formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept sulfuric acid after "acid"; accept H2SO4 before read; prompt on oil of vitriol]
Ingestion of this chemical, discovered by Jabir ibn Hayyan, can cause a Vitamin B12 deficiency and
also degenerate the spinal cord and optic nerve. If it reacts with Sodium Acetate, ethanoic acid is
formed. Its reaction with potassium nitrate can be used to produce nitric acid. Lead batteries in cars,
(*) wastewater processing, and oil refining all use this chemical with a molar mass of 98. This compound
appears as precipitation on Venus, forming a cycle much like the Earth's water cycle. It is formed by
atmospheric oxidation of sulphur dioxide in the presence of water. Also known as oil of vitriol, for ten
points, name this strong mineral acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 or Oil of Vitriol before mentioned]
In the first step of the Marsh test for arsenic, this compound is combined with zinc in a Woulfe bottle. Basil
Valentine invented two ways to produce it, including the reaction of copperas with silica, but believed the
products of those reactions to be different compounds. This compound is added to cumene hydroperoxide
in the first step of the industrial synthesis of phenol and acetone. The Glover tower further refined a process
that uses nitrogen dioxide as a catalyst for producing this compound; that process was replaced by one that
uses a vanadium(V) oxide catalyst. Those processes are the lead chamber process and contact process. This
compound is the "acid" found in lead-acid batteries, such as car batteries. For 10 points, name this strong
acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or H2SO4 before mentioned]
Johann Glauber created this substance by burning its namesake element with steam. This substance
is used with sodium chloride in the first step of the LeBlanc process. It is now produced in a three-
step cycle that includes a vanadium oxide catalyst that causes the reaction between this substance's
namesake (*) trioxide with water. Produced once with the lead chamber process and now the contact
process, this substance was once known as oil of vitriol and is present in battery acid and acid rain. For 10
points, name this only diprotic strong acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: Sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 until mentioned; prompt on oil of vitriol until mentioned]
When the gas propanethiol (proh-pane-THIGH-ol) S-oxide is released from onions, it reacts with water
in one's eyes to produce this compound. It was once produced in the lead chamber process and dimerizes to
form oleum. An acid is called a superacid if it is stronger than this acid. Hydrocholoric acid is made by
reacting table salt with this compound. Lead-acid batteries utilize this diprotic acid as an electrolyte. For 10
points, name this most important industrial chemical with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 before it is read]
A solution of viscose reacts with this compound to form filaments of rayon. Mills-Packard chambers and a
nitrogen oxide catalyst were used in an early method of creating this chemical, which is the catalyst during
the Beckmann rearrangement for caprolactam production as well as the synthesis of isooctane. This
compound reacts with uorapatite and water to produce phosphoric acid in the wet method. The lead 
chamber process for production of this compound has been largely replaced by the use of a vanadium oxide
catalyst in the contact process, and it is a major component of Venus's atmosphere and acid rain. For ten
points, identify this strong diprotic acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid (accept oil of vitriol)
The primary use of this chemical is the solubilization of phosphates to increase their bioavailability. The
modern method of synthesizing this compound performs oxidation in the presence of a vanadium oxide
catalyst to yield a dehydrated dimer of this compound which fumes. That dimer is then hydrated to yield this
compound, a powerful drying agent which contains a nonmetal in a plus-6 oxidation state. Owing to its
plethora of uses in industry, more of it is manufactured than any other chemical, typically by the contact
process. For 10 points, name this strong diprotic acid with molecular formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or H2SO4 before it is read; accept oil of vitriol and award the answerer a Nobel prize for apparently having developed a way to travel to 2012 from the 1800s]
Six equivalents of this compound are added to six equivalents of zinc and arsenic trioxide in the
Marsh test. To minimize inefficiencies in the production of this compound, the DCDA process is used.
In one synthesis of this compound, the reactants are passed through Glover towers and Gay-Lussac
towers. This compound is now produced in a process that requires a (*) vanadium-based catalyst. The
removal of water by this compound is demonstrated adding it to sugar to form a dark mass of elemental
carbon, and it can be synthesized by the lead chamber and contact processes. For 10 points, name this
diprotic acid which has chemical formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 until mentioned]
Two equivalents of sodium chloride is added to one equivalent of this substance in the Mannheim
process. The analyte is reacted with this substance in the first step of a method used to determine the
amount of nitrogen in a substance; that is the Kjeldahl method. This substance is about 18 molar at
98% purity, and the 100% pure form of this substance has a Hammett function of negative 12.
Vanadium oxide pellets are used as a (*) catalyst for the production of this substance in the contact
process, and it's not nitric acid but this substance is used as a proton donor in the first step of arene
nitration. The fuming form of this substance is commonly referred to as oleum. For 10 points, name this
strong acid commonly found in lead-based batteries, with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or oil of vitriol]
This compound reacts with sodium chloride to create an industrial reagent in the Mannheim process, and it
is used to produce a nitronium ion by protonating nitric acid, which catalyzes the addition of nitro groups to
aromatic compounds. Usually used to work up intermediates in the Nef reaction, a common lab
demonstration relies on its ability to dehydrate sucrose into pure carbon. This compound and its generating
gas is called oleum when found in solution, and it is produced in a process whose central oxidation step is
catalyzed by a Vanadium oxide catalyst in the contact process. For 10 points, identify this diprotic acid with
formula H2SO4
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or sulphuric acid; prompt on oil of vitriol]
This compound is used as a catalyst for the reaction of isobutane with isobutylene to make isooctane.
It can be created in a process improved by Gay-Lussac which uses Glover towers to remove nitrogen
oxide; that process is called the lead chamber process. Oleum is the "fuming" type of this compound,
and this acid can be created by using a (*) vanadium oxide catalyst in the contact process. Also known as
oil of vitriol, it is a major component of car batteries and acid rain. For 10 points, identify this strong acid
with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept oil of vitriol before mention, prompt H2SO4 before mention]
This compound used to be manufactured with the use of a nitrogen dioxide catalyst, though a
vanadium oxide catalyst is now more common. It can be used as a desiccant, as its reaction with water
is highly exothermic and may release enough energy to boil the water. The lead-chamber process has
been replaced by the contact process as the most common method for producing this compound, the
most synthesized industrial chemical in the United States. For 10 points, name this acid produced by
adding water to sulfur trioxide.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or H2SO4]
One method for producing this compound used nitrogen dioxide as a catalyst and involved a highly
exothermic oxidation; later versions of that method used a Glover tower to recover the nitrogen oxides and
concentrate the product. That method, the lead chamber process, has been largely supplanted by a process
that uses a vanadium oxide catalyst. Its "fuming" variety is also known as oleum, and it is found in the
clouds of Venus. This diprotic acid is also found in car batteries and acid rain. Historically known as "oil of
vitriol," this is, for 10 points, what strong acid with formula H2SO4?
ANSWER: Sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 before mentioned]
In one process for producing this compound, nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide act as catalysts in the Gay-
Lussac tower and Glover tower, and in another, an oxidation takes place in the presence of silica beads and
a vanadium (V) oxide catalyst, after which its namesake element's trioxide is reacted with water. This
compound produced by the lead chamber process and the contact process acts as the electrolyte in lead-acid
batteries, and it is the only diprotic strong acid. For 10 points, name this acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: Sulfuric Acid [accept H2SO4 before it is read]
This compound protonates nitric acid in the precursor step to the nitration of benzene. Sodium
nitrate is reacted with this compound in one method of producing it which uses Glover towers known
as the lead chamber process, while another method uses a vanadium oxide catalyst and is called the
(*) contact process. The "fuming" form of this strong diprotic acid is known as oleum. This compound is
reformed during the recharging of lead acid batteries, and the reaction of sulfur trioxide with water forms
this compound, leading to its presence in the atmosphere of Venus and acid rain. For 10 points, name this
acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid (accept H2SO4 before read; accept oil of vitriol)
In one process which produces this compound, nitrogen oxides are removed from the liquid phase to the
gas phase in the Glover tower, which is connected by the namesake units to the Gay-Lussac tower. In
another process which produces this compound, a container of silica with a vanadium (V) oxide catalyst
produces its namesake element's trioxide, which is converted to oleum. Those processes for producing this
compound are the lead chamber process and the contact process. For 10 points, name this strong acid, the
only one to be diprotic, with a chemical formula of H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or H2SO4 before it is read]
Porous silica-based pellets impregnated with vanadium pentoxide are used to produce an
intermediate in the synthesis of this compound by the contact process, and oleum is used to produce
this compound in the lead chamber process. When this compound is fluorinated it becomes the
strongest known Bronsted superacid, and a superacid is typically defined as an acid that is stronger than
this acid. For 10 points, name this diprotic, corrosive acid created from the reaction of water and sulfur
trioxide, with chemical formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or oil of vitriol; or hydrogen sulfate]
This compound acts as a catalyst in aromatic nitration, and it is typically used along with a
mercury(II) compound in the hydration of alkynes. This compound is mixed with chromium trioxide
and water in the Jones reagent. One industrial process for the production of this compound works by
oxidizing a certain element into its trioxide, then converting it into oleum, which is a (*) "fuming"
form of this compound. That process uses a vanadium pentoxide catalyst, replaced the earlier lead chamber
process, and is known as the contact process. This substance has a pKa of around negative 13. Once known
as oil of vitriol and found in battery acid, for 10 points, name this strong diprotic acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or H2SO4 before mention, or oil of vitriol before mention]
This substance is added to chromium trioxide in order to form Jones' reagent. An alkyne can be converted
to a ketone using a mercury-containing catalyst in a solution of water and this substance. The fuming type of
this molecule is created when a certain trioxide is dissolved in it. In addition to forming oleum, this
substance can be created using the lead chamber process. However, a process that supplanted it involves a
vanadium oxide catalyst; that method is known as the contact process. For 10 points, name this strong acid
with chemical formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid
In aromatic nitration, this compound deprotonates nitric acid in a classic electrophilic aromatic
substitution reaction. This chemical is mass-produced with a process that uses a vanadium oxide
catalyst, known as the contact process, which replaced the lead-chamber process. Oleum is called the
[*] "fuming" type of this compound, and it is also known as "oil of vitriol." This compound is the acid in
car batteries and it can be formed by adding sulfur trioxide to water, which occurs in the formation of acid
rain. For 10 points, name this polyprotic strong acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept "oil of vitriol" before mentioned; accept "H2SO4" before mentioned]
Older plants use this compound to process ilmenite to produce titanium dioxide. This compound can
cause precipitations when used to regenerate SAC resins in ion exchange units for water processing.
This compound is used in a three-step process in which it is reacted with iodide to make hydrogen gas
from water. This compound is industrially synthesized with a cesium catalyst in the (*) "double
absorption" modification of process most commonly used to produce it. This compound and phosphate
rocks are used in a "wet process" to create phosphoric acid. In one process, an oleum intermediate is used to
synthesize it. That process also includes a step catalyzed by vanadium oxide and is called the contact
process. For 10 points, name this strong diprotic acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 before mention; accept oil of vitriol]
When combined with chromic acid, this compound forms a substance that oxidizes secondary alcohols to
ketones and primary alcohols to carboxylic acids, known as a Jones reagent. This compound is a catalyst for
the nitration of benzene and is reacted with raw phosphate materials in the "wet method" of forming
phosphoric acid. Capable of dehydrating sucrose, it needs to be constantly stirred during dilution due to its
very exothermic reactivity with water. The most common way of producing it has oleum as an intermediary
and uses a vanadium oxide catalyst in a process patented by Peregrine Phillips, the contact process. FTP,
name this substance also known as oil of vitriol, a diprotic strong acid found in car batteries and acid rain
that has molecular formula "H-2 S-O-4."
ANSWER: Sulfuric acid (accept H2SO4 or oil of vitriol before they are read)
The first step of the Leblanc process uses sodium chloride and this substance, a bath of which is used to
make rayon filaments. A device known as a Glover tower is used in the lead chamber process to produce
this compound, which can also be made in the contact process. Once known as oil of vitriol, it can be
described as "fuming" and serve as the electrolyte in lead-acid storage batteries. For 10 points, name this
very strong acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 before it is read; prompt on oil of vitriol]
This substance reacts with sodium chloride in the Mannheim process. This substance is created
industrially through a process that employs vanadium (vuh-NAY-dee-um) oxide as a catalyst, the contact
process. A certain trioxide combined with this compound is called oleum (OH-lee-um), and this
compound's two hydrogen atoms per ionizable molecule makes it diprotic. For 10 points, name this strong
acid found in car batteries with formula H-two S-O four.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid
Poly-alkyl-benzenes treated with this chemical result in the Jaconsen reaction. This chemical reacts with salt
to create sodium carbonate in the Leblanc process, and it is added to chromium trioxide dissolved in water
to form the Jones reagent. One process used to make this chemical was invented by John Roebuck and
makes use of the Glover and Gay-Lussac towers. In addition to the lead chamber process, this chemical is
produced using a vanadium pentoxide catalyst in the contact process. The fuming type of this acid contains
sulfur trioxide, and it was formerly known as oil of vitriol. FTP name this strong diprotic acid with formula
H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 or oil of vitriol before mentioned]
A mixture of this compound and hydrogen peroxide is used in the Piranha clean. This compound is
produced along with hydrogen iodide in the Bunsen reaction, part of a cycle used to produce
hydrogen gas. This compound is reacted with sodium chloride in the Mannheim process and is useful
in the production of fertilizer because it is added to apatite in the "wet method" of phosphoric acid
production. This compound can reversibly add a blocking group to benzene rings and protonates nitric acid
for electrophilic aromatic substitution. A vanadium-five oxide catalyst is used for the production of this
compound in the contact process. For 10 points, name this diprotic acid with formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or oil of vitriol; or H2SO4 until it is read]
Chromium trioxide is diluted with this compound and acetone in a reagent that reduces primary alcohols to
carboxylic acids; that compound is the Jones reagent. This compound is reacted with two equivalents of
sodium chloride in the initial step of the Leblanc process. Glover towers are used in the lead chamber
process, which produces this compound. A vanadium oxide catalyst is used to produce this compound in the
contact process, and this compound is also known as "oil of vitriol." This compound, which is found in car
batteries, can be formed by reacting sulfur trioxide with water. Identify this diprotic strong acid with
formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [accept H2SO4 before mentioned]
The protonation of nitric acid by this compound creates greater-than-normal amounts of nitronium ions,
which are used to nitrate benzene in a textbook electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction. The dehydrating
property of this substance is often demonstrated by pouring it over sucrose. The production of this
compound was revolutionized by the use of lead-lined chambers. It is now produced using a vanadium(2)
oxide catalyst in the contact process. For 10 points, name this compound with chemical formula H2SO4, a
strong acid found in car batteries.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or H2SO4 before mentioned; do not accept "sulfurous acid"]
The "fuming" form of this compound consists of it mixed with its anhydride, and is also called oleum.
This compound is mixed with lead and lead (IV) oxide in a common type of rechargeable battery.
Elemental carbon is formed when this compound reacts with sucrose. A vanadium oxide catalyst is used to
produce this compound in the contact process. Superacids are defined to be stronger than a 100%
concentrate of this compound, the only common strong diprotic acid. For 10 points, name this compound
once known as oil of vitriol, with chemical formula H2SO4.
ANSWER: sulfuric acid [or H2SO4 before mentioned]
They usually have a Bulk Richardson Number of less than 45 and most travel to the right of the mean wind
flow in the northern hemisphere. They are associated with strongly curved or looping long hodographs, and
a key radar signature is a weak echo region in a low level hook. Vertical tilting results from updrafts
overtaking vertical wind shear, and as wind speeds increase, conservation of angular momentum causes a
decrease in circulation and the formation of wall clouds. Usually containing an associated mesocyclone,
identify, for 10 points, these intense storms with a steady rotating updraft that can give rise to hail and
tornadoes.
ANSWER: Supercell
This kind of oxygen therapy, when applied within six hours of thrombosis, has been shown to substantially
reduce the size of infarcts and increase the proportion of patients with no measurable infarct two weeks after
incident. Decompression sickness results from one of these developing in diver's tissues at higher
pressures, and hand warmers work by disturbing one, releasing a large heat of solution. Increasing the
temperature or the pressure are two ways to generate, FTP, these solutions, which rapidly discharge solute
when condensation nuclei are added.
ANSWER: supersaturated solutions [accept supersaturation, other wordforms]
These substances comprise the bottom layer of solar ponds, and they can exist because condensation cannot
take place without surface energy. An example of them is clouds, forming from atmospheric air that is this
type of substance. These substances are present in cloud chambers, and can be disturbed by the introduction
of nucleation sites, such as by the addition of a "seed crystal". Name this phenomenon, normally created by
heating, in which a solvent dissolves more of a substance than it can hold in stable solution.
ANSWER: supersaturated solutions [accept supersaturation, etc.]
Both the diffusion chamber and the Wilson cloud chamber detect charged
particles through the use of a vapor that is cooled until it exists in this state.
Crystallization by homogeneous nucleation can occur when a seed crystal is placed
in a solution that displays this property. This state arises when the equilibrium
concentration of a solid or vapor is exceeded. For 10 points, name this unstable
state that can be produced through evaporation or by altering the temperature or
pressure of a saturated solution to allow for additional solute to be dissolved.
ANSWER: supersaturation [or supersaturated; prompt on saturation]
Jaeger's (YAY-gurs) method measures this quantity by measuring the pressure required to form
a small bubble. It is denoted by lowercase gamma and is most commonly expressed in dynes
("DINES") per centimeter. The contact angle is the arccosine of the negative of the ratio of this value
for a liquid-solid interface to this value for a liquid-gas interface. DPPC reduces this quantity in
alveoli (AL-vee-OH-lie); it, like many (*) detergents, is an example of a surfactant. For 10 points, name
this property of liquids that allows small insects to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
When a gradient in this causes mass transfer of fluids, that phenomenon is known as the Marangoni
effect, and this quantity is multiplied by volume to the two thirds in an equation which relates it to
temperature, the Eotvos rule. The fact that this acts as a proportionality constant between the work
done on a liquid-vapor interface and the change in the interfacial area is demonstrated by the Young-
Laplace equation, and this phenomenon causes cohesion of molecules, which can explain capillary action.
For 10 points, identify this phenomenon which is reduced by surfactants and which allows insects to walk
on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
The strength of this phenomenon can be measured using the Wilhelmy plate method. The dispersion
relation for water waves has two terms, one governed by gravity and one governed by this phenomenon.
The strength of this phenomenon is usually measured in dynes per centimeter, as it has dimensions of
energy over area. The strength of this phenomenon is lowered by surfactants, and it arises because liquid
molecules at an interface experience attractive hydrogen bonds only from one side. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon which allows water striders to walk on water, a cohesion observed in liquids on their interface
with air.
ANSWER: surface tension
The Szyszkowski equation describes how this property decreases in aqueous solutions of carboxylic acids,
alcohols, and esters, and Jurin's height is proportional to this value. One experimental method used to
measure this property involves measuring the force while slowly lifting a platinum ring and is named for du
Nouy. According to one rule, this quantity varies linearly with the temperature and inversely with volume to
the two thirds. The Young-Laplace equation describes pressure differences between two static fluids caused
by this property, which inorganic salts can increase. Sugars have little to no effect on this property, which at
constant temperature and pressure is equal to Gibbs free energy per area. Dynes per centimeter are the units
of, for 10 points, what property of liquids caused by cohesive forces, which can be lowered by surfactants,
and which allows some bugs to walk on water?
ANSWER: surface tension
DPPC notably reduces this quantity. In the lungs, Type II pneumocytes produce a substance which
reduces this quantity. Measured in dynes per centimeter, this quantity is reduced by surfactants, and
together with adhesion, this property is responsible for capillary action. For 10 points, name this property of
liquids which allows water striders to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
This quantity's relation between three phases of a substance yields its contact angle. This property, which
takes units of force per length and Gibbs free energy per unit area at constant temperature and pressure, can
be conceptualized as the minimization of potential energy across an area. Capillary action is a result of
adhesive forces and this cohesive property, which causes water to assume a concave meniscus in glass
tubes. For 10 points, name this property of fluids that allows water striders to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
This property is typically measured using the De Nouy (duh-NOY) ring method and it causes a pressure
difference as described in the Young-Laplace equation. It is caused since molecules exert small amounts of
force on each other and thus molecules on the perimeter will experience a net force pulling them inwards.
This property is typically measured in units of Newton per meter and is lowered by materials called
surfactants. For 10 points, name this property of a liquid best seen in the ability of certain insects to walk
on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
This property stays constant after the CMC, or critical micelle concentration, is reached, which comes
after a certain amount of surfactants have been added to a solution. Laplace's Law describes why this
property is responsible for the nearly spherical form taken on by bubbles and drops of water. This property
occurs due to certain molecules of a liquid not being surrounded by attractive charges, leading to stronger
cohesion for those molecules. For 10 points, name this property of liquids that is responsible for the ability
of water striders to move atop water.
ANSWER: surface tension
Marangoni convection results from the gradient of this quantity, and its thermal effect is named
after Gibbs and Thomson. The Laplace equation states that the product of pressure and the radius of a
film is proportional to this quantity. Molecules like DPPC and SDS are used to reduce this quantity,
which is symbolized by a lowercase gamma and represents the ratio of force to the length over which it
applies. For 10 points, name this result of cohesive forces, which allows small insects to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
The Marangoni effect describes mass transfer due to differences in this quantity and its deviation from its
planar value is represented by the Tolman delta. It can be described as Gibbs free energy per unit of surface
area and the Du Nouy Ring method and Eotvos rule are used to measure this quantity. It is related to the
vapor pressure in the Clausius-Clapeyron equation, and it is defined as the force along a line of unit length.
For 10 points, name this quantity lowered by the presence of surfactants, which makes falling drops of
water into spheres and causes capillary action.
ANSWER: Surface Tension
A gradient in this quantity results in a form of convection named for Marangoni. It is related to radius of
curvature by the Young-Laplace equation. Alveoli reduce this property by secreting surfactants. This
property is responsible for the condensation of dew into droplets, and it is also responsible for capillary
action. For 10 points, identify this attraction between the molecules on the surface of a liquid and other
nearby molecules, which allows some animals to seemingly walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
The equation that balances a pressure difference against this force times twice the mean curvature is
given by Young and Laplace. Mass transport due to differentials in this force is named for
Marangoni. Molecules with nonpolar and polar ends, which often may be used as (*) detergents or
emulsifiers, act to decrease it; they are called surfactants. This force, which causes capillary action, arises in
its namesake location because cohesive forces are exerted from only one direction, unlike in the bulk fluid.
For 10 points, name this force present at the surface of a liquid.
ANSWER: surface tension
The Gibbs adsorption isotherm relates how solutes affect this quantity, and it remains constant after the
critical micelle concentration is reached. Its dependence on temperature is explained by the Eotvos Rule,
and it can be measured with a Wilhelmy Plate or a Du Nouy ring in units of dynes per centimeter. Capillary
action occurs due to this phenomenon, it results in (*) meniscuses for most liquids, and detergents lower
the value of this quantity because they are surfactants. For ten points, name this property of liquids which
allows small bugs to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
The Weber number is inversely proportional to this quantity, while one must correct for deviations in this
quantity in circular matter using Tolman's delta. One method of measuring this quantity is the Wilhelmy
plate method, and this quantity is zero at the critical point according to the Eotvos rule. Mass transfer due to
this property is called the Marangoni effect, and one equation states that this is equal to the pressure
difference divided by the sum of the inverses of the radii of curvature; that equation is named for Young and
Laplace. Surfactants lower this value, which is responsible for tears of wine. FTP, name this property of
liquids that allows bugs to walk across a lake.
ANSWER: Surface Tension
The Wilhelmy plate method is a way of monitoring this property over time. The behavior of Benard cells is
associated with a gradient in this property, which leads to transfer of mass across an interface due to a
gradient in this, also called the Marangoni effect. Alveoli try to reduce this property along their membrane,
and it is the reason dew condenses into droplets rather than remains a puddle. Also responsible for capillary
action, for 10 points, identify this property which allows water striders to walk on water because the
strength of hydrogen bonds allow for slight depressions at near the interface with air and which is generally
reduced by surfactants.
ANSWER: surface tension
For aqueous solutions with a solute mole fraction less than 1%, the Szyskowski equation can be used to
compute this value. In the Gibbs isotherm, the value capital gamma-sub-i for each solute is equal to minus
one over RT times the partial derivative of this value with respect to the natural-log concentration of that
solute, keeping P and T constant. For two adjacent bubbles of unequal radii, the pressure difference
between the bubbles is equal to twice this value times the difference in reciprocal radii of the bubbles.
Under conditions of constant temperature and pressure, this value is given by the partial derivative of Gibbs
free energy with respect to area. This quantity varies inversely with volume to the two-thirds power in
Eotvos's rule. For 10 points, name this elastic tendency of liquids to contract in surface area.
ANSWER: surface tension
A gradient in this quantity causes inhomogeneous liquids to separate according to the Marangoni
effect. When caused by solvent-solute interactions, it is described by an equation named for Gibbs. It is
related to radius of curvature and pressure by the Laplace equation, and it can be empirically
determined by the drop weight method. This property is decreased by applying surfactants, and it is
characterized by stronger cohesive forces. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon which allows insects
to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
One method for measuring this property relies on Langmuir-Blodgett type films, and that method contrasts
with the de Nouy ring method which simply uses a platinum ring to measure it. One rule concerning this
states that this differential cause of convection in Benard cell formation is independent of temperature, that
being the Eotvos rule. Pressure differences due to this property can be modeled by the Young-Laplace
equation, and differences in this property between interfaces allows for the formation of tear drops of wine
in the Marangoni effect. For 10 points, name this property, the ability to resist deformation at fluid
interfaces, as exemplified by water striders' ability to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
Substances that lower this quantity are typically amphiphilic (am-fih-FILL-ick), meaning they contain
hydrophobic (high-droh-FOH-bick)and hydrophilic (high-droh-FILL-ick) domains and can form structures
like micelles (MY-cells). In a thin enough tube, this quantity results in a type of creeping action called the
capillary action. Surfactants lower this quantity which causes a type of curve called a meniscus. For 10
points, name this type of force at the surface of a liquid that allows water striders to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
Methods of measuring the magnitude of this effect often include the use of a platinum probe, such as a
DuNouy ring or Wilhelmy plate. This phenomenon is no longer changed once the critical micelle
concentration is reached. Those micelles are formed by substances that lower the strength of this effect,
which are called surfactants. This effect limits the height in a container of a meniscus caused by capillary
action. Bubbles form spheres according to this effect. For 10 points, name this cohesive attraction that
causes a film to be created at the top of liquids, which allows some insects to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
The Eotvos equation relates temperature and this property, and the Marangoni effect involves
gradients in it. LaPlace's law gives an inverse relationship between this value and the radius of
alveoli in the lung. Because bile lowers this quantity for (*) urine, it can be used to test for jaundice in
the Hays test, and this property causes liquid to rise through thin tubes in capillary action. This quantity,
which is measured in dynes per centimeter, is lowered by surfactants like detergents. For 10 points, name
this property of liquids caused by intermolecular attractive forces that allows some insects to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
For a crystal, this quantity is proportional to the enthalpy of sublimation divided by the square of the
distance between atomic centers. This quantity is plotted in polar coordinates as a function of theta in a
Wuff construction. At constant temperature and pressure, this quantity is equal to the derivative of Gibbs
free energy with respect to area. In order to increase pulmonary compliance, alveoli secrete a substance to
lower this quantity. The existence of this quantity creates a meniscus when a liquid is held in a tube. For 10
points, name this quantity that results from cohesive forces between liquid molecules, which allows certain
insects to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension [or surface energy]
The presence of this quantity gives rise to an angle described by Young's equation. Measured using the De
Nouy ring method and predicted by the Eotvos rule, differences in this quantity lead to mass transfer in the
Gibbs-Marangoni effect. "Tears of wine" and meniscuses are caused by this property, which is decreased by
surfactants. Arising from unbalanced intermolecular forces, it allows certain insects to walk on water. For
10 points, name this property of liquids that causes falling drops to be spherical, and leads to capillary
action.
ANSWER: surface tension [accept surface energy]
The Ohnesorge number divides the viscosity by the square root of the product of length, density, and this
quantity; the Weber number is proportional to one over it. The Lippman-Young equation states that the
change in contact angle of a drop on a substrate is also proportional to one over this quantity. Dipalmitoyl
phosphatidylcholine and sodium dodecyl sulfate both reduce this quantity, which is a result of cohesive
forces among molecules of liquid. Often denoted with a lowercase gamma and expressed in newtons per
meter, for 10 points, name this property of liquids which can be reduced by surfactants and allows small
insects to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
The product of molar volume and this quantity raised to the one-fourth power is the parachor. The curvature
correction for this quantity is the Tolman length. The motion induced by gradients in this quantity is the
Marangoni effect, and it decreases with increasing temperature according to the Eotvos rule. By reducing
this value for pulmonary fluids, surfactants can prevent collapse of the lungs. This phenomenon is caused by
cohesion, and it is responsible for the spherical shape of dew droplets. For 10 points, name this
phenomenon that allows some insects to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
The Eovtos rule states that this property decreases as temperature increases. The Young-Laplace
equation relates pressure to the total vertical force produced by this phenomenon as a function of the
radius of curvature. Emulsifying agents belong to a class of compounds that decrease this property,
surfactants, and within a capillary, a meniscus forms as a result of this phenomenon. For 10 points,
name this property of fluids, which arises from the attraction between molecules located on the liquid's
surface with each other and nearby molecules.
ANSWER: surface tension
This phenomenon is the cause of Plateau-Rayleigh instability and the Marangoni effect. The Bond number
indicates the relative strength in a system of gravity and forces due to this, while the Weber number relates
it to inertia. The Young-Laplace equation states that capillary pressure is directly proportional to the wetting
angle and this quantity, and it can be computed for an arbitrary pure liquid using the Eotvos rule. Measured
in units of ergs per centimeter squared, or newtons per meter, it is causes the formation of 'tears of wine'
and the spherical shape of water droplets. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon, the storage of energy at
the surface of a liquid.
ANSWER: surface tension
The Wilhelmy plate method can be used to measure this quantity, and another method involves a platinum
ring and is named for du Nouy. The Eotvos rule predicts the value of this quantity given density, molar
mass, and critical temperature. Type II pneumocytes are responsible for reducing this quantity in alveoli,
helping gas exchange. Detergents lower this quantity that is responsible for capillary action and the
formation of a meniscus. FTP, identify this quantity that results from the attractions between liquid
molecules and allows for water striders to walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
This quantity can be calculated using the Brock-Bird relation, while Sugden modified a different equation
for it by defining a quantity called the parachor, which is proportional to this quantity to the one-fourth
power. Another method of calculating it is named after Sanchez, while the decrease of this quantity is
governed by Traube's rule. It can be related to the contact angle in the Young-Lippmann equation, and the
Marangoni effect is caused due to gradients in this quantity, which can also be measured with a Wilhelmy
plate. Taking into account intermolecular forces for molecules with no upper neighbors and made lower by
surfactants, for 10 points, name this characteristic of a liquid that is responsible for capillary action.
ANSWER: surface tension
This phenomenon is represented by gamma in an equation relating curvature to the pressure
difference due to this phenomenon. That is the Young-Laplace equation, which explains how alveoli
work. This phenomenon is usually measured in dynes per centimeter. (*) Surfactants like soap decrease
it. Water can climb up thin tubes in part due to this property in a phenomenon known as capillary action.
Menisci are due to this phenomenon. For 10 points, name this property of liquids that results in greater
intermolecular attraction at an air-liquid interface and which allows insects to walk across water.
ANSWER: surface tension [or surface free energy; prompt on cohesion or cohesive forces]
Techniques to measure this quantity include the du Nouy method, which uses a platinum ring, and a
method that can be used to prepare Langmuir-Blodgett films named after Wilhelmy. This quantity's
variance with temperature is described by the Eotvos equation. The difference in pressure across the
interface of two static fluids is twice this quantity times the mean (*) curvature according to LaPlace's
law. It leads to mass transfer in the (*) Marangoni Effect and is lowered by micelle-forming substances
called surfactants. For 10 points, name this property measured in dynes per centimeter that causes capillary
action and the formation of a meniscus, and explains why some insects can walk on water.
ANSWER: surface tension
This property decreases as temperature increases according to the Eotvos rule, and a gradient in this causes
mass transfer in the Marangoni effect. Analyzed using the drop-weight technique, this property can be
decreased by the addition of surfactants. It is responsible for the formation of a meniscus in a capillary, and
it allows certain insects to walk on water. For 10 points, name this cohesive force by which liquids are held
together, responsible for the "beading" of liquids.
ANSWER: surface tension [prompt on tension]
One method of measuring this quantity was modified by both Ramay and Shields and Guggenheim and
Katayama, and contains a V to the 2/3 term and is used to relate this quantity to temperature. In addition to
the Eotvos's rule, the Tolman length measures the deviation from its planar value. The Marangoni effect is
where a difference in this quantity causes the transfer of mass, and Laplace's Law states the inverse
relationship between this value and alveolar radius. Often measured in dynes per centimeter, its effect is
lowered by surfactants, and it is responsible for "tears of wine" and the ability of water striders to walk on
water. FTP, name this tendency of a liquid to minimize its exposed area, causing capillary action.
ANSWER: surface tension
The HLB method gives values from zero to twenty for these substances that determines their
properties. An extensively studied class of these substances from the bacteria Pseudomonas are
rhamnolipids. These substances are modeled using the Gibbs adsorption isotherm, which has a knee
and becomes constant at the CMC. Two common types of these compounds are SLS and DPPC, the
latter of which is secreted by type II alveolar cells. When dispersed in a colloid, they aggregate to form
micelles. These substances are classified as non-ionic, anionic, cationic, and amphoteric based on the
polarity of their hydrophilic head group. For 10 points, identify these compounds that reduce the surface
tension at an interface.
ANSWER: surfactants [or detergents; or wetting agents; prompt on emulsifiers, foaming agents, dispersants, or lipids]
Menger and Zheng developed polyamide examples of these substances which they called "peptoads" and
betaine-ester types of these substances are remarkably stable in acidic environments. They are not diols, but
they come in a "geminal" form characterized by dimeric species of ester-containing cationic forms of these
substances. The temperature range in which the solubiility of these substances approaches the CMC is
named for Krafft, and sees the formation of structures in which one end the other away from the bulk phase.
In addition to forming micelles, these substances are amphiphilic and posses hydrophobic and hydrophilic
ends. For 10 points, emulsions, dispersants, and detergents are all examples of what class of substances that
reduce the surface tension of water in very low concentrations?
ANSWER: surfactants [prompt early on fluorosurfactants]
A common way to analyze these substances is Epton's two-phase titration method. For high temperatures
and pressures, their effects can be measured by a captive drop method. By including diffusion, Morris et al.
expanded on the a model for these substances using pulsating bubble systems; that computational model of
them is named for Otis. SP-A is the most common protein with this characteristic and is used in the immune
system, and DPPC is the active part of another biological type. These substances have a radically lessened
effect below the CMC. They are frequently made up of molecules with hydrophobic and hydrophilic
components, which adsorb at the liquid-liquid interfaces. For 10 points, what are these substances that lower
a solution's surface tension?
ANSWER: surfactants [or micelles]
The fatty substance Lecithin is typically used as one of these compounds in food. These compounds are
classified according to their tails and their counter ion. One of these compounds is used in polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis to denature proteins. Aggregates of these compounds dispersed in a liquid colloid are
known as micelles. Sodium doceyl sulfate or SDS is an example of these compounds. These compounds
are amphiphilic since they have hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions. Different types of these compounds
include detergents, emulsifiers and dispersants. For 10 points, name these compounds that reduce surface
tension.
ANSWER: surfactant [prompt on detergents before mentioned]
One of these substances is used in an analytical technique whose tris-glycine buffer system was
developed by Ulrich Laemmli, which can be followed by the addition of Coomassie dyes. These
substances, as wetting agents, encourage flocculation, and the aforementioned example of these
substances is used to denature proteins. Below the Krafft temperature, they form micelles, and cleaning
agents that deal better with grease and hard water than soap can employ these substances, one of which is
SDS. A major type of emulsifier, these substances possess hydrophobic tails and hydrophilic heads. For 10
points, name these substances that reduce the surface tension of liquids.
ANSWER: surfactants [or detergents; at no point are they ruled out]
Molecules can only be used effectively for this purpose when they are above their Krafft temperature,
and low concentrations of these form a layer named for Irving Langmuir and Katharine Blodgett.
These substances are often added to fluids flowing through pipes to prevent corrosion, and they are
added to windows and lenses to prevent them from fogging up. William Griffin and J. T. Davies
devised measurements of the hydrophilic-lipophilic balance of these substances, based on the fact
that molecules of these chemicals have soluble and insoluble ends. Name these chemicals, used in
soaps, which lower surface tension.
ANSWER: surfactants [or surface-active agents or surface-acting agents]
Using an aminoalcohol ligand and a nickel catalyst, Fu extend this reaction to secondary substrates,
and running this reaction in "ligand-free" conditions cuts down on salt formation. The use of dppf as
a ligand in this reaction allows primary alkyl groups to be transferred. For base-labile substrates,
powdered KF can be used to activate one reactant, and it can use the SPhos ligand to allow acid
chlorides as reactants. This reaction, which is used to synthesize (*) biphenyls and poly-olefines,
requires basic activation of one reactant, unlike the tin-catalyzed Stille reaction. It occurs using a
phosphine-ligand-modified palladium catalyst and consists of a sequential oxidative addition,
transmetallation, and reductive elimination. For 10 points, name this reaction that links a halide to a boronic
acid, a coupling reaction named for its Japanese discoverer.
ANSWER: Miyaura-Suzuki coupling
This reaction can be done closer to room temperature through the use of micromixers and microreactors, or
replacing one of its reagents with trifluroacetic anhydride. An alternative to this reaction is the Corey-Kim
oxidation, which uses N-chlorosuccinimide to activate one of its reactants. It consists of two steps, the
second of which requires an amine base to form an intermediate sulfur ylide. This reaction requires a
temperature below negative sixty degrees Celsius due to an unstable alkoxysulfonium intermediate, but its
advantage is that it doesn't use toxic reagents or overoxidize to form carboxylic acids. For 10 points, name
this reaction that uses DMSO to transform an alcohol to a ketone or aldehyde.
ANSWER: Swern oxidation [accept "Swern reaction"]
A factor symbolized sigma, representing this property, multiplies the characteristic rotational
temperature in the denominator of the molecular rotational partition function. The terms gerade and
ungerade describe this property of molecular orbitals. This property is conserved in orbitals in
pericyclic reactions according to the Woodward-Hoffmann rules. Point groups represent this
property of compounds. Though meso compounds have a form of this property, no (*) chiral
compounds do. Carbon tetrachloride is nonpolar, even though its bonds are polar, because this property of
the molecule causes its dipole moments to cancel. For 10 points, name this geometrical property possessed
by molecules which look the same when reflected across a point, line, or plane.
ANSWER: reflectional symmetry [or word forms; or specific types of symmetry; prompt on even or odd parity before "chiral" is read]
This mineral can be formed from the carbonation of serpentine. A common type of rock largely consisting
of this mineral is used for carvings and countertops. The main component of soapstone, this mineral is
formed in the process of steatization from olivine. This mineral is made up of hydrated magnesium silicate,
has perfect cleavage, and produces a white streak in the streak test. Widely used in baby powders and at the
barber shop, for 10 points, name this mineral with a Mohs' hardness of one.
ANSWER: talc
A slurry of this mineral has been shown to close off the parietal and visceral layers of the pleural
cavity, curing pleurodesis. In 2000, its link to asbestos was somewhat debunked by minimal
observations in Crayola crayons made partly of this mineral, and its largest quarry is found between
mica schist and dolomite rocks at the Apennine Trimouns. It forms with the byproduct (*) kyanite in
the blueschist metamorphism of chlorite with quartz, and it can also form from serpentine and carbon
dioxide. This mineral is the major ingredient of an acid-resistant rock used in countertops, steatite or
soapstone. FTP, identify this magnesium silicate hydroxide, the softest mineral on the Mohs scale.
ANSWER: talc
C-glycosides can be prepared by reacting this compound with glycal esters and general methods for using
this compound with esters was devised by Pine and Grubbs. A chemical named for Petasis can act as a mild
replacement for this compound. In its typical use, it must be activated by Lewis base, typically pyridine, to
form a Schrock carbene, which then reacts in a two plus two cycloaddition. As an alternative to the Wittig
reaction it eschews beta-elimination products, and compared to similar reagents it reacts at low temperature.
This chemical consists of two five membered aromatic rings bound to a square planar bridge consisting of a
chloride ion, aluminum ion with two alkyl groups attached, and a titanium ion. For 10 points, name this
organometallic compound used to methylenate carbonyls.
ANSWER: Tebbe's Reagent
Because of its dielectric properties, it is used as a material for printed circuit boards in microwave
applications. Its synthesis by emulsion polymerization requires a surfactant, usually PFOA. This polymer
has a coefficient of friction of less than 0.1, the lowest of any known solid, making it ideal as a lubricant.
When bound to fabric fibers, it can repel stains. It is sometimes referred to by an abbreviation of its IUPAC
name, PTFE, but it is most commonly known by a brand name owned by DuPont. Its inertness is caused by
fluorine atoms completely surrounding its carbon atoms. For 10 points, name this material used in non-stick
coatings on cookware.
ANSWER: Teflon or polytetrafluoroethylene (accept "PTFE" before mentioned)
This substance is produced via the synthesis of a chemical created by combining three main
ingredients of fluorspar, hydrofluoric acid, and chloroform and heating between 600 and 900 degrees
Celsius. This fluorocarbon was discovered accidentally by Roy Plunkett when an iron container
catalyzed the polymerization of perfluorethylene. Because of its low (*) reactivity, it is a common
coating when storing corrosive chemicals. A DuPont trademark, this chemical is used as a common coating
of many cooking utensils because of its remarkably low coefficient of friction. For 10 points, name this
chemical synonymous with a "non-stick" coating.
ANSWER: Teflon [accept Polytetrafluoroethylene or PTFE until "DuPont trademark," prompt afterwards]
A similar product of this compound known as PFA contains carbon-oxygen bonds and is used for molding
and extrusion processes. This compound gains its unique features through the high electronegativity of one
atom, lowering the effect of London dispersion forces, and the so called "cop killer bullets" are coated with
this material. This polymer of tetrafluoroethylene has a coefficient of friction less than zero point one,
making it the only known surface on which a gecko cannot stick to. For 10 points, name this product
commonly used as a non-stick surface for cooking ware.
ANSWER: Teflon [or PTFE; or polytetrafluoroethylene]
The equipartition theorem states that the energy of each particle of an ideal gas is equal to three-halves
times a constant times this quantity. The square root of three times this quantity times the ideal gas constant
divided by a gas's molar mass gives the gas's root-mean-square speed. Charles' law states that this
quantity is directly proportional to gas volume at constant pressure. On an absolute scale, this quantity is
directly proportional to the average kinetic energy of particles in a gas. For 10 points, name this quantity
measured on the Rankine, Celsius, and Fahrenheit scales.
ANSWER: temperature
This quantity is the conjugate variable of entropy. The energy radiated by a blackbody is proportional to
the fourth power of this quantity. Subtracting the product of this value with the change in entropy from the
change in enthalpy gives the Gibbs free energy. This measure roughly quantifies the average kinetic energy
of a gas. One mole of a gas occupies 22.4 liters at the standard value for this quantity and pressure. For 10
points, name this quantity whose "absolute" type is kelvins.
ANSWER: temperature [or T]
Two forms of this quantity make up the horizontal and the curved axes of a psychrometric chart. For an
ideal gas, the volume expansivity, symbolized beta, equals one over this quantity. The efficiency of a Carnot
cycle equals one minus the ratio of this intensive quantity for the two reservoirs, while RMS velocity of a
gas is directly proportional to the square root of this quantity. Entropy is zero for a crystal when this
quantity is also zero, according to the third law of thermodynamics. This quantity varies directly with
pressure and volume of an ideal gas. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in Kelvins or degrees
Celsius.
ANSWER: temperature [or T]
This quantity can be greatly reduced by firing lasers at substances whose atoms absorb photons then reemit
them at a higher energy.When other quantities are held constant, this quantity is the partial derivative of
internal energy with respect to entropy. The energy of an ideal gas is equal to 3/2 times this quantity times
the number of moles times R. This quantity can be well-defined thanks to the zeroth law of
thermodynamics. The Carnot Cycle requires two reservoirs with different values of this quantity. For an
ideal gas, this quantity equals PV divided by nR. For 10 points, identify this thermodynamic quantity often
measured in Kelvins or degrees Celsius.
ANSWER: temperature [prompt on T]
The Legendre transform of internal energy to yield Helmholtz free energy involves the product of entropy
and this quantity. Heat capacity, according to the Debye model, is proportional to the cube of this quantity,
and the average kinetic energy of an ideal gas is three-halves times Boltzmann's constant times this
quantity. If it has a high value when changes in enthalpy and entropy are both positive, this quantity drives
the spontaneity of a reaction. That is because change in Gibbs' free energy is equal to change in enthalpy
minus this times change in entropy. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in Kelvins.
ANSWER: temperature [accept T]
This quantity is directly proportional to the average kinetic energy of an ideal gas, and along with pressure,
it forms the axes of a phase diagram. The energy needed to increase this quantity in a substance is given by
a substance's heat capacity. Conversion between two scales for this quantity involves multiplying by nine
fifths, and a third scale for this quantity starts at absolute zero. For 10 points, name this quantity measured
in Kelvin, Celsius, and degrees Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: temperature
A negative value for this quantity is possible with population inversion, and it is inversely
proportional to thermodynamic beta. For a classical system, an energy of one-half k times this
quantity is allocated to each degree of freedom by the equipartition theorem, and this quantity is the
conjugate variable of entropy. It is proportional to (*) pressure at constant volume and to volume at
constant pressure by the ideal gas law, and heat capacity refers to the amount of thermal energy needed to
raise this quantity one unit for a given substance. For 10 points, name this physical quantity measured in
kelvin and Celsius.
ANSWER: absolute temperature [or kelvin temperature]
One form of this quantity is equal to h-bar squared divided by two times Boltzmann's constant times
the molecule's moment of inertia-that form simplifies the expression for the rotational partition
function. It's not the number of particles, but this quantity is a natural variable for both the Gibbs
and Helmholtz free energies. This quantity is located in the denominator of the integrand in the (*)
Clausius inequality. This quantity is the thermodynamic conjugate of entropy. Equipartition states the
kinetic energy of a monatomic ideal gas is 3/2 times Boltzmann's constant times this quantity. Gibbs free
energy is equal to enthalpy minus entropy times this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity found in the
denominator of the combined gas law, which is often measured in Kelvin.
ANSWER: temperature [accept "rotational temperature"]
In an adiabatic process, this value is inversely proportional to volume. Boltzmann's constant relates this
value to the average translational kinetic energy of a system. A substance is a gas at values of this higher
than the critical point. Rankine names a scale for this value for which no negative values could exist. A
scale using an increment of 180 between fixed values of this competed with a Swede's Centigrade scale.
FTP, name this measurement of heat, often found with a thermometer in scales named for Celsius or
Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: Temperature
This quantity is found on the lower right of the thermodynamic square, indicating its conjugacy to entropy.
The equipartition theorem relates this quantity to the energies in a system, and the exponent in the Arrhenius
equation contains Boltzmann's constant or the ideal gas constant multiplied by this quantity. Charles' law
states that the volume of a gas is proportional to this quantity, whose lower bound according to the third law
of thermodynamics is absolute zero. Equal for two bodies in thermodynamic equilibrium, For 10 points,
name this quantity measured in Kelvin.
ANSWER: Temperature
Boltzmann factor is the reciprocal of the product of Boltzmann's constant and this quantity. When this
quantity is held constant in a process, the work done is proportional to the logarithm of the ratio of the
volumes. Although it's not heat, the efficiency of a heat engine equals one minus the ratio of this quantity
for the reservoirs. In the expression for Gibbs free energy, entropy is multiplied by this quantity. Average
kinetic energy of a gas is proportional to this quantity, which can be measured on the Rankine scale. For 10
points, name this quantity also measured in Kelvins or degrees Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: temperature [or T]
The efficiency of the Carnot cycleis equal to one minus the values of this for the two reservoirs. The
change in entropy is equal to the change in heat divided by this. The calorie is defined in terms changing a
gram of water by one unit of this. In the standard form of the ideal gas law, the product of number of moles
and the ideal gas constant is multiplied times this on the right hand side. Converting between two important
measures of it involves adding or subtracting 273. For 10 points, name this property that is measured in
Kelvin and degrees Celsius.
ANSWER: temperature [prompt on T;]
This quantity can be expressed as the inverse of the change in entropy with respect to internal energy, and
some systems display a nonzero residual entropy when this quantity is equal to zero. The dependence of
rate constants on activation energy and this quantity is given by the Arrhenius equation, and for a gas, this
quantity is proportional to volume according to Charles' Law. A quantity which remains constant in an
isothermal process, For 10 points, name this quantity which is measured on the Kelvin, Celsius, and
Fahrenheit scales.
ANSWER: Temperature
This quantity is believed to have been very low shortly following the Great Oxygenation Event, since
atmospheric methane was mostly oxidized away. The Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation is an oscillation in
it. Radiative forcing is the mechanism by which solar activity affects this quantity, as it did during the
Maunder Minimum. The clathrate gun hypothesis suggests a mechanism that could cause a sudden increase
in it, as may have happened at the P-Tr boundary. The so-called hockey-stick graph demonstrates that this
quantity has sharply risen since the 1800s. For 10 points, name this quantity that has increased alongside
atmospheric CO2 levels via human activity, causing climate change.
ANSWER: the average temperature of the Earth [or obvious equivalents, like average global temperature; accept temperature anomaly; accept more specific answers like ocean temperature; prompt on partial answer]
They include a boll weevil sex-attractant and the decalin beta-cadinene. Classified as mono-, sesqui-, and
di- types according to the number of carbons ranging from 10 to 20, they are built from 2-methyl-1,3butadiene units. Including the insecticide chrysanthemic acid, the peppermint oil menthol, norbornane
camphor, and a Pacific yew tree derivative, taxol, which is used to treat cancer, they were first studied by
Otto Wallach, whose impact on production of perfumes and flavors was recognized by a 1910 Nobel prize.
Made up of isoprene units, FTP name these compounds present in plant oils.
ANSWER: terpenes
The Hateg formation was located within this entity, and is now a source of dinosaur fossil riches in
Romania. The Western portion of this entity is called the "Alpine" part, which has such disappeared
subportions as the Valais and Meliata segments. This entity was divided by the Elburz and Carpathian
orogenies, after which its northern part became known as the "Para" part. The "Paleo" version of this entity
was found north of the Cimmerian plate, which formed the final version of this entity when it moved
northward. This body opened up when the component of Pangaea began to move apart. For 10 points, name
this gigantic body of water that opened up between Laurasia and Gondwanaland, named for a Titaness and
daughter of Uranus.
ANSWER: Tethys Ocean [accept Tethys Sea]
Phosphorus has this molecular geometry in a phosphate anion. Every backbone atom of an alkane has
this geometry. The simplest chiral compounds are formed from an atom with this geometry. Molecules with
this geometry are usually drawn with a wedge and a dashed line, indicating bonds going into and out of the
page. This molecular geometry is formed when an s orbital hybridizes with three p orbitals and its bond
angle is 109.5 degrees. For 10 points, name this molecular geometry of methane.
ANSWER: tetrahedral [or tetrahedron]
Fragments of a molecule with this geometry are isolobal to a tricarbonyl cobalt three fragment. PES
supports the molecular orbital prediction that bonds in this geometry are formed by a1 and t2 orbitals.
Complexes with this geometry experience a crystal field splitting of four-ninths delta O. Snubification of
molecules with this geometry yields a molecule in a point group with 120 symmetry operations, while this
geometry itself names a point group with 24 symmetry operations. Although the molecules themselves are
pyramidal, amines are often approximated to have this geometry, with a lone pair replacing one substituent.
Compounds with this geometry have sp3 hybridization and VSEPR idealized bond angles of 109.5 degrees.
For 10 points, name this molecular geometry consisting of a central atom bonded to four substituents.
ANSWER: tetrahedral geometry [accept word forms]
Titanocene adopts this geometry in Tebbe's reagent. Complexes with this geometry are favored
in metals with low crystal-field splitting energy. Similar to octahedral, complexes of this geometry
have d-orbitals split into two levels, with the t sub two orbitals at higher energy than the e orbitals.
Intermediates of this geometry in organic chemistry occur commonly in addition-elimination
reactions before kicking one substituent to form a trigonal planar molecule. (*) S-p-3 hybridized
carbon has this geometry, which VSEPR theory predicts occurs with one central atom, no lone pairs, and
four substituents. For 10 points, name this molecular geometry which has a characteristic bond angle of
109.4 degrees, exhibited by methane.
ANSWER: tetrahedral
A molecule of this shape is used in the final step of the Kroll process, which removes that molecule's
chlorine atoms from titanium. This also is the shape of the most common fluoride of silicon. Also the shape
of thiazyl [thigh-AZ-il] trifluoride, its bond angles are approximately one hundred nine point five degrees
when there is symmetry. This shape exists when the steric number is four and there are no lone pairs. Give
this shape exemplified by methane, which has chemical formula CH4.
ANSWER: tetrahedral
The point group for this molecular geometry has a symmetry order of twenty-four and is called T
sub d. This geometry is present in every carbon atom of cyclohexane (SIKE-lo-HECKS-ain), but
none of the carbon atoms of benzene. The polyatomic ions sulfate and phosphate have this geometry.
All (*) alkanes have this geometry, and although it is not bent, molecules with this geometry have bond
angles of 109.5 degrees. For 10 points, identify this geometry with four attached atoms and no lone pairs,
which is the geometry of methane.
ANSWER: tetrahedral geometry
For an ideal gas, this quantity is equal to one over the temperature, and this quantity is
multiplied by the bulk modulus and divided by the product of heat capacity and density in the
definition of the Gruneisen parameter. This quantity is near zero for a single phase alloy of 36%
nickel and 64% iron, called Invar. This quantity is almost zero for a material used to make really
smooth mirrors, called fused quartz, and for borosilicate glass, which is why pyrex is used in
laboratory settings. Converting between volumetric and linear versions of this quantity usually
involves multiplying by 3, and those versions of this quantity are symbolized beta and alpha,
respectively. For 10 points, name this, which gives the change in length of a one-dimensional rod
in response to a change in temperature.
ANSWER: coefficient of thermal expansion [prompt on alpha; prompt on beta]
One version of this reaction, the Ames process, was used to purify uranium during the Manhattan Project,
while the nano- type frequently ends with the reduction of molybdenum-6-plus. A mixture of potassium
permanganate and glycerol often provides the activation energy for this reaction, which its discoverer, Hans
Goldschmidt, originally used to weld railroad tracks. This reaction is notoriously difficult to smother since
its metal oxide reactant yields a constant supply of oxygen, explaining why the U.S. Coast Guard has used
this reaction to fragment icebergs. Generating temperatures up to 2500 degrees Celsius, name this chemical
reaction that in its most common form, combines aluminum powder with rust to produce molten iron.
ANSWER: thermite reaction [or thermit reaction]
Wang et al. studied this reaction to deal with municipal solid waste incinerator fly ash The
centrifugal version of this process can result in the formation of a metal-ceramic composite pipe. This
reaction has can create complexes of the product and B4C, Mo2C, and SiC.This reaction commonly
uses the oxidation of glycerin as a heat source to power the reaction, which produces molten metal as a
result. Single displacement between solid aluminum and iron-3-oxide rust is the most common type of for
ten points, this extremely exothermic reaction named after Goldschmidt and commonly used in welding
metals and incendiary weapons.
ANSWER: thermite reaction (also accept Goldschmidt process or aluminothermic reaction)
U-shaped one of these devices was designed by James Six to record maximums and minimums over a
certain time period. A sealed cylinder of water with glass bulbs of differing densities makes up one of these
devices named for Galileo. Santorio Santorio is usually credited with the invention of the "clinical" one of
these things, which was placed a patient's tongue. The most common type of this device today uses
mercury, which was invented by Daniel Fahrenheit. For 10 points, identify this device used to measure
temperature.
ANSWER: thermometer [or thermoscope]
The Karman Line resides at the lower altitudes of this atmospheric layer. The International Space
Station's orbit keeps it in the upper part of this layer, and it contains a region studied by the HAARP
program, the [*] ionosphere. In this layer of the atmosphere, the concentration of gas particles is so low
that they cannot transfer significant heat, but temperatures can reach 2,500 degrees Celsius. Between the
mesosphere and the exosphere, for 10 points, name this largest layer of the Earth's atmosphere, with a name
coming from the Greek word for heat.
ANSWER: thermosphere [prompt "ionosphere" before mentioned; do not accept it afterwards]
The temperature of this region is calculated by using drag force to determine density and then using the
density to find temperature. The anacoustic zone lies in this region of the atmosphere, and the International
Space Station orbits in it. One part of this region interacts with the solar wind to produce auroras because it
is filled with charged particles. That section is called the ionosphere, and this region is located below the
exosphere and above the mesosphere. For 10 points, identify this largest region of the earth's atmosphere
named for its extremely high temperature.
ANSWER: Thermosphere
The nucleation phase in the creation of these materials is described by Walton-Rhodin theory, and another
stage in their formation is island growth. They can be created by sputter deposition. Their properties can be
examined by ellipsometry. These materials can be created out of cadmium telluride or amorphous silicon
for use in solar panels, and these materials can be used for anti-reflection coatings on camera lenses. One
optical effect seen in these materials is caused by one light ray undergoing a phase change at the top of the
medium while a ray reflected from the bottom does not. The interaction of the aforementioned rays of light
in these materials causes interference, which results in color patterns. For 10 points, name these layers of
material with little depth, such as the surface of a soap bubble.
ANSWER: thin films [prompt on monolayers]
Ellman's reagent can be used to measure the amount of this functional group in substances, while the
Saville reaction uses mercury to replace a nitrosyl from them. Reducing the product of treating a carbonyl
compound with Lawesson's reagent results in the creation in one of these functional groups, the free form of
which may be necessary for infection by the cytomegalovirus. This functional group, which can be alkylated
by bromobimane, can only be found on one amino acid, cysteine. Capable of being formed via heating a
halogenoalkane in a sodium hydrosulfide solution, these are, FTP, which functional group, previously
known as mercaptains, which is composed of a hydrogen atom bonded to a sulfur atom?
ANSWER: thiols [accept mercaptan before mention, prompt on "sulfhydryl"]
Bader in 1949 and Bowman in 2009 developed a reaction between this functional group and alkynes that, in
the latter case, is considered quite valuable in click chemistry. The concentration of this functional group
may be detected by the strength of the yellow color following addition of DTNB, or Ellman's reagent. Aryl
examples of these compounds are synthesized from aryl diazonium chlorides in the Leuckart reaction, and
others may be formed by treating a ketone with Lawesson's reagent. Coenzyme A is an example of these
compounds. These compounds are common skunk spray components, and one example is the side chain of
the amino acid cysteine. For 10 points, name this functional group, a sulfurous analogue of alcohols.
ANSWER: thiols [or mercaptans]
DTNB, or Ellman's reagent, produces a yellow color in a test for these compounds, which appear at 2500
inverse centimeters on an IR spectrum. They can be oxidized by iodine to form disulfides, and the only
amino acid that is also one of these compounds is cysteine. Because they form strong bonds with mercury
compounds, they were formerly known as mercaptans. These compounds give grapefruits, skunk spray, and
rotten eggs their distinctive smells. For 10 points, name these organic compounds containing sulfhydryl or SH groups, the sulfur analogues of alcohols.
ANSWER: thiols [prompt on "mercaptans" or "sulfhydryls" before they are mentioned]
In the Saville reaction, a nitrosyl bonded to one of these compounds is replaced, while a sodium
variety reacts with a zinc compound in the Herz reaction. A series where a compound with two of
this functional group is added to a carbonyl and treated with Raney (*) Nickel eliminates the carbonyl.
Cysteine is the only amino acid belonging to this class of compounds making it important in forming
tertiary structures like disulfide bridges. Traditionally referred to as mercaptans, for 10 points, identify this
class of molecules which give skunks and onions their foul smell and contain hydrogen-sulfur functional
groups.
ANSWER: thiol or sulfhydryl (accept mercaptans before mentioned)
A unit named for this scientist is equal to Dalton per charge number in homage of his invention of the
parabola spectrograph. That instrument determined the mass-to-charge ratio of ions and is considered the
first mass spectrometer. Together with F. W. Aston, he proved the existence of isotopes of neon, and in a
series of experiments, he showed that cathode rays were composed of particles he dubbed corpuscles. For
10 points name this English scientist who proposed the plum pudding model and discovered the electron.
ANSWER: Sir Joseph John "J.J." Thomson
Reactions of nitric oxide are often treated as if they were of this order. This is the highest power of
volume in the Redlich-Kwong equation of state. Apery's constant is the value of the Riemann zeta function
at this number. According to the Debye [duh-BYE] model, specific heat is proportional to this power of the
temperature. The asteroid denoted by this number is Juno. Algebraic equations of this order may be solved
using the Tartaglia-Cardano formula. Monocots have a multiple of this number of petals. Platyhelminthes is
the most primitive phylum to contain a mesoderm and, therefore, to possess this many germ layers. For 10
points, give this number that is also the number of nitrogen dioxide substituents on TNT.
ANSWER: three (accept word forms like third)
The smallest cyclic alkane has this number of carbon atoms. The kinetic energy of a gas is given by one
half this number times the absolute temperature times Boltzmann's constant. This is the van't Hoff factor
for calcium chloride, and it is also the bond order of nitrogen gas. Aluminum ions commonly have this
charge, which is also the number of oxygen atoms in a molecule of ozone. For 10 points, name this number
of hydrogen atoms in ammonia which is also the atomic number of lithium.
ANSWER: positive three
This number is the highest power of the compressibility factor in the Peng-Robinson equation of
state. This is the number of exposed methyl groups in caffeine. It is the number of ring atoms in an
epoxide, and in VSEPR (ves-per) theory, for a T-shaped trigonal bipyramidal molecule, it is the
number of (*) bonding electron pairs in the molecule. The Debye model states that specific heat is
proportional to this power of temperature. This is the negative charge on a borate ion and a phosphate ion.
For 10 points, identify this number which is the atomic number for lithium and the number of carbon atoms
in propane.
ANSWER: three
This is the number of isomers of cresol and the number of benzene rings fused together to form
anthracene. In astronomy, this is the number of alpha particles used in a process that produces
carbon, and it is also the number of oxygen atoms possessed by boric acid. This is also the number of
resonance structures possessed by the nitrate ion, the number of p electrons in an atom of nitrogen,
and the number of hydrogen atoms in a hydronium molecule. For 10 points, give this number, the number of
oxygen atoms in ozone, the number of hydrogen atoms in phosphoric acid and the atomic number of
lithium.
ANSWER: three
Xenon difluoride has a linear shape because this many lone pairs surround its central atom. This is
the coordination number of carbon in graphite, ethylene, and formaldehyde. Nitrate ions have this
many resonance structures, and there are this many p orbital electrons in phosphorus and nitrogen.
Two of the carbons in an (*) alkyne have a bond order of this number, and methyl groups contain this
number of hydrogen atoms. There are this many valence electrons in aluminum and boron, and this many
oxygen atoms in an ozone molecule. For ten points, give this atomic number of lithium and mass of the
hydrogen isotope tritium.
ANSWER: three
A derivative of acetic acid with this many fluorine atoms attached is used to separate peptides during
HPLC. The Simmons-Smith reaction is a method of producing a cycloalkane with this many carbon
molecules. The element with this atomic number is bonded to aluminum hydride in a strong reducing agent.
Glyceraldehyde is a carbohydrate with this many carbon atoms. This many equivalents of hydrogen gas is
used in the Haber process. In ferric compounds, iron has this oxidation number. Citric acid and phosphoric
acid have this many equivalence points, as they can dissociate this many times. For 10 points, name the
atomic number of lithium.
ANSWER: 3 [or +3; or 3+; do not accept "minus 3"]
In an octahedral compound, this many molecules of ethylene diamine can bind to the central cation.
Chromium ions with this oxidation state exhibit a green color. The reaction of nitric oxide and oxygen gas
is a common example of a reaction of this numbered order. Phosphoric acid has this many equivalence
points, while boron and aluminum have this oxidation number. Tritium has an atomic mass of this number,
and there are this many quarks in a proton and neutron. For 10 points, name this number, the atomic
number of lithium.
ANSWER: three [accept plus three or three plus; do not accept "three minus"]
In the Debye (DEH-buy) model, specific heat is proportional to temperature raised to this power. A
compound containing this many oxygen atoms is broken down via a radical mechanism by CFCs. Bent
molecules have one electron lone pair and this many atoms. This type of s p hybridization is exhibited by
methane. It is the number of valence electrons for aluminum and boron. This many hydrogens are bonded
with a phosphate ion to form phosphoric acid. For 10 points, identify this number of oxygen atoms in
ozone.
ANSWER: three
The MCS type of these entities results in the formation of a bow echo, and a downdraft created
during their mature stage weakens the updraft during their dissipating stage. Severe examples of
them include supercells, and a collection of them forms a (*) squall line. They occur more often in the
afternoon because surface warming causes instability in the air, and they occur in the presence of
cumulonimbus clouds. For 10 points, identify these loud storms which are accompanied by lightning.
ANSWER: thunderstorms [or electrical storms; or lightning storms before mentioned; prompt on just rainstorms or storms]
A technique for interrogating the intensity of these structures was developed by Leslie Lemon, and involves
the use of a vertical profile to identify echo overhangs and reflectivity holes, which can indicate the
existence of a weak echo region. The amount of energy available for the development of these structures is
measured by taking the integral of the area between the moist adiabat and the temperature curve on a skewT diagram, which is known as CAPE. An increase in wind speed with direction can induce rotation, creating
a mesocyclone. For 10 points, identify these structures associated with cumulonimbus clouds.
ANSWER: thunderstorms [or supercells; or mesocyclones until mentioned]
These events give rise to red sprites and blue jets. Overshooting tops may be found at the peak of
these entities. If several of these entities are lined up, it is known as a squall line. A particularly large
system of these events that produce fast, sustained winds are known as derechos. Those with a
rotating updraft are known as (*) supercells. Damage from these events often come from downbursts.
Hail is usually seen in these events, which occur with cumulonimbus clouds. For 10 points, name these
weather events which are often accompanied by lots of rain and lightning.
ANSWER: thunderstorms [or lightning storms; or thundershowers; prompt on storms]
The potential of these phenomena can be determined by the six Doodson numbers. These phemonena can
be modeled as a sheet flow using Laplace's equations for these occurrences, and Ballantine created a scale
to measure the exposure of organisms in areas impacted by these phenomena. Bores related with these
phenomena can travel against the direction of current, and reduced forms of these events are labeled neap.
For 10 points, name these natural phenomena caused by the gravitational forces of the sun and the moon on
the Earth's oceans.
ANSWER: Tides
A. T. Doodson derived a harmonic generating potential governing these phenomena. The lines that connect
points of constant phase in this phenomenon meet at the amphidromic point. In most locations, their
dominant constituent is denoted "M-2"; there, these events are semidiurnal. These events have resulted in a
day about one percent longer over the past seventy million years due to dissipation. These events in lakes
may often be masked by seiche (SAYSH). Their magnitude varies between states denoted "spring" and
"neap." For 10 points, name these daily oscillations in sea levels resulting from the gravity of the moon and
sun.
ANSWER: tides
These are quantified by Doodson Numbers, and these do not exist at amphidromic [am-fih-DROE-mik]
points. Depending on location, these can be diurnal [die-UR-nul], semi-diurnal, or mixed. When these are at
their largest, they are classified as spring, and the location where these are largest is the Bay of Fundy. The
spring type of this occurs twice a month, as does the low type, which is called neap. Name these ocean
phenomena in which the water level rises and falls during the course of a day.
ANSWER: tides
Hendershott developed the self-attraction and loading term used in models describing this
phenomenon. M2 and K1 are the two largest constituents of this. The Rossby number gives an idea of
how quickly flows associated with this phenomenon decay. Laplace names an equation that governs
this. Their strength is measured in reference to a (*) datum. This phenomena defines the littoral zone.
Depending on whether it happens once or twice a day, it is classified into semidiurnal and diurnal forms.
The gravitational interaction from the Sun and the Moon cause the forcing for this phenomenon. For 10
points, name this phenomenon that involves the rise and fall of sea levels and comes in high and low
varieties.
ANSWER: tides [accept grudgingly oceanic current or oceanic circulation; prompt on current; prompt on flows; prompt on water waves; prompt on partial answers; accept word forms and reasonable equivalents]
These phenomena rotate around amphidromic points. Laplace developed a set of partial differential
equations used to model these phenomena. The bore of these phenomena opposes the natural direction of
water flow. When these phenomena are classified as diurnal, locations experience one high and one low per
day. The Bay of Fundy is famous for having the greatest range for these phenomena. For 10 points, identify
these rises and falls in sea levels tied to the gravitational forces of the Sun and Moon.
ANSWER: tides
The tractive force causes these phenomena, which can create bores, in which water travels against
the current of a narrow river. This phenomenon can be classified at its bi-monthly maximum as
"spring" and at its minimum as (*) "neap," and the world's most drastic difference between spring and
neap is seen at the Bay of Fundy. The gravitational pull of the Moon helps cause, for 10 points, what rise
and fall of sea levels?
ANSWER: tides
The amplitude of these phenomena is zero at the amphidromic (AM-fi-DRO-mik) point. These
phenomena are analogous to the forces that dictate the Roche limit, the closest distance at which natural
satellites can orbit a body without disintegrating. They are strongest during syzygy (SIZZ-uh-jee), when the
"spring" ones occur. The weakest ones are called "neap" ones. Displacement due to these forces varies the
most in Canada's Bay of Fundy. For 10 points, name these changes in the sea level caused by gravitational
forces exerted by the sun and moon.
ANSWER: tides [accept tidal forces]
The Rance Power Station in France generates electrical power from these phenomena, and an
amphidromic point is a point where their magnitude is zero. In the South China Sea and the Gulf of
Mexico, these phenomena often occur half as frequently as in other regions. The Bay of (*) Fundy
exhibits some of the largest examples of these phenomena, up to 17 meters in height. When the sun and
moon are on opposite sides of the Earth, the stronger spring type of these phenomena occur, which are
contrasted with the weaker neap variety. For 10 points, name these daily fluctuations in the surface level of
the ocean.
ANSWER: tides
Internal friction generated by this phenomenon is thought to be the cause of Io's intense volcanic activity,
and this phenomenon does not exist at amphidromic (aam-fih-DROH-mik) points. Before it was dredged,
the River Seine had a noted mascaret (maas-kuh-RAY) or bore that was driven by these events, and slack
water is the time when these effects are not active. The largest range of one of these events, sixteen meters,
was measured in Canada's Bay of Fundy, and the phases of the Moon align with the maximum and
minimum of these events, known as spring and neap, respectively. Occurring twice each day along most of
the world's coastlines, name this periodic rise and fall in sea level due to gravitational effects of the Sun and
Moon.
ANSWER: tides [or tidal currents, etc.]
The Petasis reagent contains an atom of this element at the center, and it coordinates to the two
cyclopentadiene molecules in Tebbe's reagent. Another compound that contains this element and aluminum
operates via the Cosee-Arleman mechanism, and this metal can be extracted via the Kroll process from
rutile or ilmentite. In addition to its use in the Ziegler-Natta catalyst, this metal's tetrachloride is commonly
used in organic reactions as a Lewis acid. Its dioxide is commonly found in paint. FTP, name this metal
which is used in aerospace applications due to its durability, with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: Titanium or Ti
Like vanadium, this element's metallocene adopts a tetrahedral shape instead of a typical sandwich
structure, and also demonstrates antitumor activity. This element is used in the sublimation pumps of
ultra-high vacuum systems. Processes that produce this element generally treat it first with chlorine
gas and then react that compound with liquid magnesium or liquid sodium. (*) Hunter names a process
to produce this element whose metallocene is in the Petasis reagent. This element's source is usually rutile
or ilmenite, which is used to make its tetrachloride. It is chemically similar to zirconium and along with
aluminum, this metal is found in Tebbe's reagent. The Kroll process produces, for 10 points, what light yet
durable metal that is commonly used in aircrafts?
ANSWER: titanium
Performing "electro-deoxidation" on an oxide of this metal may be able to improve on the current method
of producing it and is called the Fray-Farthing-Chen Process. Along with a heavier element, extremely pure
varieties of this element can be produced in the crystal bar process. When this element is combined with
two oxygen molecules it yields a compound that produces the asterism in star sapphires, rutile. One method
for producing the metallic form of this element yields a "sponge" form of it and replaced the Hunter
Process; the creator of that method also devised a way to produce the chemically similar element,
Zirconium. This transition metal is extracted in the Kroll process. For 10 points, name this strong,
lightweight element with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: Titanium [or Ti before read]
According to a scholarly work published by Clemson University's Turfgrass Sciences department,
this element has been shown to inhibit the ability of copper to itself inhibit root growth. M class stars
over level 5 are characterized by a strong presence of Vanadium and this material's oxide, while this
element's dioxide is produced in a reaction that involves the precursor being aerated with ammonium
chloride by removing the iron oxides. Produced via the Hunter and (*) Kroll processes, it can be
extracted from ilemite and rutile and its primary uses are as lightweight alloys or in medical prosthetics due
to its low reactivity, and in golf clubs. FTP, identify this element with atomic number 22, named for its
durability and symbolized Ti.
ANSWER: Titanium (accept Ti before mentioned)
The isopropoxide of this element can be used along with DET to asymmetrically prepare epoxides from
allylic alcohols in a reaction named for Sharpless. A CH2 group and chlorine form a bridge between this
element and aluminum in one reagent, and this element's properties are similar to those of zirconium. The
commercial production of this element treats rutile with chlorine gas to produce its tetrachloride. That
tetrachloride can also be used to polymerize alkenes, where it is referred to as a Ziegler-Natta catalyst. This
transition metal is commercially produced in the Kroll process. For 10 points, name this element whose
alloys are commonly used in the production of aircraft, which has atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: Titanium [accept Ti before mentioned]
It's not silicon, but a halide of this element is used as the Lewis acid in the Mukaiyama aldol
condensation. One compound that contains this non-iron element was synthesized by Birmingham
and Wilkinson and contains a pair of cyclopentadienyl rings and a pair of halides; that metallocene is
found in a pair of reagents used for the methylenation of carbonyls. This element is found coupled to
aluminum in (*) Ziegler-Natta catalysts, and it is produced from its tetrachloride via liquid magnesium
reduction at 850C in the Kroll process; that process obtains it from rutile. This metal, which is chemically
similar to zirconium, has an oxide which is found in the star-shaped inclusions of star sapphires. For 10
points, name this metal commonly used in lightweight alloys, with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: titanium [accept Ti before mentioned]
This element is extracted by the Kroll process, and its dioxide exists as brookite and rutile. Its
tetrachloride is used in the Mukaiyama aldol reaction. It is used with sapphire in a red light laser. Along
with aluminum, this metal is found in Tebbe's reagent. Compounds of this element are used in the ZieglerNatta catalysts. It is used as a white pigment. For 10 points, name this element, atomic number 22 which us
often used in aerospace applications and has symbol Ti.
ANSWER: titanium [accept Ti before it is read]
Along with organo-aluminum compounds, this element is commonly used to catalyze alkene
polymerization via Ziegler-Natta catalysts. An oxide of barium and this element is notable for exhibiting
piezoelectricity. It is isolated from its oxide salt in the Kroll process, and that oxide is widely used as a
pigment due to its white color. It lies between scandium and vanadium on the periodic table and is the
second-lightest transition element. For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 22 and symbol
Ti.
ANSWER: titanium [accept Ti before it is read]
Asterisms in rubies and star sapphires are caused by inclusions of this element, and a compound
containing this metal is used in the original version of the Mukaiyama aldol condensation. This metal
isopropoxide derivative is used in the Sharpless epoxidation, and one method of extracting this metal
creates two equivalents of MgCl2 as a by-product, known as the Kroll process. This metal is usually
extracted from illmatitte or rutile, and its tetrachloride is used as a common Lewis acid, while its nitride is
used as a cover for drill bits. For 10 points, name this lightweight durable metal found in spacecraft, planes,
missles, and most modern technology, with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: Titanium
Its nitride form is used in some protective coatings, while the chloride of this element is functional as a
Ziegler-Natta catalyst for polyolefins production. Its strength and ability to osseointegrate make it effective
in medical implants, and its dioxide has found uses in white pigments, photocatalysts, and sunscreens. The
ninth most abundant element in the Earth's crust, it can be extracted from ilmenite and rutile using either the
Hunter process or the commercialized Kroll process. FTP, name this corrosion-resistant transition metal
that has a higher strength-to-weight ratio than aluminum, with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: titanium
As with the element below it on the periodic table, this element is isolated when its tetrachloride [teh-trahKLOR-ide] is combined with liquid magnesium or sodium in the Kroll process. The dioxide [die-OK-side]
of this element, a white pigment, is found in the minerals anatase [A-nah-tase], brookite, and rutile [ROOtil]. This element often is combined with aluminum and other metals to create lightweight temperatureresistant alloys for expensive engines and sports equipment. Name this transition metal following scandium
on the periodic table.
ANSWER: titanium or Ti
In the catalyst for an enantioselective Sharpless epoxidation, this element's isopropoxide forms a complex
with DET. This element's ability to osseointegrate has made it ubiquitous in meshes bone replacement
therapies such as replacement of skull following brain surgery. It can be extracted from the ilmenite and
rutile ores using either the Hunter process or a process where its tetrachloride is dropped on molten
magnesium, the commercialized Kroll process. The chloride of this element is included in a complex with
aluminum is useful in producing polyolefins in its role in Ziegler-Natta catalysts. For 10 points, name this
corrosion-resistant transition metal with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: titanium
Though it is not chlorine, one compound with element is used in a reaction that couples ketone or aldehyde
groups into alkenes, the McMurry reaction. One mineral containing it, rutile, is responsible for asterisms in
gems. Its namesake sponge is purified by leaching in the Kroll process, which replaced the Hunter process.
This element's nitride is notable for its hardness equivalent to sapphire and is used to coat drill bits, and its
dioxide is used as an intensely white pigment. For 10 points, name this transition metal frequently used in
aerospace technology because of its light yet durable nature, with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: titanium [accept Ti before mention]
The tetrachloride of this element is sprayed by airplanes for skywriting, and its first use in living organisms
was the construction of bone chambers for viewing blood flow in rabbits. The asterisms sometimes found in
rubies and sapphires are inclusions of its main ore, rutile (ROO-tile). This metal is refined using magnesium
in the Kroll process, and it is used to protect pilots in what is nicknamed a "bathtub" in some fighter jets.
This element's oxide forms a brilliant white pigment, and this element together with cobalt chromium and
stainless steel is used in replacement hips. Name this silver metallic element with atomic number 22.
ANSWER: titanium
This metal is found naturally in minerals like rutile and ilmenite, and compounds containing this
metal combine with organoaluminum compounds to form polymerizing catalysts named after Giulio
Natta and Karl Ziegler. This element was first produced industrially using the Hunter process, but is
now formed after being reduced by magnesium in the (*) Kroll process. This metal's nitride is
commonly used to coat drill bits, and its dioxide is used as a white pigment. For ten points, name this silvercolored transition metal with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: titanium (accept Ti before read)
This element's dioxide exhibits superhydrophilicity, and it has one of the highest refractive indexes.
Compounds of this metal are used in the McMurry coupling, and along with aluminum it is found in Tebbe's
reagent. Like magnesium, it can burn in pure nitrogen. It is found in the mineral rutile. The tetrachloride of
this metal is important in its purification and in some versions of an alkene polymerization named for
Ziegler and Natta. This transition metal is highly corrosion resistant and many of its properties are similar to
Hafnium and Zirconium. For 10 points, name this metal whose alloys are often used in aircraft, symbolized
Ti.
ANSWER: titanium [prompt on Ti]
This metal's ores include brookite, anatase and rutile, as well as iron compounds like pseudobrookite and
ilmenite. This element's tetrachloride, besides bonding with an aluminum compound in Ziegler-Natta
catalysts, is reduced with magnesium to separate pure metal from those ores in the Kroll process. The
dioxide of this element is a common white dye, while this element's alloy with vanadium is a useful
building material. FTP, name this durable and lightweight metallic element found in airplane wings, with
atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.
ANSWER: Titanium (Accept Ti until mentioned)
This procedure is used with a thiosulfate solution following the addition of manganese (II), iodide,
and hydroxide, then a strong acid, in the Winkler test, and this procedure forms one step of the
Kjeldahl method. One form of this procedure applied to metal ions forms chelating complexes by
employing EDTA. This procedure was developed, along with the law of definite proportions, by
Jeremias Richter. The endpoint of this procedure is revealed by the inflection points of a graph of its
progress; substances like sulfuric acid have two such inflection points. For 10 points, name this laboratory
method for determining the concentration of an unknown solution of acid or base by adding a base or acid
of known concentration and recording the volume necessary for neutralization.
ANSWER: titration
The Andrew's type of this technique dissolves the substance of interest in hydrochloric acid. ELISA
uses a checkerboard type of this technique With this technique, bromine can be added to a sample of
hydrocarbons to determine the degree of unsaturation. This technique can be used with EDTA to
determine different metal ion concentrations. The Winkler test for oxygen concentration involves this
technique, which is also used in iodometry and iodine clock reactions. Phenolphthalein can be used in an
acid-base ones of these as an indicator as the endpoint is reached when the solution turns pink. For ten
points each, name this analytic technique to determine the concentration of a substance.
ANSWER: Titration
The complexometric (kom-PLEX-oh-MET-rick) type of this technique uses chelating (KEE-lay-ting)
compounds such as EDTA ("E-D-T-A"). Inflections in the graph of this technique occur at a point when the
amount of two solutions are equal; that point is the equivalence point. This technique enables one to find the
concentration of an acid or base by using it to neutralize a solution of known concentration. For 10 points,
name this technique that uses a buret (byur-ET) to slowly add a solution of known concentration to a
solution of unknown concentration.
ANSWER: titration
Examples of argentometric types include the Mohr version, which creates silver chromate. Dyes attracted to
a charged precipitate are used in the Fajans version of this procedure, and the Kjeldahl determination uses
another type of this analysis. The acid dissociation constant can be found using the slope of the Gran plot of
this process, while it is done in nonaqueous solutions for very weak acids and bases because, due to the
leveling effect, they do not have a distinct potentiometric end point Also known as volumetric analysis, for
10 points, this is what chemical analytical method that, in the acid-base variety, finds the equivalence point
of a reaction by using an indicator, thus determining the concentration of a reagent?
ANSWER: Titration (accept Indicator before "process")
In coulometric forms of this technique, a constant current is applied and the desired quantities are
found by calculating the total charge transferred. Karl Fischer created a type of this technique used
to detect small quantities of water. The redox form of this process uses a potentiometer that measure
the electrode potential of the solution. A namesake (*) curve shows the pH of the solution in the acidbase type of this procedure. Alizarin Yellow and Methyl Orange may be used as indicators in this
procedure. For 10 points, name this chemical procedure that determines the concentration of an unknown
substance in a substance.
ANSWER: Titration
One type based on zeta potentials can determine the point of flocculation. Eriochrome black T may be used
along with EDTA, a chelating agent, to detect metal ions in the complexometric type of this process. The
inflection point of this method's namesake curve is the equivalence point, where neutralization occurs, and
where bromthymol blue, methyl orange, or phenolphthalein, the pH indicator, changes color. A method of
volumetric analysis, for 10 points, name this chemical technique used to find the concentration of a reagent,
performed using a burette.
ANSWER: (acid-base) titration [accept zeta potential or complexometric titration early]
This technique is used to determine the amount of dissolved oxygen in water via the Winkler Method. It
is used to find the isoelectric point of amino acids. In this technique, the analyte is a solution of unknown
concentration, to which a solution of known concentration is added via a burette. Typically, a
color-changing indicator is used to signal the end point of this technique. For 10 points, name this
technique that often involves adding an acid to a base or vice versa to determine the concentration of a
solution.
ANSWER: titration
One type of this process finds the point when the zeta potential is zero. The curve graphing the results of
this process may have two inflection points when a diprotic compound is involved. The end of this process
is often indicated by a color-changing indicator such as phenolphthalein (FEE-nulf-THAY-leen) and is
called the equivalence point. For 10 points, name this lab technique in which a reagent is added to an
analyte to determine the analyte's concentration.
ANSWER: titration [or volumetric analysis]
One variation of this process uses an anode consisting of an alcohol, sulfur dioxide, and diatomic
Iodine to determine trace amounts of water; that is known as the Karl Fischer variation. In the zeta
potential type of this process, the iso-electric point is achieved when the zeta potential is zero while in
the (*) complexometric form, distinctive colors are displayed when EDTA chelates metal ions. The graphs
of this process have at least one point of inflection. Methyl orange, bromothymol blue, and phenolphthalein
are all common indicators in, for ten points, which process,used to find concentrations of acids and bases?
ANSWER: titration
This process is used with thiosulfate [thie-uh-SUL-fate] in the last step of the Winkler test to measure
oxygen in water. A variation of this process used to test for the presence of water was invented by Karl
Fischer. Graphs representing this process usually have a point of inflection called the equivalence point.
Those graphs usually show volume on the x-axis and pH [p h] on the y-axis. Name this process of adding a
reactant to determine the concentration of a solution, often using an indicator.
ANSWER: titration
The Karl Fischer version of this technique is used to determine water content. Potentiometry is often used
to discern when to stop this process. This technique can determine the isoelectric point for amino acids, and
the end point often occurs when an indicator changes color. When all of the analyte has reacted, this
technique yields the equivalence point. For 10 points, name this technique in which a buret is used to
determine the amount of analyte in a solution using a known quantity of reagent.
ANSWER: titration
The Winkler test makes use of this procedure, one variant of which is commonly preceded by
standardization using potassium hydrogen phthalate. The result of that variant of this process is a
sigmoidal curve with an inflection point. One common reagent for this technique contains four rings
and is colorless in (*) acidic solutions. The solution's pKa equals its pH halfway to the equivalence point
in this procedure, which commonly uses phenolphthalein or another indicator in its acid-base variant, as
well as a burette. For ten points, name this quantitative method of measuring the concentration of an
unknown substance.
ANSWER: titration (accept acid-base titration, because every clue other than the Winkler test specifically deals with acids and bases)
In addition to this procedure's Fischer variety for finding trace amounts of water, another form of this
process can be used to find the iso-electric points of colloids and is known as the zeta potential type.
Finding the point of inflection of the curves for this method gives the equivalence point. This method
usually involves a burette and commonly performed ones involve phenolphthalein turning pink. FTP, name
this laboratory method in which a reagent and indicator are used to find the concentration of a reactant.
ANSWER: Titration
One form of it uses a reaction between iodine and sulfur dioxide to measure the presence of water, and is
named for Fischer. A conductometric version of performing it requires the temperature to be constant, while
the redox variety of it uses a potentiometer. This process is generally represented by a sigmoid curves,
whose midpoint usually gives the equivalence point. For 10 points, identify this method used to find the
concentration of an unknown sample, notably used with acids and bases.
ANSWER: titration
A form of this process used in biological laboratories to determine the concentration of a virus or bacterium
is known as ELISA, and EDTA is a complexometric form of this procedure for determining the
concentration of metal ions in solution. The Zeta potential type of this procedure is used to characterize
heterogeneous systems like colloids. A redox form of it can be used to analyze wines for sulfur dioxide,
using iodine as an oxidizing agent and starch as an indicator to signal the endpoint. Name this laboratory
technique often performed with an acid and a base, which uses a buret to find the concentration of a reactant
by slowly adding it to a solution of known concentration.
ANSWER: titration [accept word forms]
In Kjeldahl's method, the back variety of this method is used to determine the ammonia content.
Argentometry uses this process to calculate the chloride ion concentration present in a sample with silver (I)
ions. The Gran method can be used to calculate the acid dissociation constant based on this technique. The
namesake curve of this technique can be used to determine the equivalence point. For 10 points, name this
type of volumetric analysis in chemistry that uses a burette and indicators to find the amount of an unknown
substance.
ANSWER: titration
This process is performed to determine a solution's ammonia content as part of the Kjeldahl Method. An
acid known as EDTA is commonly used in its complexometric type, and this process' acid-base type makes
use of a burette until reaching the equivalence point. Bromothymol blue, methyl orange, and
phenolphthalein are chemicals commonly used in this process as indicators. For 10 points, name this
common lab technique used to determine the concentration of a solution.
ANSWER: titration or titrimetry
S. P. L. Sorensen developed a type of this technique for amino acid analysis that employs formaldehyde and
potassium hydroxide. The presence of some metal ions in solution may be determined by performing this
technique with EDTA. This technique leads to a graph whose inflection points represent the technique's
possible endpoints. For 10 points, name this method of quantitative analysis wherein the chemist reacts a
known volume at known concentration of one substance with a known volume of unknown concentration of
the other, most often employing a pH indicator to determine when the acid and base have neutralized.
ANSWER: titration
This technique can be used to measure the average molecular weight of fatty acid chains by finding its
saponification value. The graph illustrating this process has its steepest slope at the equivalence point,
which shows where the amount of added substance is enough to neutralize the analyte. That point is often
found by a change in a pH indicator. It usually uses a flask with the analyte and a calibrated burette with
the standard solution. For 10 points, name this technique for determining a substance's concentration.
ANSWER: titration
The last step of the Kjeldahl method uses sodium carbonate in the "back" type of this process. An
item used in another type of this process forms a bond with calcium and magnesium and is known as
Eriochrome Black T. That type uses EDTA to locate metal ions and is the complexometric type of this
process. Complete when it has reached its (*) inflection point, a burette drops bits of a sample in this
technique in which phenolphthalein is an indicator used to determine the equivalence point. For 10 points,
name this process of volumetric analysis that determines the concentration of a known reactant.
ANSWER: Acid-base Titration [accept Titrimetry or volumetric analysis before mentioned]
A "checkerboard" form of this procedure is used before ELISA. An anode containing a base, an
alcohol, iodine, and sulfur dioxide is employed in a form of this procedure developed by Karl Fischer,
and the distinctive colors displayed when EDTA chelates metal ions contrast with those of organic
dyes in the (*) complexometric form. Plots corresponding to this procedure display at least one inflection
point. Requirements for mundane forms of this procedure include a buret, an indicator, and an acid or base
of known concentration. For 10 points, name this procedure by which an unknown concentration is
determined.
ANSWER: titration
This process is used to determine the amount of dissolved oxygen in water samples in the last step of the
Winkler test. This process can be used to find the point of flocculation of a colloid in the zeta potential type.
The reaction between iodine and sulfur dioxide is used in the Karl Fischer form of this process, another
form of which utilizes phenolphthalein and other indicators to find the equivalence point. For 10 points,
name this technique in which a burette is used to slowly add a known solution to determine the
concentration of an unknown one.
ANSWER: titration
A "checkerboard" variety of this procedure is undergone by reagents in the ELISA assay. Another type
of this process is named after Karl Fischer and used to determine the amount of water in a sample. One type
of this process utilizes bromthymol (BROM-thigh-mol) blue or phenolphthalein (FEEN-ulth-ALE-een)
depending on the strength of the acid and base involved. Those components are added until an equivalence
point is reached. For 10 points, identify this laboratory technique used to determine the concentration of a
solution by adding incremental amounts of another known solution.
ANSWER: titration
The Fischer method uses this technique to measure the amount of water in organic materials. The
Mohr and Volhard methods employ this technique to determine chlorine and silver concentrations.
Iodine can be used to determine starch content in one version, and bromothymol blue is among the
indicators used in another version. For 10 points, name this chemical analysis technique that often
employs a burette, and which is often used to determine acid and base concentrations.
ANSWER: titration
The Karl Fischer variety of this procedure is used to determine trace amounts of water in a sample,
and EDTA is often used in used when metal ions are involved. Potentiometric versions of this often
involve periodically measuring the voltage across an analyte solution. Results of this technique are
often plotted on a namesake (*) curve usually containing a distinct inflection point, and chemicals such as
phenolphthalein are often used to determine an equivalence point in acid-base ones. For 10 points, name
this lab procedure in which a concentration of an unknown solution can be found my adding a reagent with
known concentration drop-wise often through a buret.
ANSWER: titration
The Karl Fischer type is intended to detect small volumes of water, while organic amides often undergo this
process in a solution of glacial acetic acid. The zeta potential type of this process is carried out on colloids,
while complexometric ones may use chelating agents like EDTA. This process generates a curve with
multiple inflection points, called equivalence points, for polyprotic acids. For 10 points, name this process
by which the concentration of a known volume of a given acid or base may be found by neutralizing a stock
solution of acid or base.
ANSWER: titration [accept word forms]
One method of this uses an alcohol, imidazole, sulfur dioxide and iodine in a reaction that uses a current
supplied by platinum electrodes to drive it; that version is named for Karl Fischer and is used to detect
water. One way of obtaining the result of this approach often uses a thermistor to measure the "breakpoint"
when the rate of the change of temperature hits an inflection point; that method is the thermometric method.
A more common approach examines a namesake curve after a substance like phenolphthalein has been
used. After the equivalence point is reached, this method's endpoint is where the chosen measure has an
inflection point; this measure is commonly electric potential or pH. For 10 points, what is this chemical
technique that determines the concentration of an unknown substance in a sample.
ANSWER: titration
The form of isothermal calorimetry named for this process allows for the accurate determination of
enthalpy, entropy, stoichiometry, and binding constants, making it the gold standard for measuring
carbohydrate and enzyme interactions. One form of this process uses pyridine, sulfur dioxide, and
iodine to cause an iodine-to-iodide redox reaction to determine the moisture content. (*) Curves for
this process tend to be sigmoidal. Karl Fischer names one type of this process, which can involve adding
substances like methyl orange to figure out when the reagent and analyte are added in the correct proportion
to chemically cancel each other out at the equivalence point. For 10 points, name this process, which can be
used to determine the concentration of an unknown substance.
ANSWER: titration
One form of this technique gives "sap values" of fats, while an applied current replaces one of the
components of this technique in the coulometric type of it. In the most common form of this
procedure, a point where the reaction quotient is one is at the center of a buffer zone. That point, the
"half-equivalence point,", is an inflection point on this procedure's namesake (*) curve. This technique
often uses a burette, and indicators such as phenolphthalein can be used to indicate the end of this
procedure. For 10 points, identify this lab technique where a known concentration of a standard solution is
reacted with an analyte to determine its concentration, often used in acid-base chemistry.
ANSWER: titration [accept volumetric analysis, accept titrimetry]
When graphing the results of this method, multiple transition regions can be seen when a chemical
worked with is polyprotic. Those graphs of this method's curves can be used to approximate the equivalence
point. Color changing substances such as methyl red and phenolphthalein (FEE-noll-thail-leen) are often
used as indicators during this process. For 10 points, name this common chemistry lab experiment that uses
a substance with a known pH to find the unknown pH or concentration of a solution, and often makes use of
a buret (burr-ET).
ANSWER: acid-base titration
Amino acids are least soluble at the isoelectric point, a point on the curve associated with this lab
technique. Finding the end point for this lab technique requires substances like (*) phenolphthalein
and litmus, which are known as indicators. The curve associated with this technique has an inflection point
when the amount of a reagent added from a buret is the same as the amount of analyte in the sample; that
point is the equivalence point. For 10 points, name this technique that is used to determine the unknown
concentration of a known reactant.
ANSWER: titration [or titration curve]
EDTA detects metal ions in this procedure's complexometric (cahm-plex-oh-MEH-trick) form. For
polyprotic (pah-lee-PRO-tick) acids, its graph possesses many inflection points at which neutralization
occurs. This procedure uses an indicator such as phenolphthalein (fee-nol-THAY-lean), which turns pink in
color at the equivalence points. To perform this procedure, one commonly uses a burette to drip an acid
into a base or vice versa. For 10 points, name this laboratory technique for finding a solution's unknown
concentration.
ANSWER: titration (tie-TRAY-shun)
The Fischer type of this process is used to determine trace amounts of water in a sample, and the
complexometric variety is particularly useful in determining the different metal ions present in a
solution. Although enthalpy change can be used to locate the (*) equivalence point in this process, that
procedure is most often accomplished using indicators such as phenolphthalein. For ten points, identify this
common laboratory technique used to determine the unknown concentration of a known reagent, commonly
applied to acids and bases.
ANSWER: Titration
Electrophoretic light scattering can be used to determine the optimal rate of flocculation in the zeta
potential form of this process, and triethanolamine is applied to mask other substances prior to the
addition of EDTA in the complexometric version of it. Trace amounts of water are analyzed in the Karl
Fischer version of it, and the second derivative of its namesake curve can easily determine the
equivalence point of this process. For 10 points, name this method of determining unknown
concenentrations by slowly buretting a reagent into an indicator.
ANSWER: titration
One form of laboratory technique is performed partially by using sodium carbonate in the final step of
the Kjeldahl method, and EDTA is used as a chelating agent in its complexometric form. Bromothymol
blue and phenolphthalein are frequently used in this technique, which involves the determination of an
equivalence point. For 10 points, identify this laboratory technique in which an acid or base of known
concentration is added to a solution of unknown concentration.
ANSWER: titration [accept early buzz of acid-base titration]
One form of this procedure makes use of the chelating effect and uses a ligand like EDTA. Another
ligand is then employed that forms a complex once all of the EDTA is used up. This is known as the
complexometric form of this procedure. A graph that can be produced from this procedure has an
important point equal to the point of inflection. That graph can be drawn using the Henderson-
Hasselbach equation. Indicators like phenolphthalein are used as an indicator during this procedure to
determine the equivalence point. For 10 points, name this method of chemical analysis in which a known
amount of a chemical is reacted with a chemical of unknown concentration delivered via a buret.
ANSWER: titration
It names a form of calorimetry which is used to calculate biological binding affinities, and its zeta
potential variety attempts to induce flocculation in a colloid by reaching the isoelectric point. A
precipitation form is carried out with silver nitrate and sometimes referred to as Mohr's method, and
this process is usually stopped once the experimenter has reached the equivalence point. Often
employing indicators like phenolphthalein, for 10 points, name this procedure in which one uses burets
to find an unknown concentration through an acid-base neutralization reaction.
ANSWER: titration
The amount of water in a sample can be determined using a variant of this procedure named for Fischer.
A stopcock is typically used to control the speed of this procedure. This procedure ends when the
equivalence point is reached, which can be detected by the pH level, or through the use of an indicator such
as methyl red or phenolphthalein. For 10 points, identify this laboratory procedure which determines the
concentration of a chemical in a solution, often by adding a base to an acid until one is neutralized.
ANSWER: acid/base titration [or volumetric analysis; or titrimetry]
A thermistor forming one arm of a Wheatstone bridge is used in one variation of this technique. A
Karl Fischer one is intended to detect small volumes of water. Murexide may be used for
complexometric ones, often carried out with EDTA, and this technique is over at an inflection point,
many of which are possessed by polyprotic acids, called the (*) "equivalence point," at which point an
indicator ideally will change color. For 10 points, name this analytic technique in which a buret filled with
an acid or base of known concentration is added to a known volume of unknown concentration.
ANSWER: titration
Colloids can be analyzed with this technique's zeta potential variant, and disodium EDTA is
used with metal ions in the complexometric type. Iodine and starch may track the redox type of
this procedure, which commonly employs an indicator and buret and is used to determine the
pH of a solution. When equal volumes of two solutions have been combined, this process has
reached the "equivalence point." For 10 points, name this technique in which a solution of
known concentration is used to determine the concentration of an unknown solution.
ANSWER: titration
The potentiometric form of this process involves measuring the potential difference between two cells
and using the Nernst Equation. When this process is done using a polyprotic solution, there will be more
than one equivalence point. At the half equivalence point of this process for a buffer solution, the pH equals
the pKa, as shown by the Henderson-Hasselbalch Equation. For 10 points, name this process that often
makes use of indicators such as phenolphthalein (FEE-nul-THAY-leen) and a buret.
ANSWER: potentiometric titration [or acid-base titration]
In the Coulometric variety of this technique, a platinum anode generates iodine currents which are used
when one reaches the endpoint to determine the amount of water in the original solution. This was one type
of this classic technique invented by Karl Fischer in 1935. During acid/base ones, a burette is used to
administer the neutralizing agent thereby creating an equivalence point with polyprotic acids/bases having
multiple equivalence points. FTP, this is what lab technique used in analytical chemistry to determine the
unknown concentration of an acid/base.
ANSWER: titration
This process's complexometric type uses EDTA to detect metal ions. The "back" variety of this
process is the standard type done in reverse, and some substances, when undergoing this process,
produce a graph with multiple inflection points. [*] Polyprotic acids have more than one of those
"equivalence points," at which an indicator, such as phenolphthalein, will change color. Usually done with
an acid and a base, for 10 points, name this laboratory technique that utilizes a burette and is used to find
the concentration of a reactant by slowly adding it into a solution of known concentration.
ANSWER: titration
The Karl Fischer test is an example of this procedure used to determine water content in a sample. The
amount of surfactant needed to achieve stabilization of a colloid can be determined by the zeta potential
type of this process, and EDTA is commonly used to perform its namesake action on metal ions in solution
in the compleximetric type of this process. Methyl orange can be used in the chemical or acid-base type of
this technique, which employs that and other indicators to observe the equivalence point of a sample. For 10
points, name this laboratory technique employed to determine the concentration of an unknown solution by
slowly dripping in some solution of known concentration.
ANSWER: titration
In one isothermal version of this technique for protein ligand studies in a calorimeter, a binding
polynomial is used to analyze the data. Before fluorescence-activated cell sorting, a version of this
technique using serial dilution is performed using the antibody of interest. This technique produces a curve
with inflection points for each dissociation equilibrium, which is why polyprotic samples have multiple
bumps on said curve. Samples are placed in burets for this procedure, and an indicator like phenolphthalein
is used to determine when the equivalence point has been reached. For 10 points, name this chemical
procedure which is used to find the concentration of an acid or base in a sample.
ANSWER: titration
An acid's pKa can be computed by taking the volume of reagent added at the point of inflection of the curve
of this process, dividing by two, and finding the corresponding pH. That point of inflection in the curve
used in this process is this process's equivalence point. The endpoint of this process is where the indicator
used in this process changes colors. Name this process where an acid is reacted with increasing amounts of
a base to determine its concentration.
ANSWER: titration
The "checkerboard" version of this procedure is used to generate standard curves for an ELISA assay.
Potassium permanganate is used in a redox version of this procedure used to find the iron content of a
sample. When applied to a polyprotic sample, this procedure produces a curve with multiple inflection
points. For 10 points, name this procedure, that most often uses an acid-base reaction to determine the
amount of analyte in a solution by dripping in a standard solution.
ANSWER: titration
One variety of this process helps to determine the optimum dose to induce flocculation, and besides the zeta
potential and Fischer kinds of this process, eriochrome black T is often used with calcium or magnesium
ions in the complexometric version. An inflection point on this technique's namesake curve denotes the
equivalence point, and this process often requires indicators such as phenolphtalein. For 10 points, name
this technique, which uses a calibrated burette is added to an analyte and is used to determine unknown
concentrations of a reactant in solution.
ANSWER: Titration
One form of this lab technique induces coagulation or flocculation of colloids nearing the isoelectric point,
at which their zeta potential is approximately zero. Another variety, which may use the chelating agent
EDTA, is the complexometric type. Potentiometers determine the endpoint of this technique's "redox"
types, and their namesake graphs feature a point of inflection called the equivalence point. For 10 points,
name this lab technique often done using an indicator to determine an unknown pH, which uses a buret to
drip precise amounts of reactant into a solution until something drastic occurs.
ANSWER: titration
One type of this process is named for a value that gives the stability of a colloidal system, and another type
is used in the Winkler test. The results of this process can be analyzed with a Gran plot. The ability of the
reaction between iodine and sulfur dioxide is utilized in the Karl Fischer variety of this process. Another
variety uses EDTA and is known as the complexometric type of this process. An indicator, such as
phenolphthalein, is often used, in addition to a buret. For 10 points, name this process in which one solution
of known concentration is added in increments to determine the unknown concentration of another solution.
ANSWER: Titration
The lifecycles of these phenomena are driven by the movement of air by water called the "rear flank
downdraft." These phenomena occur in an accessory cloud that extends beneath a cumulonimbus known as
a wall cloud. They are given a rating from zero to five depending on their severity according to a scale
named for Pearson and Fujita. They are most prevalent in a region occupying the Great Plains and Midwest,
known as their namesake "alley." For 10 points, name these destructive, rotating columns of air that spring
from funnel clouds.
ANSWER: tornadoes
Variants of these natural phenomena are landspouts and waterspouts. One early warning sign for the
occurrence of these is the presence of hook echoes, which are produced by precipitation or debris wrapping
around a supercell. The strength of these natural phenomena is measured by the Fujita Scale. Their
namesake "Alley" cuts through the American Midwest. For 10 points, name these rotating columns of air.
ANSWER: tornado
In one scale used to measure these phenomena, "T" is equal to the Beaufort scale value divided by two and
subtracted by four, known as the TORRO scale. Although not a thunderstorm, rear flank downdrafts can
produce hook echoes which signify the development of these phenomena. These phenomena usually
develop from mesocyclones in supercells, but waterspouts are one form of these phenomena that form over
a body of water. The intensity of these phenomena can be measured by the Fujita scale. For 10 points, name
these weather phenomena that involve high winds and funnels, commonly affecting the Midwest.
ANSWER: Tornados [accept Twisters]
One scale for measuring the intensity of these phenomena sets T equal to B over two minus four, and is
called the TORRO scale. This object's formation can sometimes be seen on Doppler radar intensity images
as hook echoes. The damage that these entities cause is ranked on the Enhanced Fujita scale. One of them
that forms over water is called a waterspout, and they typically form from wall or funnel clouds. For 10
points, name these rotating columns of air that are ranked on a scale from EF1 to EF5.
ANSWER: tornadoes [or twister; do not accept "cyclone"]
One way to measure these phenomena subtracts 4 from B over 2 and is known as the TORRO scale.
Types of them include "wedge", "stovepipe", and "rope", and they often develop from supercells.
These phenomena can be detected on Doppler radar by the presence of a hook edge. Convergence of
warm air in an updraft, and cool air from the downdraft region of a (*) storm may contribute to the
formation of them, as do shear winds going in opposite directions. The most common scale used to rate
these phenomena is based primarily on the damage they inflict on human built structures and vegetation, the
Fujita scale. For 10 points, name these violent rotating cyclones, commonly seen in a namesake Midwest
"Alley".
ANSWER: tornadoes [accept twisters; prompt on "cyclones"]
There is some evidence that the cores of these phenomena are heated by dry adiabatic subsidence.
The TORRO scale is a newer classification of these phenomena. The triple point of a certain
structure is the intersection of warm inflow, cool outflow, and the rear flank downdraft and is
favorable for the genesis of these phenomena. A hook echo is a common indicator of these phenomena
and is characteristic of (*) supercells, which are cloud formations that often spawn these phenomena. They
are classified from one to five on the Fujita scale based on destruction caused and wind speeds. For 10
points, name these violent, fast-spinning air columns.
ANSWER: tornadoes (accept twistor; prompt on "mesocyclone" or "cyclone")
The formation of these structures usually begins with a warm RFD, though a cold, wet FFD might also
occur. Shortly before these entities form, a "hook echo" often appears on Doppler radar, which will
typically have a large quantity of debris at the tip. These entities typically are either of the wedge or
stovepipe varieties. The Great Natchez one of these entities appeared in Mississippi in 1840. When they
occur over water, they are called waterspouts. Their strength is now typically measured on the EF, or
Enhanced Fujita scale. For 10 points, identify these rapidly rotating columns of air that occur predominantly
in a namesake "Alley" of midwest states.
ANSWER: tornadoes [accept waterspouts before mentioned]
This phenomenon can be measured via the TORRO scale, and relative velocity images can identify
convergence boundaries where these form. Rear flank downdrafts are responsible for this feature's signature
hook echo on Doppler radar imagery. Most commonly found as satellite, rope, and wedge types, strong ones
often descend from wall clouds in mesocyclones, and may feature multiple vortices. The "enhanced"
version of the scale currently in use ranks these from zero to five. For 10 points, name this weather
phenomenon, a destructive rotating column of air.
ANSWER: tornadoes
They develop from supercells, but are narrow enough not to be affected by the Coriolis effect in
terms of their cyclonic direction. The strength of these phenomena is measured by the Fujita and TORRO
scales. The United States is the most common site of this phenomenon especially in a namesake alley in the
central Midwest. This phenomenon is sought after by self-proclaimed storm chasers and variations include
landspouts and waterspouts. Name these violent rotating columns of air that begin as funnel clouds.
ANSWER: Tornadoes (prompt Twisters)
Famous scientists who studied this phenomenon include Allen Pearson, who co-names the scale used to
measure it. This phenomenon is divided into "wedge" and "stovepipe" varieties. They leave a so-called
"hook echo" on radar and are associated with rear flank downdrafts in a supercell thunderstorm. Measured
on the Fujita scale from 1 to 5, this phenomenon is common in an area called this phenomenon's "alley",
which includes the Great Plains and Midwest. For 10 points, name this weather phenomenon that produces
high winds and a funnel cloud.
ANSWER: Tornado or Twister
These objects are associated with wall clouds and supercell thunderstorms. Only two percent of these are
classified as extreme, and the scale that measures them includes a rating that has never been measured.
These objects form near dry lines, and moisture is necessary for their formation. These storms often last less
than ten minutes, but can last over an hour. These storms can form over water but most frequently form over
land. They are measured on the Fujita scale. For 10 points, name these rotating columns of air.
ANSWER: Tornado [accept equivalents like twisters, cyclones, or landspout; do not accept "hurricane"]
The progenitors of these phenomena appear as velocity couplets. These entities are generally located at the
center of a hook-shaped echo on the southwest of their progenitors. These entities often form along with
rear flank downdrafts from supercells and usually spawn from mesocyclones. A few waterspouts may be sea
versions of this phenomenon, and their strength can be measured using the Fujita scale. For 10 points, name
these tightly rotating columns of air that frequently hit the Midwest.
ANSWER: Tornadoes [or twisters; prompt on "mesocyclone" before mentioned]
In 2012, the SDO satellite discovered and filmed enormous earth sized versions of these on the
surface of the sun. These are often visible because of the low pressure predicted by Bernoulli's
principle, which causes condensation of water vapor in the air. The TORRO scale extends one scale to
measure these, while the Fujita scale measures their strength by the damage done, with an F0 barely
damaging trees and an F5 ripping buildings from their foundations. Creating wind speeds of up to 300 miles
per hour, for ten points, name these giant rotating columns of air, often found in their namesake alley.
ANSWER: Tornadoes [accept twister or cyclone]
During one of these phenomena, low-level shear aligned by updrafts is penetrated by cold air from
the downdraft, creating "hook echo" patterns on Doppler radar. In fair weather, one of these
phenomena occurring over a body of water is called a (*) waterspout. The Enhanced Fujita scale rates
the damage of, for 10 points, what rotating columns of air formed when funnel clouds reach the ground?
ANSWER: tornadoes (prompt on funnel cloud before mentioned; prompt on waterspout, twister, or cyclone)
On a NFPA diagram, this property of a material is assigned a number in between one and four on
the blue component. Along with metabolism, this property of an NCE is studied before phase 1 of
development. For most compounds, an absolute form of this property is given by either the LD50 or
LC50, the latter of which has the same units as concentration. The therapeutic index is the ratio of
this quantity for a compound to its (*) benefits. The acute form of this property is measured relative to
skin or oral exposure. For a compound, this property can be given in terms of teratogenicity and
mutagenicity, the former of which is a measure how likely it is to cause a birth defect. For 10 points, name
this measure of how poisonous a particular substance is.
ANSWER: toxicity [accept word forms; before mention, accept lethality, mutagenicity, teratogenicity, lethal dose, toxic dose, killing dose, poisonous dose etc]
Many compounds of this group exhibit an effect where non-linear degenerate molecules undergo a
distortion that removes their original distortion. The Jahn-Teller effect can be seen in them, and in
one theory, the interaction between a magnetic field and paramagnetic compounds of this group can
determine if those compounds are high-spin or low-spin. That theory also explains the various colors
of compounds of this group. Crystal Field theory explains the spectrochemical series that lists the size
of energy differences between this group's orbitals when they are bound in a (*) coordination
complex. Carbon monoxide is a strong field ligand that can bind to them. For 10 points, name this group of
elements with an incomplete d-orbital, which includes elements like titanium and silver, and is located at the
center of the periodic table.
ANSWER: transition metals [accept transition element; be nice and accept coordination complexes before mention]
One of these elements is more stable with a half-filled lower-energy shell than a partially-filled
higher-energy shell, so it violates the Aufbau principle. Many of these elements are (*) paramagnetic,
most have multiple oxidation states, and they include the lanthanides and actinides. Groups 3 through 12
are, for 10 points, what f- and d-block elements, which are shown in the middle of the periodic table?
ANSWER: transition metals (accept transition elements; accept copper before "lanthanides"; prompt on metals)
The Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson model explains bonding between alkenes and this class
of substances. C-H activation uses an intermediate containing one of these materials,
and Alfred Werner won the 1893 Nobel Prize for the study of complexes of them
which follow an 18-electron rule. Lanthanide contraction explains small radii in
heavier examples of them, and they are used as(*) catalysts because substrates adsorb
onto them. The presence of these elements gives rise to colored salts because they have partially
occupied d orbitals. Occupying groups 3 through 12 on the periodic table, for ten points, name
this class of metals including cobalt, cadmium, and copper.
ANSWER: transition metals (prompt on "metals" or "d-block metals", do not prompt on or accept more specific classes of metals)
One group of these elements includes the catalyst for the Kumada coupling and the Heck reaction; that
element is also used along with finely divided carbon and hydrogen gas. One of these elements has ores
including ilmenite and rutile, and another is used in the reduction of nitrogen oxides and the production of
acetic acid in the Monsanto process. Compounds to the right of one group of these elements cannot form
double bonds to oxygen; that group contains osmium, ruthenium, and iron. For 10 points, name these
elements with partially filled d orbitals.
ANSWER: transition metals
Compounds of these elements are often paramagnetic, and electronic transitions in compounds of these
elements can be understood through Tanabe-Sugano diagrams. A complex ion centered around an ion of
these elements binds to a ligand in a coordination compound. The lanthanides and actinides are called
"inner" ones of these elements. These elements have partially or fully filled d orbitals. Scandium is the
lightest of these elements, and other examples include copper, silver, and gold. For 10 points, name these
elements located in groups three through twelve of the periodic table.
ANSWER: transition metals [or transition elements]
Compounds containing elements from this group are described by the crystal field theory and
typically follow the 18 electron rule. Two members of this group are common examples of violations
to the aufbau principles, placing one electron in their 4s orbital rather than completely filling their
highest energy orbital as expected. The third and fourth rows of this group come after the lanthanide
and actinide series respectively. On the periodic table, this group of elements includes everything from the
group 3 to group 12 elements. For 10 points, name this group of elements that have partially filled d
orbitals, which include scandium, titanium and iron.
ANSWER: transition metals (prompt on "metal")
Protein engineering uses phi value analysis to study the structure of these entities, which are thought
always to be aromatic for pericyclic reactions. These entities are predicted to be "early" or "late" by
the Hammond postulate, based on whether (*) reactants or products are higher in enthalpy. These entities
are located at first-order saddle points on the potential energy surface, as they are depicted as local maxima
on reaction coordinate diagrams. The energy of these entities is lowered by the use of catalysts, as these
entities are accessible once the activation energy is added to the reactants. For 10 points, name this entity in
which all bonds are activated.
ANSWER: transition states
Computational tools for finding these entities include the synchronous transit and nudged elastic band
methods. A theory named after them breaks down when explaining quantum tunneling below a crossover
temperature. This entity will resemble the species that it is closest to in energy, according to the Hammond
Postulate. This species is found at a local maximum enthalpy and is represented by a double dagger. One
theory of these entities gives rise to the Eyring equation, a common alternative to the Arrhenius equation.
An activated complex must become one of these entities before reactants can turn into products. For 10
points, name this hypothetical species that corresponds to the activation energy of a reaction and is the
point where the reaction is irreversible.
ANSWER: transition state [prompt on activated complex]
Their energies may be modeled using Marcus theory, and methods for their computation search the PES
using techniques like "nudged elastic band" or the "dimer method," trying to find saddle points on the
potential. They resemble the higher-enthalpy species according to the Hammond postulate. FTP, identify
these local maxima on reaction coordinate diagrams, whose energy is lowered by the action of catalysts, the
point in a chemical reaction where all reacting bonds are half-formed.
ANSWER: transition state
Two methods of determining these entities are the nudged elastic band and string methods. One theory of
them states that on the potential energy surface of a reaction, they occur at each saddle point. They are
referenced using double-dagger notation in the Eyring-Polanyi equation, which describes them. They most
closely resemble the reaction species to which they are closer in free energy according to the Hammond
postulate. Enzymes work by making these entities more stable. Name these excited states represented by the
peaks in a reaction coordinate, forming part of the activated complex.
ANSWER: transition states [accept activated complex until mentioned]
Ahmed Zewail observed these structures using lasers in a new field of study he dubbed
femtochemistry. Oseltamivir, or Tamiflu, is an example of an inhibitor that works by mimicking
this kind of structure. The Eyring equation was developed out of the theory of this name. This
structure has a trigonal bipyramidal geometry in the SN2 reaction. This structure's appearance
depends on the species closest to it in free energy, according to Hammond's postulate. Activated
complexes are similar to these structures, which are denoted by a double dagger symbol. This
structure corresponds to the highest potential energy along the reaction coordinate. For 10 points,
name these fleeting structures produced during chemical reactions.
ANSWER: transition states [accept activated complexes before mentioned]
These structures were supposed to exist in "quasi-equilibrium" by Evans, Polyani, and Eyring; the canonical
form of that theory cannot apply to hydroboration reactions since systems exhibit a sort of momentum with
respect to the reaction coordinate. These entities may be found by searching for maxima on a potential
energy surface describing a reaction. The Hammond postulate predicts that these species better resemble
whichever reaction endpoint is higher in enthalpy. Catalysts work by reducing the energy of these entities.
For 10 points, name these theoretical entities with half-formed and half-broken bonds, which lie between
two stable intermediates in a chemical reaction.
ANSWER: transition state
Since they are impossible to isolate, they are very difficult to study; femtochemical IR spectroscopy,
however, can provide a useful approximation of their structure. These are identified by the coordinates of
the saddle points of the potential energy surface and hypothesized in arrow-pushing reaction mechanism
diagrams. Although they are absent in phase transitions, the instability and high energy of these
configurations gives plots of potential energy versus reaction coordinates their characteristic hill-shaped
appearance. E to the power of the opposite of the energy of these minus the energy of the products divided
by the universal gas constant times the absolute temperature gives the rate constant, and that energy is
known as the Arrhenius or activation energy. Also known as activated complexes, FTP name this highenergy molecular configuration found between reactants and products-and between those and chemical
intermediates.
ANSWER: transition states (accept activated complexes before named)
The synchronous transit and nudged elastic band methods are used to find these entities on a given PES, and
analogues to these general chemical constructs include the neuraminidase inhibitor oseltamivir. An
experiment by Polanyi which mapped the potential surface between a hydrogen radical and a hydrogen
molecule was important in developing the theory concerning these states, which are represented on the dot
of the diagonal of a More O'Ferrall Jencks plot. The difference in the free energy of these states is the
subject of the Curtin-Hammett principle. A statement sometimes named for Leffler claims that the structure
of this entity resembles the species nearest to it in energy. For 10 points, name these chemical intermediates,
the energy at which can be found using the Arrhenius equation, sometimes known as activated complexes.
ANSWER: transition states
A point between two of these is named after Wheland. Edward Thornton and Rudolf Marcus have
expanded the original version of a hypothesis about the structure of one of these entities, the
Hammond Postulate. In biochemistry they are roughly equivalent to the activated complexes. They
occur at the highest point along the reaction coordinate, and the energy required to form them is the
activation energy. For 10 points, name this highest-energy intermediate of a reaction.
ANSWER: transition state [prompt on "activated complex" before mentioned; prompt on "Hammon Postulate" before mentioned]
The Cascadia margin is an example of a filled one of these features. These features are responsible for
the slab-pull force. There are two main classes of these features: those associated with island arcs and those
adjacent to continents. These features are the result of basaltic crust being subducted at its contact with
granitic crust. For 10 points, identify these deep, elongated depressions that stretch below the abyssal plain,
making them the deepest part of the ocean, as at the Marianas one.
ANSWER: oceanic trenches [prompt on subduction zones; prompt on convergent plate boundaries]
Chemicals with this molecular geometry can undergo nitrogen inversion and include phosgene and
formaldehyde. This shape exists in molecules in which carbon has a double bond and single bonds, and in
most molecules with sp2 ["S P two"] hybridization. It is similar to bent geometry but includes no lone pairs.
This is the shape of ions such as nitrate in addition to the molecules boron hydride and sulfur trioxide.
Name this shape associated with molecules that have more than two atoms around the center and that are
positioned in two dimensions.
ANSWER: trigonal planar [prompt on planar]
One of these entities occurs between the outer atoms of a cyanogen molecule and between the two atoms of
a carbon monoxide molecule. It has two perpendicular regions of peripheral electron overlap between
orbitals as well as a region of head-on overlap. Present in the cyanide ion and diatomic nitrogen, this type of
bond characterizes the nitrile functional group, and orbitals involved in this type of bond exhibit sp
hybridization. Hydrocarbons that have at least one of these structures are called alkynes. For 10 points,
name this type of covalent bond that consists of two sigma bonds and a pi bond and is stronger than a
double bond.
ANSWER: triple bond
Aromatic compounds featuring a functional group with this kind of bond are produced by the Sandmeyer
reaction; that functional group containing this kind of bond is the nitrile group. The carbon-nitrogen bonds
in a cyanogen molecule are of this type, as are the bonds in carbon monoxide and diatomic nitrogen. These
bonds consist of a sigma bond and two pi bonds. For 10 points, name these covalent bonds that form when
two atoms share six electrons and are stronger than double bonds.
ANSWER: triple covalent bonds
A pure substance has no degrees of freedom at one of these, according to a rule named for Gibbs, and
any system has p choose 3 of these, where p is the number of [*] phases. Helium-4 has two
unconventional ones due to superfluidity, while for water, it fixes the definition of the Kelvin scale and is at
.612 kilopascals and 273.15 Kelvins. For 10 points, name this point where coexistence curves meet on the
phase diagram, a temperature and pressure at which a substance exists in an equilibrium of all three phases
of solid, liquid, and gas.
ANSWER: triple point
Many of these exist for substances with multiple polymorphs, such as silver iodide and aluminum silicate,
and helium-4 has two of them, called "lambda" ones, because of superfluidity. If a substance has n solid
phases, it will have n choose three of these. Gibbs's phase rule states that there exist one fewer degrees of
freedom under this condition than the number of components in the mixture. One aspect of it for water is the
second reference point of the Kelvin scale. FTP, name this pressure and temperature at which one may
isolate all of a substance's three phases.
ANSWER: triple point
In mathematics, the origin is termed this for the graph r equals cosine of three theta. Water realistically has
seven of these due to the polymorphs of ice, and for a pure substance, this corresponds to zero degrees of
freedom according to the Gibbs phase rule. When pressure is isothermally increased at this point, water
becomes a liquid and so this is unusually higher than the freezing point. The Kelvin is defined in terms of,
for 10 points, what point on a phase diagram where gas, liquid, and solid all exist in equilibrium.
ANSWER: triple point
A high pressure jump near it indicated that the transition from high field phase to paramagnetic phase is first
order for Helium. The ITS-90 temperature scale uses a portion of this value for Neon, Oxygen, and other
materials as definitions for some of their temperature points. For water it occurs about .01
degrees Celsius above the normal freezing point. For most substances the liquid phase can only occur at
higher temperatures, and in all substances it can only occur at higher pressures. FTP, name this spot on a
phase diagram where solid, liquid, and gas can exist in equilibrium.
ANSWER: Triple Point
In 2001, George Schmermund patented a new cell used to reach this condition at less than 10% of the
previous cost, and an analogous condition for aluminosilicate (uh-LOOM-i-noh-SI-li-cut) minerals can be
found using Schreinemaker's method. This condition is located at the intersection of co-existence curves,
and by Gibbs' phase rule any system with p phases has p choose 3 of these points. Sublimation (sub-liMAY-shun) only occurs at temperatures and pressures below this point, whose value for water is used as a
reference in defining the kelvin. Found at 0.01 degrees Celsius and 611.73 pascals for water, name this
point on a phase diagram at which solid, liquid, and gas states exist in equilibrium.
ANSWER: triple point
Systems with n phases possess n choose three of these, which are unique for single-component situations
because of Gibbs's phase rule. The plot of two solutions to the Clausius-Clapeyron equation for a substance
intersect here, while helium-4's superfluidity gives it two of these. This condition for one substance defines
the Kelvin temperature scale, and this condition sits at the intersection of two coexistence curves. For 10
points, name these pairs of temperature and pressure conditions, which for water is 273.16 K and about six
hundred twelve pascals, in which a substance exists as a solid, liquid, and gas simultaneously.
ANSWER: triple point
Gustav Tammann determined that this condition exists at several different points for water; for ice
III it occurs at about 251 on the kelvin scale. Taking the inverse that this condition exists for water
defines the unit of the Kelvin scale; extremely precise thermometers are still calibrated using this
condition. Gibbs phase rule implies that a pure substance in this condition will have zero degrees of
freedom. A system with p phases will have p choose 3 number of these points; one of them for water exists
at .01 degrees Celsius and 611 Pascals. For 10 points, name this point on a phase diagram where a
substance can exist as a solid, liquid and gas.
ANSWER: triple point
The top of this layer of the atmosphere is pushed up due to the ITCZ and its height drops off
severely in the area of the subtropical and polar front jets. This layer of the atmosphere is turbulent
and well-mixed because its temperature decreases with increasing height. That (*) decrease in
temperature ends at this layer's namesake "pause". For 10 points, name this lowest layer of the atmosphere
that is below the stratosphere and is where most weather occurs.
ANSWER: troposphere
Intrusions of air from a higher layer of the atmosphere into this layer can be located by calculating
potential vorticity. Scattering in this layer is relied upon by microwave radio communications. The
highest part of this atmospheric layer contains most of the jet stream, and the mixing of this layer
with the layer above it was blamed for destabilizing the polar vortex. This atmospheric layer contains
almost all of the water vapor in the atmosphere, and this layer contains most of the atmosphere's
mass and weather. Name this layer below the stratosphere, the lowest layer of the atmosphere.
ANSWER: troposphere
The size of this atmospheric layer can be measured by observing aerodynamic drag on satellites, and this
layer became much smaller in 2008 and 2009. The location of the International Space Station, this area and
the ionosphere [ie-ON-uh-sfehr] are the target of storm probes being sent up by NASA. The ionosphere
goes throughout the altitude of this region in addition to some areas above and below it. This layer is the
primary location of auroras. Name this region above the mesopause [MEH-soe-paws] named for its high
temperatures
ANSWER: troposphere
The Hadley, Ferrel and polar cell regions are found in this layer of the atmosphere. This is the thinnest
layer of the atmosphere for which the lapse rate is negative. Jet streams occur in the upper part of this layer
of the atmosphere. The classic anvil shape of cumulonimbus clouds is due to the barrier between this layer
and the one above it, and it is where most weather occurs. For 10 points, identify this lowest layer of the
atmosphere that is found below the stratosphere.
ANSWER: troposphere
Richardson numbers show a negative bimodal distribution in this region where peroxyacetyl nitrate is an
important pollution storage molecule. Anvil heads form at the upper boundary of this region, and the threecell model, which consists of Hadley, Ferrel, and Polar cells, explains circulation within it. This region has
grown in recent decades, a trend blamed on ozone depletion and greenhouse gases. Like the mesosphere,
this region experiences decreased temperature with altitude and its upper reaches contain the jet streams and
cirrus clouds. Containing most of the mass and all the weather of the atmosphere, name this layer just above
the surface of the Earth.
ANSWER: troposphere
Meridional flow occurs in this structure and generates more vorticity than zonal flow. The lapse rate
changes from positive to negative at the top of this region, also known as the temperature inversion. The
lower boundary of the stratosphere is this layer's namesake "pause." 80% of the atmosphere's mass is in this
turbulent layer, where most weather phenomena occur. For 15 points, identify this lowest layer of the
atmosphere.
ANSWER: troposphere
The upper boundary of this structure is the point where the lapse rate goes from positive to negative,
forming what is known as an inversion layer. Air at the bottom of this layer is about 15 degrees
Celsius and -55 degrees Celsius at the top. About 10 miles wide at the equator and 5 miles wide at the
poles, this layer contains about 75% of the atmosphere's total's mass and nearly all of its water vapor
and is bounded on the bottom by the planetary boundary layer. For 10 points, name this layer of the
atmosphere found below the stratosphere, the lowest layer of the atmosphere that is the site of most weather
phenomena.
ANSWER: troposphere
The intensity of these phenomena can be calculated by adding one half to the log base two of H sub a
v, and is ranked on a scale named after Soloviev and Imamura. The DART warning system for these
phenomena includes a bottom pressure recording package, and computer models can predict the
arrival of these phenomena using bathymetry and (*) seismic information. Drawbacks happen because
the first part of these phenomena to reach land is the trough. These phenomena have very low amplitudes in
open ocean, but drastically increase in height and decrease in wave length when they approach the shore.
For ten points, name these giant waves often caused by earthquakes, one of which devastated Sri Lanka in
2004.
ANSWER: tsunami (do not accept or prompt on "tidal wave")
Titov and Synolakis developed the MOST model for these entities. These entities are likely to be formed
if there is a sharp upslope at low frequencies on an effective movement-frequency diagram. A distinctive
V-shaped formation found on Madagascar indicates that a "mega" one of these entities could have been
caused by an ancient meteor impact. That formation is the Fenambosy chevron. Run-up is one measure
used to characterize these entities. Due to their long wavelength, they are always shallow-water waves.
Drawback, a dramatic drop in sea level, can occur when the trough of these entities reaches the coast first.
For 10 points, identify these large waves that can be caused by earthquakes.
ANSWER: tsunamis [or seismic sea waves; or tidal waves]
These events rarely occur in very cold regions, but one of these is very similar to an ivu. One of the beststudied occurrences of this phenomenon occurred in 2003 near Rat Islands, Alaska. Scientists debate
whether this occurrence in 1929 near the Saint Lawrence River was caused by a landslide. Some of the
worst of these were caused by the 1883 Krakatoa eruption and the 1755 Lisbon earthquake, and the
deadliest ones probably occurred in 2004 in the Indian Ocean. Give this term which is Japanese for Harbor
Wave.
ANSWER: tsunami
The Soloviev-Imamura intensity scale rate the intensity of these events. Shoaling causes these
phenomena to slow down as they approach land, and if a trough, rather than a crest, is the first part
of this phenomenon to (*) reach land, then drawback occurs, creating an apparently low tide. Underwater
earthquakes can cause, for 10 points, what kind of dangerous tidal wave that devastated Japan in 2011?
ANSWER: tsunami (prompt on tidal wave before mentioned)
Though enzymes containing this element are unusual, two of them, AOR and GAPOR, are used by
Pyrococcus furiosus. For many living things, this element is toxic because it interferes with the use of
molybdenum and copper. Found with calcium and oxygen in scheelite, this element is often used
for electrodes in arc welding and in high-speed steel. This element with the highest melting point is
combined with rhenium in X-ray tubes. In the early 20th century, this element started being used as
a light bulb filament. Name this element that was known as wolfram, which is why its symbol is W.
ANSWER: tungsten
Materials that become sediment through changes in this quantity are classified according to the
Bouma sequence. This property is typically measured with Jackson Units, which uses the visibility of
a flame as a standard of reference. Although it is not transparency, a circle with 2 black and 2 white
regions is used to measure this property of a fluid - that apparatus is the Secchi Disk. Circulation
driven by this quantity can be induced by (*) soil liquefaction. Adding plankton or runoff to a liquid
increases this quantity, which causes sediment to flow underwater. For 10 points, name this measure of a
murkiness of water, typically caused by particles suspended in the liquid.
ANSWER: turbidity [prompt on "currents" due to ambiguities; accept turbidity currents]
This property can be examined from satellite-based observation tools such as AVHRR by looking at the
amount of reflected light on a 580-680nm band. Evidence for its namesake currents can be found in the
breaking of transatlantic cables during the 1929 Grand Banks earthquake and the presence of submarine
fans and at the end of underwater canyons. These currents notably form abyssal plains. Often associated
with algae blooms, a high value of this property can be detrimental to aquatic plants. For 10 points, identify
this cloudiness of a liquid, which in oceans can be caused by runoff, sediments, and phytoplankton.
ANSWER: turbidity
The characteristic "cry" of tin when it's bent is caused by this phenomenon, and in isometric systems
this phenomenon can generate the "iron cross" configuration. The Manebach and Carlsbad laws
cover some instances of this process, which can occur through displacive polymorphism. Its
polysynthetic form generates several parallel surfaces. Orthoclase feldspar often shows the (*)
penetration form of this phenomenon, while it's not metamorphosis but the contact form of it has a single
composition surface. The Brazil Law form of this phenomenon occurs in quartz upon a change in
temperature and pressure. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which two different crystals share lattice
points.
ANSWER: twinning
This is the number of unhybridized orbitals left in an sp hybridized bond. This is also the number
of unbonded electrons on the central atom of an ozone molecule. In cupric oxide, copper has a
positive charge of this magnitude. This is also the number of carbon atoms in a molecule of ethylene
(EH-thuh-leen), the number of valence electrons in a (*) calcium atom, and the number of protons in an
atom of the lightest noble gas. For 10 points, name this atomic number of helium.
ANSWER: two
This is the number of lines on the Orgel diagram for species with one d-electron. Pyridine undergoes
substitution on this numbered position in the Chichibabin reaction. At standard temperature, a gas
comprising molecules that contain this number of atoms has internal energy roughly equal to
five-halves n R T. This is the number of chlorine atoms bonded to the metal in Grubbs's catalyst. In
diborane, this many electrons are formally shared between three centers. This is the number of
possible optical isomers of a molecule with (*) one chiral center. There are 4n plus this many pi electrons
in a ring molecule that is aromatic due to following Huckel's rule. There are this many carbon atoms in
ethylene. For 10 points, identify this number of hydrogen atoms in a water molecule.
ANSWER: two
This is the number of radial nodes possessed by a 4p orbital or a 5d orbital, and in molecular
orbital theory, the bond order is calculated by finding the difference between bonding and
non-bonding pairs and dividing by this number. A p-orbital has this many lobes, and the value of the
(*) spin quantum number can take on exactly this many different values. The principal quantum number, or
n, is this value for lithium, beryllium, and neon. For 10 points, identify this number that is the atomic
number of Helium.
ANSWER: two
Oxalate can bind to the central atom in a coordination complex this many times. Mesons are made of
this many subparticles. Tartaric, citric, and carbonic acid have this many equivalence points.
Tritium contains this many neutrons in its nucleus. Alkenes contain this many (*) bonds between its
carbon atoms. All s orbitals can contain up to this many electrons. This is the oxidation number of zinc,
and it is the number of valence electrons in all alkaline earth metals. For 10 points, name this number,
which is the atomic number of helium.
ANSWER: two [accept plus two or two plus; do not accept "minus two," do not accept "two minus"]
This property can be measured by adding potassium permanganate in the Baeyer test, or by
adding bromine in methylene chloride for the bromine test. This non-molecular weight property
increases in order for the following compounds: myristoleic, linoleic, and arachidonic acid. This
property can be quantified by adding half the number of nitrogens, subtracting half the number of
halogens and hydrogens, adding the number of carbons and 1. This property can be reduced by
hydrogenation, and it corresponds to the number of double bonds there are. For 10 points, name
this property possessed by trans, and other much healthier fats.
ANSWER: degree of unsaturation [or index of hydrogen deficiency; rings plus double/triple bonds; or word forms; do not accept or prompt on "saturation"]
This element was never present in the Canyon Diablo Troilite, which is why that body defines the
origin for plotting the geochron. Ratios between isotopes of a daughter nuclide of this element were
used by Clair Patterson to date the Earth. This element was the cause of reactions in the Oklo mine
in Gabon. This element forms only in the r-process, and one of the main reasons the age of the galaxy
is so imprecisely known is its uncertain production ratio relative to (*) Thorium in supernova
emissions. Its decay to lead-206 and 207 is used in a radiometric dating scheme. Its 235 isotope is the only
naturally-occurring fissile isotope. For 10 points, name this actinide, the heaviest naturally-occurring
element.
ANSWER: uranium [or U]
This element was originally used as a catalyst in the Haber process, and it is found in abundance in
Saskatchewan. Its two major isotopes are 238 and 235, the latter of which was once referred to as "actino"
this element. That former isotope of this element is useful since it decays to the fissile plutonium 239, and
as such that isotope is frequently used in weapons. For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number
92 and symbol U.
ANSWER: uranium
Along with copper, this element can be obtained through in-situ leaching, which results in yellowcake.
This element's hexafluoride (hex-ah-FLOOR-ide) is used in enrichment, and it is found bonded to oxygen
in the mineral pitchblende. This element is the heaviest one known to occur naturally with isotopes such as
235 and 238, the former of which splits into barium and krypton during nuclear fission. For 10 points, name
this radioactive element with symbol U.
ANSWER: uranium
The long half-life of about 4.5 billion years of this element makes it useful for radiometric dating in
techniques that see it decay to thorium (THOR-ee-uhm) and lead. Martin Klaproth discovered this
element's presence in pitchblende. It also occurs in a type of powder called yellowcake. The 235 isotope of
it is the only naturally occurring fissile (FIH-sie-ull) isotope, which is enriched in centrifuges from its more
common 238 isotope. For 10 points, name this member of the actinide (ACK-tih-nide) series that is used in
nuclear reactors.
ANSWER: uranium
After an attempt to use this element instead of tungsten in lamp filaments was unsuccessful, the
Westinghouse Lamp Plant in New Jersey supplied this element to the government during World War Two.
An isotope of this element decays into barium, krypton, and three neutrons. This element's depleted form is
used in dense weapons, while its enriched form is used by nuclear power plants. Name this element just
before neptunium and plutonium on the Periodic Table whose 235 isotope is used in chain reactions.
ANSWER: uranium or U
Along with potassium and thorium, this element is responsible for heating of the asthenosphere.
Before its modern use, this element was used to add color to glass and ceramic in Rome and Bohemia.
Its discoverer, Martin Klaproth, extracted this element by dissolving pitchblende in nitric acid, and it
was originally used as the catalyst for the Haber process. The (*) 235 isotope of this element was the
first fissile element discovered and decays into Krypton-92, and its 238 isotope is often used for armor
penetration and weapons. For ten points, name this actinide with atomic number 92 and symbol U.
ANSWER: uranium (accept U before mention)
Though not an alkali metal, this element's carbonate is water-soluble, and this is the lighter of the
two elements typically found in MOX fuel. ADU is mixed with hydrofluoric acid to produce this
element's hexafluoride, and this element is most commonly found in an ore whose crystals consist of
three of this element and eight oxygen atoms. Penetrative (*) bullets often consist of the depleted variety
of this element, which can be extracted from pitchblende or "yellowcake." For ten points, identify this
element whose isotope-238 has a very long half-life, and whose atomic symbol is U.
ANSWER: uranium (accept U before mentioned)
The extraction process for this element requires grinding it up and leeching with sulfuric acid,
converting its dioxide into a trioxide. Afterwards, it is enriched by adding elemental fluorine to form its
hexafluoride, which is then converted back into the dioxide for conversion into the pellets for its best
known use. Available from the pitchblende, this element converts into thorium and potassium in the Earth's
core and contains the radioactive 238 isotope. For 10 points, identify this actinide used in nuclear power
plants, symbolized U.
ANSWER: uranium [accept U prior to mention]
The main ore of this element always contains trace elements of radium, and technetium is a decay
product of this element in that ore. This element's hexafluoride is produced in the gas centrifuge
process. One isotope of this element, which is extracted from (*) yellowcake, undergoes alpha-decay to
form an atom of thorium in the first step of fission. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number
92, which is used as the fuel in nuclear reactors.
ANSWER: uranium [or U]
Industrially, this compound is created from the reaction of dry ice and ammonia to produce ammonium
carbamate, which decomposes into this compound. This compound is produced in a namesake cycle, also
known as the ornithine cycle, which converts ammonia into it. Friedrich Woehler was the first chemist to
create this compound, which consists of two amine groups bonded to a carbonyl. Elevated levels of this
compound in the blood are present during kidney failure. For 10 points, name this first organic compound to
be made synthetically, which is found in urine.
ANSWER: urea
Barbiturates are produced by reacting this substance with malonic (muh-LOH-nik) esters, and plywood is
made with a resin of this substance and formaldehyde. Arginase (AHR-juh-neys) catalyzes the formation of
this substance in the ornithine (OR-nih-theen) cycle, and a BUN test measures its concentration in the
blood. The vitalism theory was disproven when Friedrich Wohler synthesized this molecule from
ammonium cyanate, and in mammals this is the major nitrogenous (nai-TRAH-jih-nuhs) waste product of
protein metabolism. Consisting of two amine (uh-MEEN) groups bonded to a carbonyl (kar-BAH-nil),
name this molecule formed in the liver, filtered by the kidney, and passed out of the body in the urine.
ANSWER: urea [accept carbamide; do not accept "urine"]
This compound reacts with malonic esters to form barbituric acids. With formaldehyde, it comprises a
transparent resin used in adhesives. It forms up to 8 hydrogen bonds with water, so it is highly watersoluble, and it is produced in a process catalyzed by arginase. Synthesized from carbon dioxide and
ammonia in the Bosch-Meiser process, it is used as a fertilizer. In 1828, while trying to prepare ammonium
cyanate, vitalism was disproved by Friedrich Wohler when this compound was produced from inorganic
materials. A nitrogenous waste product of protein metabolism, it is filtered from blood by the kidneys. For
10 points, name this compound occurring in urine.
ANSWER: urea or carbamide
N-acetylglutamate regulates this compound's production by activating carbamoyl phosphate synthase,
which initializes its synthesis. Along with its analog, guanidinium, it is a strong protein denaturant, and
other key steps in its synthesis include the conversion of ornithine to citrulline, which is then converted into
arginine and this compound in its namesake cycle. Consisting of two amine groups linked by a carbonyl,
this non-toxic compound derives from toxic ammonia in the liver and makes up most of the dry weight of
urine. For 10 points, name this compound which clears most nitrogenous waste from the body and was first
synthesized by Friedrich Wohler.
ANSWER: urea
This compound is the simplest carbamide. In the body, it is produced in a cycle which uses three ATP
molecules and produces the intermediate citrulline. Friedrich Wohler's synthesis of this compound
disproved vitalism. This compound's structural formula is NH2CONH2. It is produced principally in the
liver to allow for a safe way to excrete nitrogenous waste. For 10 points, name this solid
nitrogen-containing component of urine.
ANSWER: urea
In this procedure, a decrease in the energy difference between two frontier orbitals leads to a bathochromic
shift, while an increase in that difference leads to a hypsochromic shift. It uses either a split-beam or singlebeam spectrophotometer to measure the output and a deuterium arc or tungsten lamp as a spectrum source.
It requires the use of a quartz cuvette to hold the sample and is sometimes used as the detector for an HPLC
experiment. An exocyclic double bond adds 5 nm while a secondary amine adds 60 nm according to the
empirical rules used to predict the results of this technique, which are named for Woodward and Fieser, and
this technique is commonly used to image chromophores with large conjugated pi systems. For 10 points,
name this type of spectroscopy that uses wavelengths shorter than IR but longer than X-rays.
ANSWER: UV/Visible spectroscopy [accept either UV or visible]
One technique often performed in this state uses a Buchner funnel to extract a dissolved solid from
a solvent. Another technique performed in this state uses a spin bar instead of boiling chips, because
that variant does not need to heat the liquid. Water-traps and water aspirators are occasionally used
in both the aforementioned namesake filtration and distillation techniques. Experiments carried out
in this state usually require Pyrex or round-bottomed glassware because Erlenmeyer flasks or those
with (*) cracks may spontaneously collapse. The two walls of a Dewar flask are separated by material in
this state, which is often achieved by means of a pump. For 10 points, name this state in which a
near-complete lack of vapors leads to extremely low pressure.
ANSWER: vacuum [or more specific answers such as high vacuum or ultra high vacuum; accept vacuum filtration until read; accept vacuum distillation until read; prompt on "low pressure"]
Resonance and orbital hybridization were developed as part of a "bond theory" described by this
adjective. The steric number is principally used in a model whose name starts with this adjective;
that model predicts molecular geometry based on minimizing (*) electron pair repulsion. Lewis dot
diagrams only depict the electrons described by this adjective. For 10 points, identify this adjective applied
to electrons that participate in bonding and to the outermost shell of an atom.
ANSWER: valence
Examples of the type of molecule named after this person include diatomic xenon; such molecules may be
held together by hydrogen bonds. The Casimir effect was discovered in the course of an attempt to measure
the force named after this person. The two constants named after him are measured in liters per mole and in
liter squared bars per mole squared. One of those constants is multiplied by the number of moles and
subtracted from the volume in his namesake equation in order to correct for the volume of molecules, while
the other one corrects for intermolecular forces. Name this Dutch scientist who improved the ideal gas law.
ANSWER: Johannes Diderik van der Waals
This man names a set of interactions that are the subject of the Hamaker theory, and an equation named for
him has curves that are unstable at low temperatures. This scientist names a parameter which is equal to one
half the distance between the nucleii of two nonbonding particles. Pressure is modified by a term that
accounts for attraction between particles, while volume is reduced by a term accounting for the volume of
particles in this man's namesake equation, which modifies the ideal gas law. For 10 points, identify this man
who names a set of dipole-dipole forces which include the London dispersion forces.
ANSWER: Johannes Diderik van der Waals
A quantity named for this man is equal to half the distance between nuclei of two identical, non-bonded
atoms. An equation named for this man predicts that the critical compressibility factor equals three-eighths
and does not include a function of the reduced temperature, unlike the similar Redlich-Kwong equation.
This chemist created the "hard sphere" model of atoms, predicting that atoms have a fixed volume "b,"
which is subtracted in the denominator of his cubic equation of state. The Debye and London dispersion
forces are part of a set of forces named for him. For 10 points, name this Dutch chemist who formulated a
correction to the ideal gas law.
ANSWER: Johannes Diderik van der Waals
Materials that obey this relation have an interparticle potential proportional to d over r to the 6th power,
assuming r is greater than d. The isotherm of this equation below the critical temperature was modified by
Maxwell to include a flat portion, which removes the metastable states. It assumes the material in question
consists of hard spheres of equal radius, and can be derived as a first-order truncation of the virial equation.
It contains parameters for inter-particle attraction and particle volume, or a and b respectively. For 10
points, name this modification of the Ideal Gas Law, an equation of state named for a Dutch chemist.
ANSWER: Van Der Waals equation of state
More refined alternates to this equation include the Beattie-Bridgman and Benedict-Webb-Rubin
equations. The formulator of this equation rewrote it in terms of reduced variables to obtain the law of
corresponding states. Dependency on Pitzer's acentric factor was introduced to a modification of this
equation by Soave. Another modification of this equation is used in the petroleum industry because it
performs slightly better at the critical point than the Redlich-Kwong equation. That is the Peng-
Robinson equation. This equation incorrectly predicts a critical compressibility factor of three-eighths.
This equation uses constants a and b to correct for intermolecular forces and finite molecular size,
respectively. For ten points, name this modification of the ideal gas law created by a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation of state
An anomaly in the oscillation of its isotherm described non-existent substances, and was solved by Maxwell
through an equal area rule. A modification for it which takes into account the acentric factor was developed
by Redlich and Kwong. It is inapplicable to first order phase transitions, and it takes into account the
volume of the particles and their interactions among themselves, which can be found in the coefficients a
and b. For 10 points, identify this equation which attempted to rectify the ideal gas law, named for a Dutch
scientist.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation of state
At the critical point, this equation predicts a compressibility of three-eights. The critical
exponents predicted by this equation are identical to those predicted by the Ising model, placing it in
the universality class of mean field theories. It is derived using the hard-sphere potential. Around
phase transitions, it incorrectly predicts oscillatory isotherms. This equation can be derived by
truncating the virial expansion at two (*) terms. One constant in this equation accounts for the excluded
volume of a particle, and another accounts for attractive forces. It adds two constants, a and b, to a less
accurate law. For 10 points, name this improvement on the Ideal Gas Law, named for a Dutch physicist.
ANSWER: Van Der Waals equation
This equation predicts an inversion temperature equal to 27/4 times the critical temperature, and the
critical exponents predicted by this equation place it in the same universality class as the Ising model.
This equation can be derived by considering a hard-sphere potential with a sixth power dropoff, and
this equation incorrectly predicts oscillatory isotherms around the critical point. This equation adds
variables accounting for (*) intermolecular forces and the excluded volume of individual particles, which
are labelled a and b respectively. For 10 points, name this modification of the ideal gas law, an equation of
state named for a Dutch chemist.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation
This equation predicts a critical compressibility factor of 0.375 for all substances, which is higher
than the actual measured values. Maxwell's equal area rule fixes a defect in this equation where an
isotherm describes a physically impossible state with (*) dP/dV greater than 0. This equation's inflection
point on a P-V diagram corresponds to the critical point. Its attractive term is made temperature-dependent
in the Redlich-Kwong equation. This equation assumes that molecules attract and repulse one another and
that molecules take up space, which are quantified by the variables a and b and are measured for each gas.
For 10 points name this equation of state created by a Dutch scientist, an early modification of the ideal gas
law.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation of state
This equation can be derived from perturbation theory's hard sphere model. One parameter is multiplied
by the square of moles over volume and added to pressure in this equation, and a second parameter is
multiplied by number of moles and subtracted from volume. Those parameters denoted, a and b, are this
equation of state's namesake parameters. For 10 points, name this deviation from the ideal gas law, named
after a Dutch scientist that also lends his name to weak intermolecular bonds.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation
Van Laar modified this equation to find the excess enthalpy of a liquid mixture. One parameter in this
equation is equal to twenty-seven sixty-fourths times R-square T sub c squared over P sub c. The
Joule-Thomson inversion temperature is equal to twenty-seven fourths times the critical temperature
predicted by this equation. The isotherms predicted by this equation tend to oscillate around a phase
transition, a fact corrected by Maxwell's equal area rule. This equation has parameters that account for the
excluded volume of a particle and one accounting for attractive forces between particles. Those parameters
are labelled a and b. For 10 points, name this equation of state, a modification of the ideal gas law named
after a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation
One form of this equation can be derived using perturbation theory and the hard sphere potential; one can
use the aforementioned derived form to approximate the second virial coefficient. Improvements on this
equation were named after Berthelot and Dieterici, both of which were replaced by another named after
Redlich and Kwong, which also used two correction parameters. Substance-specific coefficients used in this
equation account for intermolecular attractions and molecular volume, which adjust pressure up and volume
down, respectively. For 10 points, name this equation of state, an improvement on the ideal gas law.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation [prompt on ideal gas law]
One equation that is incredibly similar to this one has a modified version containing the number 9/128. The
internal pressure for a substance that can be described by this equation is a times n squared over V squared.
The Maxwell construction assigns equal and opposite areas to the unrealistic loops observed by plotting this
equation, which is directly modified by the Bertholet equation. Those abnormalities occur in the phase
transition zone and indicate that volume increases with pressure. The second virial coefficient allows for
derivation of the two constants in this equation, which represent an attractive and repulsive term. For 10
points, quantity p plus n squared a over v squared end quantity minus quantity V minus nb end quantity
equals nRT in what equation of state for real gases?
ANSWER: van der Waals equation [accept Bertholet equation until mentioned]
One of its principle failings comes at gas-liquid equilibria, since it does not predict that at constant
temperature, pressure is constant as volume varies; however, it is still better under those conditions than a
generally-superior modification, the Redlich-Kwong equation, does even worse with vapor-liquid equilibria.
Its two parameters account for particle size and nonzero interparticle interaction strength and are typically
written as a and b. It shares a namesake with the forces arising from particles developing instantaneous
dipoles. For 10 points, identify this equation of state, an improvement on and generalization of the ideal gas
law.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation
One graphical representation of this equation exhibits spurious loops which imply that certain substances
have negative compressibility. That region is modified by a horizontal line determined by the Maxwell
equal area rule. A later modification of this equation introduced a T to the one half term in the denominator
of the A parameter; that equation was introduced by Redlich and Kwong. This equation contains factors
which account for the volume of individual molecules as well as the attractive forces between molecules, its
b and a terms. For 10 points, identify this equation of state, the first modification of the ideal gas law to
describe real gases, which was developed by a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: van der Waals Equation of State
Soave altered a modification of it to include the acentric factor. That modification functions best in an
equilibrium region and is named for Redlich and Kwong. Maxwell formulated his Equal Area Rule to
replace that unstable region with a horizontal line in plots of this equation. One term central to it equals
three times the critical pressure times the critical volume squared, that being the attraction parameter. This
law goes beyond the assumptions of kinetic molecular theory to account for molecular interactions in its "a"
term and volume in its "b" term. For 10 points, name this equation of state named for a Dutchman, a
modification of the ideal gas law.
ANSWER: van der Waals law or equation [accept Redlich-Kwong equation until "Redlich"; prompt on ideal gas law/equation until read]
The statistical mechanics derivation of this equation assumes an interparticle potential inversely
proportional to distance to the sixth power. Maxwell used an equal area rule to correct for an error in this
equation, which can be written in terms of the cube of the volume and is a simplification of the virial
equation. It involves two gas-dependent parameters, the first dependent on interparticle attractive forces and
the second on the proper volume of gas particles. Those are commonly written as a and b. For 10 points,
name this equation of state for real gases developed by a Dutch theoretical chemist as an improvement upon
the ideal gas law.
ANSWER: Van der waals equation
This statement can be used to derive the Batchinsky relation, and it also proves the Law of Corresponding
States by finding 0.375 to be the critical point compressibility factor. This law's third virial coefficient is
equal to b2, where b is in units of meters cubed over moles and accounts for excluded volume. That
parameter is paired with another corrective parameter, a, which accounts for the attraction between particles
in a gas. For 10 points, name this modification of the ideal gas law, an equation developed by a Dutch
scientist who also names weak intermolecular forces.
ANSWER: van der Waals equation of state
These entities account for the attractive term in the Lennard-Jones potential, and one type of them is
named for Keesom. The structure of geckos' feet enables the lizards to use these to adhere to walls, and
they also include Debye forces. Their namesake also formulated a correction to the ideal gas law, and
they include one type that results from the interaction of temporary dipoles, London dispersion forces.
For 10 points, name these weak attractive forces between gas molecules, named for a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: van der Waals forces [prompt on early London dispersion forces]
This interaction explains why the boiling point for butane is higher than for isobutene despite both
having the same molecular formula. Willem Keesom explained a type of this interaction that arises from
molecules having elements with different electronegativities. This force can be caused by the temporary
clustering of electrons at one end of a molecule, which can create an induced dipole. That dispersion type
of this force was described by Fritz London. For 10 points, name this force that attracts molecules together
more weakly than covalent and hydrogen bonds.
ANSWER: Van der Waals force [or dipole-dipole interaction before "dipole"; or London dispersion force before read; or London force before read]
The energies associated with these interactions can be calculated using Hamaker coefficients,
and they arise from the inverse sixth power term of the Lennard-Jones potential. Keesom and
Debye expanded them to account for dipole-induced dipole and dipole-dipole interactions, and
London elucidated a form known as dispersion forces. For 10 points, name these intermolecular
forces that are weaker than covalent bonds and named after a Dutch physicist.
ANSWER: Lifshitz-van der Waals forces [accept London dispersion forces before mentioned]
This group of forces include the force between a permanent dipole and an induced dipole, the Debye
force, but they do not include hydrogen bonding. One of these is a result of nonpolar molecules forming
instantaneous dipoles that attract each other and is the London dispersion force. That force explains why
iodine is a solid and fluorine is a gas at room temperature. For 10 points, name this set of intermolecular
forces named for a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: van der Waals forces
These interactions are encompassed in the "r to the minus 6" term in the Lennard-Jones potential. The
typical region where these interactions occur is confined between their namesake surfaces, which are
essentially spheres of electron density. This class of interactions occurs anytime an induced dipole is
generated, and it is this type of interaction that allows geckos to climb up glass surfaces. These interactions
are generally weaker than dipole-dipole interactions, and a broad definition of these forces encompasses
London dispersion forces. For 10 points, identify these weak attractive forces named for a Dutch physicist.
ANSWER: van der Waals forces/interactions [prompt on London dispersion forces before mentioned]
They can be summed in a pair-wise fashion to create the generalized Hamaker theory. In addition to
contributions from ionic double layers, they comprise a major part of DLVO theory, and they are the source
of the term raised to the sixth power in the Lennard-Jones potential. Recent studies have developed carbon
nanotube hairs able to exploit them in a manner similar to geckos, which use them to stick to surfaces. They
include permanent, induced, and transient interactions, the latter known as London dispersion. For 10
points, name these general intermolecular forces, named for a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: van der Waals forces [prompt on London dispersion forces before read]
The equation by this name has been improved upon by the ESD and Peng-Robinson equations, as well as by
an equation subject to the Soave modification. A phenomenon with this name can be modeled by the
Lennard-Jones potential and is analogous to the Casimir effect. The Keesom interaction along with a force
that attracts particles without permanent dipole moment are types of, for 10 points, what class of forces
including London dispersion and dipole-dipole forces?
ANSWER: Van der Waals forces or equation
Their strength as a function of distance can be modeled by the Lennard-Jones potential. Their namesake
also names an equation of state which modifies the ideal gas law. Unlike covalent and ionic bonds, they are
caused by changes in the polarizations of nearby molecules. One variety of them arises between nonpolar
molecules due to induced dipoles, and is known as London dispersion forces. For 10 points, identify these
generalized weak intermolecular forces, which are named after a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: Van der Waals forces
These interactions are accounted for by the sixth-power term in the Lennard-Jones potential. The
scientist who derived these interactions incorporated them as the n squared a squared over volume
squared term in his namesake equation. These interactions occur between various combinations of
permanent and induced dipoles. These interactions include the (*) London dispersion forces, and they
are what allow geckos to stick to vertical surfaces. For 10 points, identify these intermolecular forces
named for a Dutch scientist.
ANSWER: London-van der Waals forces [or London-van der Waals interactions; or London-van der Waals attractions; prompt on intermolecular forces; prompt on dipole forces; prompt on London dispersion forces]
Potential energy due to these forces is often modeled as proportional to the inverse sixth power of distance,
and a subtype whose strength depends on polarizability and dipole moment is sometimes named for Debye.
Another subtype accounts for the higher boiling points of straight molecules compared to spherical
molecules with an equal number of electrons and for the ability of (*) geckos to climb glass surfaces; those
induced dipole-induced dipole forces are also known as London dispersion forces. For 10 points, identify
this type of intermolecular force, weaker than covalent, ionic, and hydrogen bonds, named for a Dutch
scientist.
ANSWER: van der Waals force [accept van der Waals interaction]
These forces can cause a type of spectral line broadening that can be described by a Levy distribution.
Langbein developed an "exact" representation for these forces based on a macroscopic theory put forth by
Lipschitz, which accounts for retardation and many-body interactions. Pairwise addition is used to calculate
the strength of these forces between spherical bodies in a method developed by H. C. Hamaker. One
possible explanation of the Casimir effect is that it arises from these interactions between parallel uncharged
conducting plates, and these interactions account for the attractive term in the Lennard-Jones potential. One
type of these anisotropic forces is named for Keesom, and another kind named for Debye occurs between a
permanent dipole and an induced dipole. The strength of these forces is proportional to the negative sixth
power of distance. Another type of these forces occurs between instantaneous dipoles and is called London
dispersion forces. For 10 points, name this class of weak intermolecular forces named for a Dutch chemist.
ANSWER: van der Waals forces
The mathematical expression for them is sometimes splined together with a Morse potential for better
agreement with experiment. One model for these interactions is a three-body potential which includes the
product of three cosines of angles, and is named for Axilrod and Teller. Another model of these
interactions was created by H.C. Hamaker. One type of these interactions is named for (*) Keesom, while
another is named after Debye. They are responsible for the term inversely proportional to the sixth power
of distance in the Lennard-Jones potential. FTP, identify this class of intermolecular forces which includes
London dispersion forces, and is named for a Dutchman.
ANSWER: van der Waals forces [Accept London dispersion forces before (*). DO NOT accept afterwards. Prompt on "intermolecular" forces.]
An equation named for this man gives the rate of change of the equilibrium constant with respect to
temperature as delta H standard over R T squared. One paper by this man cited the isomerism of maleic
acid and fumaric acid as evidence for a theory independently proposed by J. A. Bel concerning the
tetrahedral nature of the carbon atom. One quantity named for him is a measure of the effective number of
particles in solution. That quantity is related to the degree of dissociation, is important in colligative
properties such as osmotic pressure, and is known as this man's namesake "factor." For 10 points, name this
Dutch scientist who won the first Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van't Hoff
Independently from Joseph Le Bel, he explained optical activity by proposing that certain molecules are
shaped like tetrahedrons. His namesake equation uses the enthalpy [EN-thul-pee] change to relate
temperature change to the change in the equilibrium constant. The effect of a particular solute species on
colligative properties is measured by his namesake "factor." For 10 points, name this Dutch chemist who
won the first Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff
Independently of Le Bel, this man developed a stereochemical model of the optical activity of certain
compounds. This chemist's name is sometimes appended to Le Chatlier's principle and he used a
system of a piston with two semi-permeable membranes to derive an equation for osmotic pressure.
He gives his name to an equation relating the change in temperature, equilibrium constant, and
(*) Gibbs free energy, but he is most notable for a factor appearing in equations involving colligative
properties For 10 points, name this Dutch chemist who names the factor i representing dissociation, the
first Nobel laureate in chemistry.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff
This man provided justification for the work of Arrhenius pertaining to the dissociation of
electrolytes in a solution, and he established that carbon compounds which consist of four different
substituents are tetrahedral in terms of stereochemistry. This scientist concluded that for any
chemical reaction, the thermodynamic change in temperature can be related to the enthalpy by
taking the natural logarithm of the equilibrium constant and plotting it versus the reciprocal of the
temperature, with the slope yielding his namesake equation. For 10 points, name this Dutch chemist who
names a factor that measures the effect of a solute upon colligative properties.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van't Hoff
This scientist and J.A. Le Bel worked independently to derive the basic ideas of stereochemistry. The
equation named for him, also known as the Vukancic-Vukovic [VOO-kahn-sik VOO-koh-vich] equation,
can now be derived from the Gibbs-Helmholtz equation to give a straight-line relationship between the
reciprocal of temperature and the natural log of the equilibrium constant. He is also the namesake of the
number that tells how many ions are formed from a solute, which is useful in the study of colligative [koLIG-uh-tiv] properties. Name this Dutch chemist who won the first Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van't Hoff (prompt on "Hoff")
This scientist was the first to explain optical isomerism by proposing that carbon is tetrahedral. He stated
that a reaction's standard enthalpy change divided by the product of R and temperature equals the log of the
equilibrium constant in his namesake equation. A dimensionless number named for him gives the number of
particles per formula unit of solute, and is used in equations for colligative properties such as boiling-point
elevation and osmotic pressure; that number, often symbolized lower-case i, is his namesake "factor". For
10 points, name this first winner of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, a Dutch chemist.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff
This man's work, independent of Le Bel, attempted to show that tetrahedral geometry was possible
in carbon bonds. One of his namesake equations relates temperature and equilibrium constant given
the standard enthalpy change. The measure of how many particles are released into solution per unit
solute is known as his namesake "factor," and is important in calculating colligative properties. For 10
points, name this Dutch chemist who worked out an equation for osmotic pressure.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van't Hoff
For Langmuir isotherms the isosteric enthalpy of adsorption can be determined using an equation named
after this man. That equation can be derived using the Gibbs-Helmholtz equation, and relates the rate of
change of the equilibrium constant as a function of temperature. The fact that the chemical potential of a
solvent must be equal on each side of a membrane is used to derive another equation named after this man,
used to calculate the osmotic pressure of dilute solutions. FTP, name this Dutch scientist, whose namesake
factor describes the dissociation of solutes that are important in colligative properties, and who in 1901 was
the winner of the first Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van't Hoff
This scientist's namesake equation relates the change in equilibrium constant of a reaction to the change in
a system's temperature. His namesake factor is used to calculate colligative properties like osmotic pressure.
That factor denotes the concentration of dissociated particles of a solute and is designated i. For 10 points,
name this Dutchman who was the first Nobel Laureate in Chemistry.
ANSWER: Jacobus Henricus van't Hoff
Simulations have predicted that small changes in heat capacity may account for observed deviations from
one of this man's equations, as visualized in his namesake plots. That equation can be modified to include
the standard entropy of change but generally relates the log of a ratio of equilibrium constants to a change in
inverse temperature. He also names an equation that uses an eponymous quantity, which itself appears in
expressions of colligative properties and describes the dissolution of a substance, known as his factor. For
10 points, identify this namesake of an equation used to find osmotic pressure of dilute solutions, a
Dutchman and first winner of the Nobel in chemistry.
ANSWER: van't Hoff equation
This quantity can be approximated using the Antoine equation. It can be expressed with respect to
water and ice via the Goff-Gratch equation. The Kelvin equation describes the logarithm of this
quantity in terms of the Surface tension and radius of a droplet. The logarithm of this quantity varies
inversely with temperature according to the Clausius-Clayperon equation. When a substance boils, this
quantity must be greater than atmospheric pressure. For 10 points, identify this quantity, which for mixtures
is given by Raoult's law.
ANSWER: vapor pressure
Two equations giving the temperature dependence of this quantity in terms of three constants are the
Kirchhoff relation and the Antoine equation. Small values of this quantity can be measured by the Knudsen
method of molecular effusion. Another equation relates its logarithmic temperature dependence to the
associated latent heat, and by definition its total value is equal to the sum of its values for pure components
times the mole fraction of each component in an ideal solution, according to Raoult's law. The ClausiusClapeyron equation gives the temperature dependence of, FTP, this quantity which equals one atmosphere
at the normal boiling point of a liquid.
ANSWER: vapor pressure
The Wagner equation is a four-parameter extension of the Antoine (ANN-twahn) equation used to
model this quantity with fitted parameters. When there are multiple substances present, the mole
fraction of each substance is multiplied by this quantity for each substance; the sum is equal to this
quantity for the total mixture by (*) Raoult's (rah-OOLT'S) Law. When it equals the atmospheric
pressure, boiling occurs. For 10 points, name this equilibrium force per area exerted by an evaporated
substance over its liquid, which is measured in torr or pascals.
ANSWER: vapor pressure [prompt on pressure]
One equation relates the natural log of this quantity to the acentric factor, while it is represented in
terms of empirical parameters in the simpler Wagner and Antoine equations. Those equations can be
derived from an expression for the slope of the coexistence curve, the (*) Clausius-Clapeyron relation,
while the value of this property for a liquid mixture is a weighted sum of the values for its components by
Raoult's Law. At a substance's boiling point, this quantity equals the atmospheric pressure, while substances
with high values of it are called volatile. For 10 points, identify this property, the pressure of the gaseous
form of a substance in equilibrium above its liquid or solid form.
ANSWER: vapor pressure [prompt on volatility before "volatile"]
Some methods for computing this quantity include the Lee-Kesler correlation, the Wagner functions, and
the DIPRR equation, and one method of measuring it uses a Knudsen Cell. The Arden-Buck and GoffGratch equations are used to compute this quantity for water, and comparing this quantity between different
components gives the relative volatility. For an ideal mixture, it is dependent upon the mole fraction of each
component, and the boiling point is defined as when this equals atmospheric pressure. For 10 points, name
this value calculated by Raoult's Law, the pressure at which a gas is in equilibrium with its liquid and solid
phases.
ANSWER: equilibrium or saturation vapor pressure [prompt on partial answer]
The definition of the acentric factor includes the negative log of the reduced form of this quantity,
when the reduced temperature is 0.7. A pure liquid's fugacity is approximated as the product of the
fugacity coefficient, the Poynting factor, and this quantity. This quantity is not unitless, but it is
smaller for the heavy key component during separations. The logarithm of this quantity varies
linearly with one over temperature by (*) Antoine's equation. At high concentrations, a component's
partial pressure equals its mole fraction times this quantity according to Raoult's Law. It equals atmospheric
pressure at the boiling point. For 10 points, name this quantity, the pressure of gas above a solution.
ANSWER: vapor pressure [or saturation pressure; prompt on pressure]
The gravametric Knudson method to measure this quantity involves holding the analyte in a capsule with a
hole, and is mainly used when expected values for this quantity are small. Three substance specific
quantities can be plugged into the Antoine equation to give this quantity. The Clausius-Clayperon equation
suggests that knowledge of this quantity at a specific temperature allows its calculation any other
temperature along a coexistence curve. It is equivalent to the equilibrium constant for the phase change of a
liquid to a gas. For 10 points, identify this quantity for a 2-phase mixture of a liquid which must be equal to
the atmospheric pressure at the boiling point.
ANSWER: vapor pressure [prompt on partial]
This quantity can be calculated from the Antoine equation. When the enthalpy of vaporization replaces
the enthalpy change in the van't Hoff equation, it becomes the Clausius-Clapeyron equation, which can
calculate this. This can be calculated based on a weighted average using mole fractions in Raoult's Law.
For 10 points, name this type of pressure that occurs in the gas phase.
ANSWER: vapor pressure
When given temperatures and enthalpy values, the Clausius-Clapeyron equation estimates this
value, which, for volatile substances, is higher at low temperatures. At equilibrium, the partial
pressure of a substance is equal to its mole fraction times this quantity, according to (*) Raoult's Law.
A boiling substance will have equal values for atmospheric pressure and, for 10 points, what other type of
pressure exerted when a gas co-exists with its liquid or solid phase?
ANSWER: vapor pressure (do not accept or prompt "pressure")
This quantity can be calculated for water with the Arden Buck equation, which is a recent improvement
over the Goff-Gratch equation. Thermogravimetry can be used to calculate this value for solids, and it is
related to the molar volume, surface tension, and droplet radius in the Kelvin equation. Another equation
relates two values of this quantity to the enthalpy of vaporization and temperature, and is named for
Clausius and Clayperon, while this value is modified by mole fractions of species in solution in Raoult's
Law. For 10 points, name this measure of a liquid's tendency to evaporate, which, when it exceeds
atmospheric pressure, results in boiling.
ANSWER: vapor pressure
The success of fractional distillation depends this value for substances in a solution. An isoteniscope is used
to measure this for a liquid, and partial pressure is equal to the amount of this provided by a component of a
mixture. One way to calculate this for varying temperatures is via the Antoine equation, which is derived
from the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. The boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which this is equal
to atmospheric pressure, and this value has a direct relationship with the volatility of a solution. For ten
points, name this pressure, the pressure at equilibrium of the gas resulting from the boiling of a liquid.
ANSWER: vapor pressure
The temperatures at which this quantity is the same are linearly related according to Duhring's
rule. It is measured using an isoteniscope. The log of this quantity is equal to A minus the quantity B
over C plus T in one equation. This quantity is multiplied by the Poynting correction factor and the
activity coefficient in order to find fugacity. This quantity is graphed against mole fraction in order
to determine (*) deviations from ideality. In general, this quantity equals its value for a pure solvent times
the mole fraction of the solvent according to Raoult's Law. Volatile substances have a large value for it.
This quantity is equal to the atmospheric pressure at the boiling point. For 10 points, name this quantity, the
pressure of a gas above a liquid.
ANSWER: vapor pressure [prompt on partial answer; prompt on "volatility"]
Estimates of the enthalpy change associated with this process may be found using the reduced temperature
by the Watson relation or by assuming a constant value for the entropy change by Trouton's rule. That
enthalpy change is proportional to the derivative of the vapor pressure with respect to the inverse of
temperature by the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. A binary mixture which does not change composition
under this process is called an azeotrope. In one of the colligative properties, the temperature at which this
process occurs is increased. This process occurs when the vapor pressure is equal to the atmospheric
pressure. For 10 points, name this phase change from a liquid to a gas.
ANSWER: vaporization [prompt on "phase change" or "phase transition" before mention, accept boiling]
Reactions in which the reagents undergo this process may be conducted at reflux to prevent a loss of
product. Theoretical plates arise when this endothermic process exactly balances its inverse. "Chips" made
of alumina are used to promote one type of this process in the laboratory. This process is forbidden beyond
the critical point. Distillation separates mixtures based on differences in the way this process occurs. The
temperature at which one type of it occurs is colligatively raised by solutes. Substances may undergo the
"flash" type of this process if nucleation sites are suddenly added. For 10 points, name this phase change in
which a liquid turns into a gas.
ANSWER: vaporization [or boiling; or evaporation; or word forms]
Hellman-Bich diagrams are useful in analyzing this equation. Several quantities found in this
equation can be calculated using cluster integrals, which rely on the Mayer f-function. This equation
is derived by considering the one-body, two-body, etc. contributions to the grand partition function.
The coefficients of this expression can be solely written as a function of the temperature, and setting
the second of those coefficients equal to zero gives a point at which the derivative of the (*)
compressibility factor with respect to density is zero; that point is the Boyle temperature. It is usually
written as a polynomial in terms of one over the volume. Truncating this formula at two terms gives the van
der Waals equation, while truncating after the first term gives the Ideal Gas Law. For 10 points, name this
equation of state, which is written as an infinite polynomial expansion.
ANSWER: virial equation of state [do NOT accept "virial theorem"]
One term in this equation contains a factor that represents the total density of bound and scattering
states in the system. That second term in this equation vanishes when the derivative of the
compressibility with respect to pressure is zero; the temperature at which that occurs is named for
Boyle. The coefficients of terms in this equation are polynomials in the coefficients of the
configuration integral, which is defined in terms of the Mayer f-function and can be evaluated via (*)
cluster expansion. Retaining only the first two terms of this equation leads to a derivation of the van der
Waals equation. For 10 points, name this generalization of the ideal gas law which expresses the pressure of
a system as a power-series in density. which shares its name with a theorem relating the average potential
and kinetic energies of a system.
ANSWER: virial expansion [or virial equation]
In one discipline, this property can be modeled stochastically using the Heston model, and in that field the
VIX indices try to capture this property. In another field, the relative form of this quantity for a binary
mixture describes the separability of the components of the mixture, and is defined as the partial pressure
for a component divided by the mole-fraction of the component in liquid. For a financial instrument, the
standard deviation of returns is commonly used to describe this property, and lead was added to gasoline to
reduce this property. For 10 points, identify this concept which refers to the tendency of a liquid to vaporize
upon thermal excitation.
ANSWER: volatility [PROMPT on things such as "standard deviation" or "variance" or "risk" on the finance clues; prompt on "vapor pressure" or "vaporization" for the chemistry clues]
Fragmental material produced by events caused by these structures is called tephra. These structures
can produce pahoehoe (pa-ho-EE-ho-EE) and aa (AH-ah) flows, and the collapse of land following events
caused by these structures forms calderas. For 10 points, identify these geologic structures, examples of
which include Mount St. Helens and Krakatoa, capable of violently erupting magma.
ANSWER: volcanoes
These objects often contain interior branch pipes which eventually can lead to parasitic cones. Examples of
these were recently found on the dark side of the Moon, and many of these exist on Jupiter's moon Io. One
of the most closely observed ones is Sakurajima, and monitoring includes forward looking infrared,
listening for harmonic tremors, and measuring for ground deformation. These objects contain a caldera, and
these can be classified as cryptodomes, cinder cones, composite, or shield. Name these openings that often
form mountains where ash and magma can reach the Earth's surface from below.
ANSWER: volcanoes
These features may create breccia-filled diatremes, which can form maars when they reach the
surface. These features' subglacial type can cause floods called jokulhaups, and flood basalts form
when they affect oceans.(*) Lahars form when water mixes with pyroclastic flows from these geological
features, and the collapse of craters in these features creates calderas. These features' shield type is
exemplified by Mauna Loa. For 10 points, name these geological features, ruptures in the crust through
which ash and magma escape.
ANSWER: Volcanoes
Ice versions of these features sometimes form on Lake Superior in the winter, and the mud versions
are commonly found on the ocean floor. They are most commonly found at tectonic plate boundaries,
but they sometimes form away from plate boundaries at mantle plumes, commonly called (*) hot
spots. The Pacific Ocean's Ring of Fire is home to hundreds of these. Name these openings in the Earth's
surface, usually cone shaped, that eject magma and ash during eruptions.
ANSWER: Volcanoes
Mayon, a strato-type of this structure in the Philippines, is nearly perfectly conical. Explosions in
these structures can cause tephra, which is classified by size into lapilli, pyroclastic blocks, and (*)
ash. The shield variety is formed by basalt buildup, and they can be found at Mt. Vesuvius, Mauna Loa, and
around the Ring of Fire. For 10 points, name this type of opening in the Earth's crust through which lava
erupts.
ANSWER: volcanoes
When formed underneath glaciers, these landforms can cause devastating floods known as jokulhaups
(yoe-kull-howps). A pyroclastic flow may stem from these landforms, which can excrete material known as
pahoehoe (pa-HOY-hoy) and aa (ah-ah). Broadly, these landforms are classified into composite, shield, and
cinder types. For 10 points, name these landforms, prominent around the Earth's "ring of fire," which are
formed where magma can reach the earth's surface.
ANSWER: volcanoes
When glaciers cover these objects, a landform called a tuya (TOO-yuh) is formed. Maars (MARZ) and
tuff rings are examples of these objects. A lahar (luh-HAR) is a mud flow that is caused by the action of
these features, which can produce pahoehoe (pah-HOY-hoy) and aa (AH-ah). Pyroclastic flows can occur
when they become active. Their types include composite cone and cinder cone. This geologic feature is
common in the Ring of Fire. For 10 points, name these mountains that form when lava erupts to the earth's
surface.
ANSWER: volcanoes
These things can produce rocks with highly vesiculated texture, as well as a certain glass that can be dated
by observing its degree of hydration. Some large-scale versions of these things in Siberia are implicated in
the Great Dying. A bomb is a large piece of tephra, a type of pyroclast that is emitted from these things.
When they collapse, they form calderas. The appearance of these things away from plate boundaries is
attributed to hot spots. Extrusive rocks are formed at these places. Some examples of those are a lighterthan-water rock, pumice, as well as obsidian. For 10 points, name these ruptures in the crust that allow
magma to flow out and become lava.
ANSWER: volcanoes [generously accept flood basalts or trap basalts]
This object can form a tuya when it is found underneath a glacier. The "cryo" type of this object is
most famously found on the largest moon of Neptune, Triton. Lake Toba in Sumatra was created by the
"super" kind of this object, one of which can also be found in Yellowstone National Park. This object can
produce a pyroclastic flow, as well as a'a, pahoehoe, basalt, pumice, and igneous rock. For 10 points,
name this object that expels lava, examples of which include Vesuvius and Mount St. Helens.
ANSWER: volcanoes
One of these structures, Ol Doinyo Lengai, produces natrocarbonatite. A tuya is an example of the
subglacial type of these structures, which can produce jokulhlaups [yo-kul-h-loips]. These structures are
responsible for the formation of cryptodomes, and they can also produce pahoehoe [puh-HOH-ee-hoh-ee]
or aa [AH-ah]. The collapse of their center forms a caldera, and many of them are found around the Ring of
Fire. For 10 points, name these openings in the Earth's crust through which lava is ejected, examples of
which include Vesuvius and Krakatoa.
ANSWER: volcanoes
Extremely blocky, steep-sided types of these landforms occur when they form under glaciers, and
are known as tuyas. Their activities can form cryptodomes, which, when moved from their original
location, are known as coulees. Their actions are sometimes described as phreatic or (*) plinian
depending on whether they create large amounts of steam. They can create flows of pahoehoe or aa, and
they come in composite, shield, and cinder cone varieties. For 10 points, name these openings in the earth's
crust that allow magma to come to the surface, exemplified by Krakatoa and St. Helens.
ANSWER: volcanoes
Phreatic events associated with these structures feature superheated steam and can create craters called
maars. Plinian events associated with them are often preceded by pyroclastic flows. Land around these
structures can collapse and fill with water, resulting in a caldera. Underwater examples of these structures
include deep sea vents like black smokers. Hawai'ian examples are particularly low in silica, allowing them
to be very broad. The majority of active examples are found around the Pacific Ring of Fire. For 10 points,
name these mountains out of which magma can erupt onto the earth's surface.
ANSWER: volcanoes
The existence of groundwater near one of these objects can lead to an opening called a maar and
surface fractures called diatremes. Fumaroles, which can turn into hot springs, are found on or near
these objects. Glass created by these objects is called Pele's [PAY-lay'z] tears in honor of a goddess.
These objects sometimes cause the climate to cool, and one was blamed in 1816 for the "year without
a summer". These objects can emit tephra [TEF-ruh] or pyroclasts into the air, some of which is
igneous rocks. Classifications of these objects include cinder cones and the shield type. Name these
objects located above magma, which emit ash and lava into the air when they erupt.
ANSWER: volcanoes
The creation of the Siberian Traps, which may also have been the cause of the Permian-Triassic
extinction, is due to one of these entities. Mobergs and tuyas are examples of these structures with
flat tops due to the melting of an icecap. Underwater (*) "black smokers" are examples of these
structures, and hotspots are regions featuring their characteristic activity that may be due to mantle plumes.
Igneous rocks that form due to these objects have small crystals, are also called "extrusive," and include
obsidian. For 10 points, name these features, whose shapes include the "shield" examples that make up
many Hawaiian islands, exemplified by Krakatoa and Vesuvius.
ANSWER: volcanoes
This quantity names a form of viscosity that only applies to fluids that can have flows with nonzero
divergence; those fluids are thus called compressible. This quantity is raised to the polytropic index
in the relation that constrains polytropic processes. The parameter (*) b in the van der Waals equation
of state exists because nonideal gas particles exclude some amount of this value. Avogadro's law states that
this value is constant for a set amount of ideal gas and is equal to about twenty-two point four liters per mol.
For 10 points, name this quantity proportional to the cube of length.
ANSWER: volume [accept spatial extent or other clear-knowledge equivalents; prompt on radius or other related quantities]
The van der Waals equation corrects this quantity using the parameter "b." Isochoric processes
perform no work because it remains constant. Kinetic theory assumes that this quantity is zero for
single molecules. Boyle's law states it has an inverse relation with (*) pressure, which is multiplied by
this quantity in the ideal gas law. For 10 points, name this quantity that is constant for solids and liquids but
variable for gases and is often measured in liters.
ANSWER: volume
In the virial expansion, N divided by this value gives the exponentiated variable of each term. One
implication of Le Chatelier's principle is that as this quantity decreases, the products of a reaction will have
more moles of gas than the reactants. The square of this quantity is in the denominator of a correction term,
of which n-squared times a is the numerator, in the van der Waals equation. Boyle's law states that pressure
and this quantity are inversely proportional. For 10 points, name this measure of the amount of space
occupied by a substance.
ANSWER: volume
This quantity is held constant in the final cooling stage of the ideal diesel cycle. This quantity is
held constant in Gay-Lussac's law and is unchanged in an isochoric process. The "b" term in the van
der Waals equation accounts for this property of gas molecules. This quantity is kept constant in a
(*) bomb calorimeter. Charles' law relates this quantity to temperature, while Boyle's law relates it to
pressure. For 10 points, give this quantity typically measured in liters.
ANSWER: volume
For a saturated liquid, this value is approximated using the Rackett equation. Powers of the
reciprocal of this quantity are the terms of the virial equation of state. At a constant value of this
quantity, the heat capacity of a monatomic ideal gas is equal to n times the ideal gas constant times
three-halves. The change in this value in response to a mean stress is given by the compressibility
factor. Internal energy plus (*) pressure times this quantity is equal to enthalpy, and isochoric processes
keep it constant. This value is inversely proportional to pressure and directly proportional to temperature
according to the combined gas law. For 10 points, identify this quantity, the amount of space that an object
takes up.
ANSWER: volume [or V]
When this quantity is constant, specific heat equals the partial derivative of internal energy with respect
to temperature. This value is held constant in isochoric processes. The b constant in the Van der Waals
equation adjusts for this property. This quantity is conjugate to pressure, and it is inversely proportional to
pressure in Boyle's Law. For 10 points, name this quantity measured in cubic meters, the amount of space
enclosed by a region.
ANSWER: volume
The b parameter in the Van der Waals equation represents a correction factor for this quantity. The
Gay-Lussac law is valid when this quantity is held constant. In thermodynamics, work is equal to the
negative integral of pressure times the change in this quantity. This quantity is held constant in isochoric
(ICE-oh-KOR-ic) processes, and most versions of the ideal gas law have the left side equal to pressure
times this quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity that can be measured in liters.
ANSWER: volume
This state property is the only one which explicitly does not follow Gibbs' theorem. In an Otto
cycle, there are two isentropic steps and two steps where this quantity remains constant. The slope of
a coexistence curve equals the difference in entropy divided by the difference in this quantity for the
two phases, according to the Clapeyron equation. Both terms of the van der Waals equation have this
quantity in the (*) denominator. When this state variable is held constant, heat added to the system equals
the change in internal energy, such as in a bomb calorimeter. This quantity is proportional to temperature
and inversely proportional to pressure for ideal gases. For 10 points, name this quantity which is measured
in liters.
ANSWER: molar volume
This quantity is constant for a polytropic process when the polytropic index is equal to infinity. The product
of this quantity and its conjugate variable plus internal energy is equal to enthalpy. In the van der Waals
equation, the product of the number of moles and the corrective term b is subtracted from this quantity.
Work is equal to zero in thermodynamics when this quantity is held constant, which is known as an
isochoric process. According to Avogadro's law, this quantity is proportional to the number of moles, and
according to Boyle's law, it is inversely proportional to pressure. For 10 points, name this quantity often
measured in cubic meters or liters.
ANSWER: volume
In a polytropic process, this quantity is raised to the polytropic index. This quantity will increase in
the Joule-Thomson effect as temperature decreases. The "b" term in the van der Waals equation has
units of this quantity. Change in internal energy equals the change in heat when this quantity
remains constant, such as in a (*) bomb calorimeter. In an isochoric process, this variable does not
change. According to the ideal gas law, it equals number of moles times the gas constant times temperature
over pressure. For ten points, name this quantity often measured in a graduated cylinder, represented in
liters.
ANSWER: volume (or V)
For a plug flow reactor, this quantity is equal to the area under the curve on a Levenspiel plot. Application
of Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics to a gas only applies if the thermal de Broglie wavelength is much smaller
than the cube root of this quantity divided by the number of particles. This quantity is a natural variable for
both the internal energy and the Helmholtz free energy. The compressibility factor is expressed in terms of a
power series in the inverse of this quantity in the virial expansion. One term of the Van der Waals equation
contains the Van der Waals a parameter divided by this quantity squared, while another term contains the
parameter b, which represents the value of this quantity for gas particles. This quantity is held constant in an
isochoric process. Boyle's law states that the product of pressure and this quantity is constant. For 10
points, give this quantity often measured in liters.
ANSWER: volume [accept molar volume until "liters"]
In an isothermal process, the change in entropy is proportional to the natural log of the ratio of the final and
initial value of this quantity. This is constant in isochoric [eye-suh-KAWR-ik] processes. In isobaric
processes, the amount of work is the integral of pressure with respect to this quantity. Enthalpy equals
internal energy plus pressure times this quantity. Name this quantity that varies inversely with pressure in
Boyle's Law and is multiplied by pressure in the Ideal Gas Law, often measured in liters, gallons, or cubic
length units.
ANSWER: volume
The reciprocal of density is called the "specific" type of this quantity. Through is "b" constant, the van
der Waals equation accounts for the fact that this quantity is nonzero for the particles being described. The
product of this quantity and pressure appears in the ideal gas law, and this quantity is directly proportional
to temperature in Charles's law. Density is calculated as mass divided by this quantity. For 10 points, name
this quantity describing the amount of space taken up by an object.
ANSWER: volume
In the Diesel cycle, this value is held constant during cooling, which means that step is classified as
isochoric. In an isobaric process, pressure is multiplied by the change in this quantity to calculate work. A
common form of the Van der Waals equation subtracts n times b from this quantity, and, to calculate
enthalpy, this quantity typically is multiplied by pressure. According to both the Ideal Gas Law and Boyle's
Law, this quantity varies inversely with pressure when temperature and number of moles is held constant.
Name this quantity equal to mass divided by density that typically is measured in some form of cubic units.
ANSWER: volume
This concept can be used to determine the covalent portion of "all-atom" force fields, and one of its codevelopers, R. J. Gillespie, has extended it to include ligand close packing among second period elements.
In the 1960s, Argonne National Lab successfully applied this concept to noble gas compounds, though it
unexpectedly fails for phosphine and gives out entirely at aprismatic molecules. Application of this concept
often calls for the AXE method to find steric numbers, and while it cannot be used to calculate bond
lengths, it does predict unusual cases like the T and seesaw. Treating multiple bonds as "superpairs",
identify this theory that uses electrostatic interaction to predict molecular geometries like bent for water and
tetrahedral for methane.
ANSWER: VSEPR (VES-pur) theory [or valence shell electron pair repulsion theory; accept GillespieNyholm theory before "Gillespie"]
This system, which is alternatively named for Ronald Nyholm and Ronald Gillespie, fails to work for
compounds with ionic bonds. This system classifies sulfur hexafluoride as having an octahedral structure,
carbon dioxide as having a linear structure, and water as having a bent structure with a bond angle of 104.5.
For 10 points, identify this system which characterizes the spatial geometry of molecules based upon
electrostatic repulsion between the bonds of the molecule.
ANSWER: VSEPR theory [or valence shell electron pair repulsion theory]
Ionic forces explain why lithium oxide is an exception to this theory, which divides compounds into
different categories based on a property called the steric number. As a consequence of this theory, methane
does not assume a square planar structure since that would space the bonds 90 degrees apart from each
other rather than the 109 degrees in its actual shape. Common shapes generated by this theory include
see-saw, trigonal bipyramidal, and bent. For 10 points, name this theory of chemical bonding which as its
name suggests claims that electrons want to be as far apart as possible.
ANSWER: valence shell electron pair repulsion theory or VSEPR ["vesper"] theory
George Oenslager made this process more efficient by pioneering thiocarbanalide as an additive to it.
About half the world's zinc oxide is used as an additive for this process, whose product replaced oil-soaked
leather as a gap sealant. The use of sulfur to create linkages between polymers in this thermoset reaction
was developed by American Charles Goodyear, whose company uses it in making tires. For 10 points,
name this industrial process that hardens rubber.
ANSWER: vulcanization [accept word forms]
Stearic acid is sometimes used as an organic activator for this process, while a "dynamic" form of it was
first applied to EPDM compounds and generally improves the properties of thermoplastic elastomer blends.
George Onslager's pioneering use of aniline derivatives such as thio-carb-ani-lide and MBT in this process
in the presence of zinc oxide greatly accelerated this process. It results in the formation of crosslinks
containing sulfur that prevent constituent polymer chains from moving independently, and it was invented
by Charles Goodyear. Widely used in the manufacture of tires, for 10 points, identify this procedure that
makes rubber more durable, which is named for the Roman god of fire.
ANSWER: vulcanization [or equivalents]
The effects of carbon black on this process were observed using IGC, and fluorinating agents allow
materials that have not undergone this process to be bound to materials that have. At room temperature, a
platinum salt helps siloxanes undergo this process to form silicones, though it is usually catalyzed by zinc
oxide. Parkes developed a way to do this under colder temperatures, using vapors instead of the heated
sulfur process used by its inventor. For 10 points, identify this Goodyear-invented method for curing rubber
named for the Roman god of fire.
ANSWER: vulcanization
In 2011, Kurotobi and Murata captured a molecule of this compound in buckminsterfullerene. This
compound is produced with methane in the Sabatier process. The protonated form of this compound has a
pKa of negative 1.74. When working with redox reactions in an acidic medium, protons and this molecule
are added to balance the half reactions. Desiccants like calcium sulfate remove this substance, and a
neutralization reaction typically forms a salt and this compound. This compound also forms with carbon
dioxide in a combustion reaction. Name this compound often called the "universal solvent," and whose
protonated form is the hydronium ion.
ANSWER: water [accept H2O until mention, DHMO, or dihydrogen monoxide]
Hydrogen gas is produced industrially via the reaction of this compound with carbon monoxide
in its namesake "gas shift reaction." A line in the phase diagram for this compound uniquely slopes
to the left, because this compound's solid form is less dense than its (*) liquid form. The most famous
compound to adopt a bent geometry, it weighs 18 grams/mol and can be deprotonated to form the hydroxyl
anion. NaCl can be perfectly ionized in, for 10 points, what "universal solvent" with formula H2O?
ANSWER: water [or H2O; accept ice or water vapor at any point]
The Fischer-Tropsch process produces hydrocarbons and this compound. Cobalt chloride turns
from blue to red in its presence, forming a coordination complex with six copies of this molecule. The
very high surface (*) tension of this molecule is responsible for its upward facing meniscus and enables
capillary action to occur. This compound in its purest form has a pH of 7, and is known as the "universal
solvent." For 10 points, identify this molecule consisting of two hydrogens and one oxygen.
ANSWER: water
In nature, great quantities of methane are stored in a clathrate of this molecule. This substance has
a molarity of about fifty-five, and fifteen forms of its crystalline solid form are known. It forms
azeotropes with (*) HCl and ethanol. The calorie is defined in terms of its specific heat capacity. Its solid
form is less dense than its liquid form and many of its properties are the result of hydrogen bonds. For 10
points, name this molecule consisting of two hydrogens and one oxygen.
ANSWER: water [accept H2O before mentioned]
Mixing DMAD and quadricyclane as suspensions in this substance results in a higher yield for a
cycloaddition reaction than dissolving them in toluene. Because this substance has a high cohesive energy
density and has a higher internal pressure than the reagents of the Diels-Alder reaction, the reaction occurs
faster in the presence of this substance. It's not protons or electrons, but balancing redox reaction equations
in acidic conditions often involves adding multiple moles of this molecule to either side. Arrhenius acids
and bases are defined by their interactions with this substance, which is formed when hydrogen combusts.
For 10 points, name this universal solvent with the formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or H2O until it is read; or dihydrogen monoxide; or DHMO]
The Bernal-Fowler model uses the 4-site approach to model this substance. Certain Claisen
rearrangements and Diels-Alder reactions exhibit reaction rate accelerations when carried out in
emulsions of this substance, an effect studied by Sharpless. This substance is sometimes coordinated
with crystals to help them (*) retain their crystalline properties, and the triple point of this substance
defines the Kelvin scale. The heavy form of this substance contains higher deuterium content, and its solid
state is less dense than its liquid state. For 10 points, name this universal solvent with formula H2O.
ANSWER: Water [accept H2O before mentioned, or dihydrogen monoxide]
In photosynthesis, this substance is oxidized by 4 charge separation reactions making oxygen in
photosystem II, and its ability to form chlathrates with other compounds leads to high amounts of trapped
methane on the ocean floor. This compound's "heavy" variety is often used in nuclear reactors as a
moderator, and it frequently serves as an amphoteric solvent. For 10 points, name this common compound,
also known as dihydrogen monoxide, with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or H2O or dihydrogen monoxide before mentioned]
The partition coefficient is commonly defined using octanol and this compound. Reaction of a protonated
nitrile with this compound gives an imidic acid, which tautomerizes to an amide. Acid-catalyzed addition of
this compound to an acetal gives a carbonyl. This compound can be removed from a sample by using silica
gel, which is an example of a desiccant. The solid-liquid line on the phase diagram of this compound slopes
downwards, and it expands in volume as it freezes. The reaction of an Arrhenius base with an Arrhenius
acid will always produce one molecule of this compound. For 10 points, name this compound with a pH of
7 and chemical formula H2O.
ANSWER: water
Along with table salt, ammonia, and carbon dioxide, this compound is an input in the Solvay process. It is a
byproduct of the Ostwald process used to make nitric acid, and this compound notably has explosive
reactions with several pure alkali metals. Combustion of hydrocarbons produces carbon dioxide and this
compound, which reacts with strong acids to form hydronium ions. For 10 points, name this compound
sometimes jokingly referred to as "dihydrogen monoxide."
ANSWER: water [or H2O]
The Sabatier reaction results in the production of methane and this compound in the presence of a nickel
catalyst. A tertiary amine is created after an amine is reacted with methyl iodide, silver oxide, and this
compound in the Hofmann elimination. In an aldol condensation, this compound is removed in the final step
to create a conjugated enone. It forms azeotropes with hydrochloric acid and ethanol, and its triple point is
used to define the units of temperature. Its ability to dissolve many substances leads to it being known as
"the universal solvent." For 10 points, name this compound consisting of two hydrogen atoms and one
oxygen atom.
ANSWER: water [or H2O]
This compound's concentration is not included in the calculation of its dissociation constant, which at 25
degrees Celsius is equal to 1.0 times 10-14. Along with methane, this compound is a standard source of
gaseous hydrogen in the Haber-Bosch process. This molecule exhibits a 104.5-degree bond angle between
its three atoms, which exemplify a "bent" configuration. This compound is known as the "universal
solvent." For 10 points, name this simple compound with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or H2O before it is read]
Bernal and Fowler developed the first four-point model of this substance, which is broken down in the
sulfur-iodine cycle. Sharpless studied the rate acceleration seen in reactions performed in emulsions of this
substance. This substance makes cobalt(II) ("cobalt-two") chloride turn purple, and benzene is used to
entrain its azeotrope with ethanol. With carbon dioxide, this amphoteric compound is one of the end
products of complete combustion. Its liquid phase is denser than its solid phase, and its high specific heat is
due to extensive hydrogen bonding. For 10 points, name this chemical compound with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [accept H2O before it is read]
The acceleration of some Claisen rearrangements in emulsions of this substance was studied by Karl Barry
Sharpless. The second stage of the Ostwald process is carried out with an absorption apparatus containing
this byproduct. It can be removed from mixtures with magnesium or sodium sulfate, and alkali metals are
extremely reactive with it. This compound, frequently used as a moderator for nuclear reactors, can contain
a deuterium atom in its "heavy" variety. Along with carbon dioxide, it is produced in combustion reactions,
and its triple point is used to define the Kelvin. For 10 points, name this compound with bent molecular
geometry and formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [accept H2O or dihydrogen monoxide before mention]
Following a discovery by Breslow, this compound became commonly used as a solvent in pericyclic
reactions like Claisen rearrangements and Diels-Alder reactions. Hinshelwood's work on reaction rates that
earned the 1957 Chemistry Nobel focused on the production of this compound, which can produce ethanol
when added to ethane. The bond angle of a molecule of this compound is approximately 104.5 degrees, reflecting
tetrahedral electron-pair geometry and bent molecular geometry. Density changes from about 1.09 cubic
centimeters per gram to 1.00 as this compound melts at 0 degrees C. FTP, name this amphiprotic and neutral
compound in acid-base chemistry, sometimes referred to as DHMO, dihydrogen monoxide.
ANSWER: H2O Accept Water Laugh at and Accept early Dihydrogen Monoxide
Morokuma and Pedersen performed the first calculations on dimers of this substance, and Berkeley
professor Richard Saykally's research entirely concerns this substance. The sulfur-iodine cycle is
employed to decompose this substance into its constituent elements. Some reactions carried out in
emulsions in this substance exhibit a rate acceleration studied by (*) Sharpless. Models of the highlyordered layers this substance forms around phospholipid tails explain the entropic contribution to their
orientation inward in the cell membrane, and its triple point defines the Kelvin scale. For 10 points, name
this common solvent with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [accept H2O before mentioned]
Stromatolites were formed in this substance. Hypoxic or anoxic areas in this substance are known as
dead zones. The temperature at which this substance is densest is lowered below four degrees celsius when
its salinity is not zero. Its solid form is less dense than its liquid form. This substance participates in a
namesake cycle that, in part, involves evaporation and precipitation. For 10 points, identify this substance
found in the oceans, which has formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or ocean water; or sea water]
Cornelius van Niels proposed that this substance may have been produced as a byproduct of carbon fixing
by purple and green bacteria. This substance is found sporadically in the vadose zone. When this substance
is involved, a volcanic eruption can be "phreatic." Large-scale movement of this substance is facilitated by
thermohaline circulation. When it is removed from belowground, land subsidence can result, as can
sinkholes. For 10 points, name this substance whose "fresh" type is contained in aquifers.
ANSWER: water [or H2O; accept various types of water, such as fresh water; prompt on steam]
This substance is assumed to have vertical equipotential lines in order to simplify solutions to an equation
for its movement. That assumption named for Dupoit is invoked along with Darcy's law to explain this
substance's movement. Pockets of air are found alongside it in the vadose zone. It is present in any bedrock
pore in the phreatic zone. Structures that contain it can emit it spontaneously if its namesake "table" is
above
ground level. This substance flows freely from artesian wells. For 10 points, name this substance, which is
found in porous rock in aquifers.
ANSWER: water [accept groundwater; or underground water; or H2O; or other reasonable equivalents]
This compound is the only chemical not recycled in the sulfur-iodine cycle, and four- and five-site
molecular models of it are known as the Bernal-Fowler and TIP5P models, respectively. Samples of this
compound exist in an autolysis equilibrium, and its solid-liquid phase boundary has a positive slope.
Gaseous products are often said to be collected over this substance, which is commonly distributed in 55.5
molar concentration. Complete combustion releases this compound and carbon dioxide as products. For ten
points, name this universal solvent also known as dihydrogen monoxide or H2O.
ANSWER: water (accept H2O or dihydrogen monoxide before mention)
Reacting a carbonate with an acid releases carbon dioxide and this compound. Alkali
(AL-kuh-lye) metals react with this compound in a violently exothermic reaction. This compound is
known as the (*) universal solvent. On a phase diagram, the slope of its solid-liquid boundary is unusually
negative, and its triple point is at a temperature just above zero degrees Celsius. For 10 points, name this
compound that, because its IUPAC ("eye"-"YOU"-"pack") name is its common name, is never actually
referred to as dihydrogen monoxide ("dye-HYE-druh-jen muh-NOX-ide").
ANSWER: water [or H2O before "dihydrogen"]
A pure solution of this material has a concentration of approximately 55 Molar, and a solution of
95% ethanol and 5% this substance forms a positive azeotrope. Its autoionization constant is equal to
10 the the negative (*) 14th power. One molecule of it can form a series of four hydrogen bonds with
neighboring molecules. Its maximum density occurs at approximately four degrees Celsius, and it boils at
100 degrees Celsius. For 10 points, name this common solvent with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water or H2O
A compound named for its lack of this substance is produced by the condensation of two carboxylic acids.
On a phase diagram for this molecule, the lower part of the solid-liquid boundary has negative slope.
Twenty-three molecules of this substance surround four molecules of methane to form a clathrate. This
molecule has an unusually small bond angle of 104.5 degrees, since it has two lone pairs on its central atom.
Reagents dissolved in it are indicated by the letters "aq" in parentheses. The calorie was defined in terms of
this compound's unusually high specific heat, which is due to hydrogen bonding. For 10 points, name this
compound with chemical formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or dihydrogen monoxide; or oxidane; or H2O before it is read]
This molecule is the lighter of the two molecules formed by the enzyme catalase (KAH-tuh-lays). This
molecule forms a negative azeotrope (AY-zee-oh-trope) with hydrochloric acid and a positive azeotrope
with ethanol. The molecule's triple point is used to define the Kelvin temperature scale. It is the conjugate
acid of hydroxide ions. The Celsius scale is based on the boiling and freezing points of this molecule. For
10 points, name this "universal solvent" that covers about 70% of the Earth's surface.
ANSWER: water [or H2O]
This substance is subjected to the chemical oxygen demand and biochemical oxygen demand tests, and
measurements of its quality include TSS and TDS. One property of this substance can be tested for by a
circular disk divided into black-and-white quarter-segments and mounted on a pole, a device called a Secchi
Disk. Thermal differences in this material can result in different concentrations of carbon dioxide in
different layers of it, which can cause a CO2 eruption to occur. Darcy's law can be used to describe the
movement of this substance when it is found in rock. For 10 points, name this substance found in aquifers,
lakes, and rivers.
ANSWER: water [or H2O]
In a laboratory environment, calcium chloride and sodium sulfate are commonly used "agents" for
removing this substance; those agents are known as dessicants. This substance's solid-liquid phase
boundary has a negative slope. Its triple point is used to define the Kelvin. One molecule of this is formed
in a condensation reaction. Many of this compound's unusual properties, such as its solid being less dense
than its liquid form, are the result of hydrogen bonds. For 10 points, name this chemical with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [accept H2O before mentioned]
This compound forms a negative azeotrope with hydrochloric acid and a positive azeotrope with ethanol,
while this molecule's large dipole moment enables capillary action in plants and gives this compound's
liquid phase high surface tension. This compound's highest density occurs at 4 degrees Celsius, and its solid
phase is less dense than its liquid phase. For 10 points, what molecule, known as the universal solvent, has
formula H2O?
ANSWER: water [accept H2O before it is mentioned]
This substance's small electrical conductivity is due to the presence of hydronium ions created by
autoionization. Due to the presence of two lone pairs, this molecule has a "bent" shape with a bond
angle of 104.5 degrees. This molecule's solid phase is (*) less dense than its liquid phase as a result of the
formation of a crystal lattice due to hydrogen bonds. A common method for producing hydrogen is
performing electrolysis on this molecule. For 10 points, identify this molecule with chemical formula H2O.
ANSWER: pure water [or H2O until it is read]
A common positive azeotrope consists of 96% ethanol and 4% of this substance. On a PT diagram, this
substance's melting point line has a negative slope. Adding an Arrhenius base to an Arrhenius acid always
produces this substance, which is produced with carbon dioxide in all combustion reactions. This
substance's specific heat is 4.18 joules per gram degree Celsius, as a result of its strong ability to hydrogen
bond to itself. For 10 points, name this compound with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or H2O until it is read]
A form of polymerization often contrasted with addition usually results in the loss of this compound
from component monomers. This compound's auto-ionization has an equilibrium constant equal to one
times ten to the negative fourteenth power. On a PT diagram, its melting point line's slope is negative,
because the solid form of this substance is less dense than the liquid form. Combustion reactions result in
the production of it and carbon dioxide. This compound's polarity makes it the "universal solvent." For 10
points, name this compound with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [or H2O before mention]
This substance forms clathrate compounds such as methane clathrate, found near the ocean floor. It is the
leaving group in the conversion of amides to nitriles, and reacts readily with Grignard reagents. A common
monodentate ligand, this compound forms a positive azeotrope with ethanol. It reaches its maximum density
at 4 degrees C and has a bond angle of 104.5 degrees. This amphoteric compound is produced in acid-base
neutralization reactions. It experiences capillary action in glass tubes and has a high specific heat due to
extensive hydrogen bonding. For 10 points, identify this polar covalent compound with formula H2O.
ANSWER: water [accept H2O before the end; prompt on ice]
Mahoney and Jorgensen developed the TIP5P model of this substance, which can accelerate the Claisen
rearrangement. This substance reacts with sulfur dioxide and iodine in one step of the sulfur-iodine cycle.
According to the Mpemba effect, this substance can freeze faster with a high temperature compared to a low
temperature. This substance is absorbed by calcium oxide and other desiccants. This liquid is denser than its
solid form, and its maximum density occurs at around four degrees Celsius. This liquid is known as the
universal solvent, and it is often produced in condensation reactions. For 10 points, name this liquid whose
chemical formula is H2O.
ANSWER: water [or water vapor; or dihydrogen monoxide; prompt on "H2O"]
Properties of this substance can be measured with a CTD instrument. Samples of this substance can be
obtained with a Niskin bottle. A secchi disk is used to measure the transparency of this substance. The
presence and size of objects in this substance can be detected using SONAR. For 10 points, identify this
substance that occupies most of the surface of the Earth and which typically has a salinity of about 35 parts
per thousand.
ANSWER: ocean water [or sea water]
This process can be achieved by multi-step metal oxide cycles, which may be unfeasible simply
because they involve the use of chemicals other than the chemical central to this process. In one
method of conducting this process, the central compound is first reacted with iodine and sulfur
dioxide. This process restores the electron that ends up on NADPH during the light reactions of
photosynthesis, during which it occurs at a (*) manganese cluster. The SI cycle results in this process,
and biologically, this process happens due to photo-oxidation in photosystems' oxygen evolving complexes.
This process yields a diatomic gas that is the basis for a namesake "economy." For 10 points, name this
process which can happen by electrolysis of the central substance, in which the O-H bonds of H2O are
broken to make O2 and H2.
ANSWER: splitting of water [accept any logical equivalent about the "bonds of water being broken"; prompt on answers about "generating H2" or "generating Oxygen" before the last word]
One category of models used for this action utilizes the quasi-geostrophic approximation to the vorticity
equation and the hydrostatic thermodynamic energy equation to find closed-form solutions for the
geopotential tendency and vertical velocity. Early models for doing it included the one-parameter barotropic
and two-parameter baroclinic model. Modern models for doing this are based on the "primitive equations,"
written in sigma-coordinates, are solved using finite difference methods to find velocity field tendencies
which are then extrapolated to calculate future values of the geopotential, iterating for the required period of
time. This process often uses Doppler radar to determine initial wind conditions. For 10 points, name this
action, an attempt to numerically model atmospheric conditions at a future date.
ANSWER: atmospheric weather prediction [accept virtually anything that mentions that you're trying to figure out what the weather will be like in the future; prompt "meteorology"]
A type of this process induced by forest fires basically works by expanding a thin layer of material to
induce spalling. One type of this process produces fractures called "joints." That example of this
process, which produces exfoliation domes and onion layers, is called sheeting. The differential type
of it occurs when structures made from items found in different parts of the (*) Bowen's reaction
series are used. On the crust, hematite is typically produced when this happens to hornblende. Physical
types of this process includes frost wedging, and chemical types include carbonic acid dissolving minerals.
For 10 points, name this generic geological process, which fragments or decomposes rocks, and which is
often confused with erosion.
ANSWER: chemical or physical weathering [prompt on "sheeting" before mention.]
Some early supporters of the work of this scientist were Emile Argand, who studied the Alps, and
Alexander Du Toit, but his many detractors included paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson. His theories
became more popular long after his death thanks to increased data on the Wadati-Benioff [wah-DAH-tee
BEH-nee-awf] zone and other parts of the ocean floor. Though much of his efforts while alive were in
exploring Greenland and the jet stream, his most famous theory arose from studying books of fossil
similarities in different locations and maps showing shapes of landforms. His book The Origin of
Continents and Oceans contained the theory that there had once been a single giant continent. Name this
early-20th-century German scientist who developed the theory of continental drift.
ANSWER: Alfred Wegener [VAY-gun-ur]
Arthur Holmes did work on this man's hypothesis that the mantle undergoes thermal convection. This
man's most famous theory was supported by the discovery of seafloor spreading. After reading a scientific
paper linking fossil records on opposite sides of the Atlantic and noticing the complementariness of South
America's and Africa's coastline, he proposed the existence of a supercontinent later named Pangaea. For
10 points, name this person who proposed the theory of continental drift.
ANSWER: Alfred Wegener
He pioneered the use of balloons to study air circulation, and received a Ph.D. in astronomy. Among
other observations that helped lead him to formulate his most famous theory, he looked at evidence
of striations in areas of Argentina, Botswana and the Gobi Desert where glaciers no longer form.
This man observed deposits of swamps, reefs and other equatorial features in non-equatorial climate
areas, and used fossil evidence of the Mesosaurus, a freshwater reptile that couldn't swim in cold, salty
water, existing in both Africa and South America. The author of The Origins of the Continents and Oceans,
FTP, this is what postulator of Pangaea who proposed the theory of continental drift?
ANSWER: Alfred Wegener
The chemist for whom this reaction is named gained fame for mentoring a group of Japanese students
known as the Choushu Five. Phase transfer catalysts like tetra-butyl-ammonium are often used in industrial
procedures to provide a soft counter-ion, while one version of it sees an alkyl tosylate react with an alcohol.
It is the most common way to create a product that can also be obtained by acid-catalyzed intermolecular
dehydration of alcohols. In its usual form, this reaction sees an alkoxide ion react through backside attack
with a primary alkyl halide. For 10 points, name this reaction used to produce symmetrical and assymetrical
ethers.
ANSWER: Williamson ether synthesis
While catalysis is not necessary, if an unreactive alkylating agent is used, then the rate of reaction can be
greatly improved by the addition of a catalytic quantity of a soluble iodide salt to cause a variation on the
Finkelstein reaction. The alkoxide ion and alkyl halide reactants react via an SN2 reaction, and it was first
performed using an alcohol and sulfuric acid by its namesake. The product of this reaction can be called an
epoxide or "crown" if it is cyclic and was used as an anesthetic. Creating a compound containing an oxygen
molecule bounded to two alkyl groups, FTP name this reaction that results in the formation of ethers.
ANSWER: Williamson ether synthesis (accept logical equivalents)
Peng and Song reported a variant of this reaction which uses simultaneous ultrasound and
microwave irradiation, which does not require the use of phase-transfer catalysts like tetra-nbutylammonium bromide. Sodium hydride or carbonate bases are used to deprotonate one reactant
in this reaction, and an intermolecular version of this reaction can be performed on halohydrins. An
iodide salt can be used to speed up this reaction via halide exchange. A sterically hindered reactant
can lead to (*) alkene formation in this reaction, because this reaction proceeds via an alkoxide attacking
an alkyl halide in an SN2 reaction. For 10 points, name this reaction which is used to form compounds
containing oxygen single bonded to two carbons.
ANSWER: Williamson ether synthesis
Structures created by this phenomenon are known as ventifacts. A type of transport via this
phenomenon is known as saltation. This phenomenon is the primary driving force behind surface
ocean currents. The Beaufort scale is used to classify this phenomenon based on observed sea
conditions. This phenomenon is responsible for creating (*) aeolian landforms, such as dunes and
sand-blasted rocks. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that results from the uneven heating of Earth's
surface
ANSWER: wind
The Foehn ["fain"] type of this phenomenon is caused by adiabatic warming, and ergs formed by it
are concentrated between 20 and 40 degrees latitude. In the station model, its magnitude is denoted
by flags and pennants stemming from a barb, and isotachs indicate where it occurs at the same speed.
In the (*) doldrums, the prevailing form of it is weak, and this phenomenon causes erosion by aeolian
processes. It is rated on the Beaufort scale, and an anemometer measures its speed. The trade ones occur
near the equator, and it causes ocean surface waves. Monsoons are seasonal types of, for ten points, what
meteorological phenomenon, the movement of air?
ANSWER: winds
Bagnold's formula states that the movement of material affected by this phenomenon is
proportional to the cube of its strength. The direction of the slip face is determined by the direction
of this phenomenon, which is responsible for creating Dreikanters. Derechos are storms with shears
induced by this phenomenon. It drives the processes of saltation and suspension, and it is responsible
for creating (*) barchans, ergs and other ventifacts. Aeolian processes are driven by this phenomenon,
which also creates dunes. For 10 points, identify this weather phenomenon which can be measured with an
anemometer, whose strength is classified on the Beaufort scale.
ANSWER: wind [accept wind speed or other such answers that measure wind]
On the station model, this phenomenon is plotted using a barb that contains flags which show its
magnitude. On a map, this phenomenon's direction is held constant along an isogon, while its speed is
constant along an isotach. Near the ocean, this phenomenon changes direction at night, when the land cools
faster than water. The lack of this phenomenon defines the "horse latitudes." The Beaufort Scale measures
the strength of this phenomenon, the speed of which is related to damage on the Saffir-Simpson and Fujita
scales. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, the movement of air on the earth's surface.
ANSWER: wind
The Papagayo (PAH-pah-GYE-oh) and Tehuano (tay-HWAN-oh) types of this phenomenon are crucial to
Central American ecosystems. This phenomenon is measured using the Beaufort Scale. Energy can be
harvested from this phenomenon using namesake turbines. A a drop in temperature in the presence of this
phenomenon is its namesake "chill." For 10 points, name this movement of air from high pressure to low
pressure.
ANSWER: wind
Sediments that this phenomenon produces often feature distinctive frosted and pitted quartz grains. The
physics of particles that it transports were investigated by Ralph A. Bagnold, who classified structures
produced by it as barchan or parabolic. One feature commonly produced by this phenomenon is deflation
pavement. The impact of it on the ocean's surface is measured on the Beaufort scale. For 10 points, name
this meteorological phenomenon that occurs due to atmospheric pressure gradients, examples of which
include the westerlies and trade.
ANSWER: wind
The Bagnold formula models a process resulting from this phenomenon, one form of which occurs near the
magnetopause and passes through the bow shock. John Patterson invented the three-cup variety of a device
used to measure this phenomenon. The planetary form results from the escape of gases into outer space,
and the heliosphere is defined by another type consisting of charged particles from the sun. This
phenomenon can be measured with an anemometer. Neptune experiences the highest speeds of it in the
solar system, and sand dunes are formed by erosion due to it. For ten points, name this meteorological
process of the large-scale movement of air.
ANSWER: wind
Adiabatic cooling causes the Santa Ana or Diablo varieties of this phenomenon. Barbs on the sides of Stuve
diagrams indicate one of their properties, and station models use flags on tails to plot their magnitude. Its
speed is measured with an anemometer and described using the Beaufort scale, and this phenomenon is
weak or nonexistent in the doldrums. Jet streams are a type of these, and unequal heating of the surface of
the Earth gives rise to sea and land varieties. For 10 points, name this movement of air from high pressure
to low pressure which is utilized by sailboats.
ANSWER: Winds
In meteorology, when this phenomenon is perpendicular to isolines, the greatest advection occurs. The
Beaufort scale is used to characterize this phenomenon. Transport that occurs via this process is called
aeolian, which can create loess. The speed of this phenomenon can be measured with an anemometer. For
10 points, identify this flow of air between areas of different pressure, caused by the uneven heating of the
Earth.
ANSWER: wind
Rapid changes in this phenomenon's magnitude and direction are known as its namesake "shear". Like
oceanic current, its geostrophic type occurs when a pressure gradient balances the Coriolis force. The
overall direction of this phenomenon reverses at around 30 and 60 degrees latitude. Landforms created by
this phenomenon are called Aeolian (AY-oh-lee-an). Its speed is measured on the Beaufort scale. For 10
points, name this phenomenon measured by an anemometer, the movement of air.
ANSWER: wind
This man developed a method using tetraphenylborate for determining the amount of potassium in
seawater. One reaction named for him forms a carbanion next to an oxygen atom, which then
rearranges into an alkoxide. An alkoxy-lithium salt is the intermediate in one reaction named for this
man, in which an ether transforms into an alcohol under the influence of an alkyl-lithium compound.
One reaction developed by this man has a four-membered-ring intermediate that collapses, releasing
(*) Ph-three-P oxide as a driving force; that reaction usually has an erythro betaine intermediate, which can
be converted into the threo betaine using phenyl-lithium in a modification named for Schlosser. For 10
points, name this German chemist and namesake of a reaction which transforms a carbonyl into an alkene
by the use of a phosphonium ylide.
ANSWER: Georg Wittig
A similar reaction to it sees the addition of an R group at the alpha carbon of an ester and is named for
Horner and this reaction's namesake. One variation of this reaction uses a proton donor to reduce a carbonlithium bond formed due to excess lithium to selectively yielding of the E type of product, and is called the
Schlosser modification. It sees the formation of the zwitterionic betaines which undergo an oxaphosphetane
intermediate, and phosphine oxide is a by-product of this reaction which usually yields Z alkenes. For 10
points, name this reaction that uses an aldehyde or ketone and a phosphorus ylide to produce alkenes and is
named after a German chemist.
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
One modification to this reaction uses an organolithium reagent to convert the erthyro intermediate to the
threo intermediate. Reactions which achieve the same goal as this reaction include the Peterson and Julia
reactions, and using Tebbe's reagent yields a product that can also be produced in this reaction. This
reaction proceeds via a four membered ring intermediate, which leads to the fact that this reaction only
yields a Z product. In a lead up to this reaction, a strong base is applied to an alkyl halide and a
triphenylphosphene to generate a ylide ("ill-id"), which in turn forms a betaine by attacking a carbonyl. For
10 points, identify this reaction which forms an alkene from a carbonyl and a phosphonium ylide, named for
its German discoverer.
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
Although Georg Geissler was the second author on the paper introducing this reaction, he is never referred
to as a namesake of this reaction. One alternative to this reaction uses a compound obtained in the Arbuzov
rearrangement; that alternative transforms carbanions into olefins with E-selectivity and is named after
Emmons, Wadsworth, and Horner. Another modification to this reaction adds lithium salts to create the
threo version of the betaine intermediate, which again creates E-selectivity, instead of the usual Zselectivity, in the product of that Schlosser modification. For 10 points, what is this reaction that forms
olefins from ketones and phosphonium ylides, named after a German chemist?
ANSWER: Wittig reaction [or Wittig olefination]
According to Maryanoff and Reitz, interconversion of reaction adducts in this reaction results in
stereochemical drift. A triply eponymous alternative to this reaction uses the products of the Arbuzov
reaction. This chemical reaction is used in the production of Vitamin A1 by BASF. In a similar reaction to
this one, a beta-hydroxysilane undergoes an elimination; that reaction is named for Peterson. That previous
alternative is named for Emmons, Wadsworth and Horner. Using a phenyl lithium deprotonating agent
allows interconversion of erythreo to threo betaine in the Schlosser modification of this reaction. This
reaction can preferentially produce Z-alkenes and its intermediate is an oxophosphetane. For 10 points,
name this reaction in which aldehydes or ketones are reacted with a phosphonium ylide.
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
This reaction is used to create an alpha, beta unsaturated ester in the third scheme of the total synthesis of
Callystatin A. One of the first industrial uses of this reaction was the BSAF vitamin A synthesis. This
reaction can be used to prepare stilbene from benzaldehye. A variant of this reaction which has a water
soluble by-product is the Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons reaction. This reaction has a betaine intermediate.
Reagents for this reaction that have their anion stabilized by a carbonyl tend to produce E products. This
reaction is often performed with a triphenyl phosphonium compound. For 10 points, name this alkene
forming reaction of an aldehyde or ketone with an ylide.
ANSWER: Wittig Reaction
A complementary reaction to this one is often used to prepare alpha, beta-unsaturated esters and is known as
the Wadsworth-Emmons reaction. Along with an alcohol, a product of this reaction can be used with diethyl
azodicarboxylate in the Mitsnobu reaction, and that product is also a side product in synthesizing amines in
the Staudinger reaction. A modification of this reaction uses phenyllithium and hydrochloric acid at low
temperatures, to get the reaction mechanism, converting the erythro betaine intermediate to a threo
betaine. That modification will yield the E- isomer as opposed to the Z- isomer normally yielded by this
reaction, and that modification is named for Schlosser. For ten points, name this reaction in which an
aldehyde reacts with a phosphonium ylide to produce an alkene.
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
Lawesson's reagent is formed by a ring-closing mechanism similar to one seen in this reaction, and it yields
products that are also obtained via a reaction named for Julia and Lythgoe. Similar reagents in it are used in
the Still-Gennari reaction, the Arbuzov reaction, and the Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons reaction. It is thought
to proceed through a betaine intermediate, which is required for one modification of this reaction named for
Schlosser. The Horner modification to this reaction produces (E)-alkenes, though normally the formation
of (E)- or (Z)-alkenes is determined the stability of its ylide intermediate. For ten points, name this reaction
that uses triphenyl phosphine to generate alkenes from carbonyl compounds.
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
Maryanoff and Reitz studied deviations from the proposed mechanism of this reaction, discovering a
phenomenon they dubbed "stereochemical drift." One modification of this reaction uses phenyllithium and
hydrochloric acid to convert an erthyro betaine into the threo variety. That modification allows the products
of this reaction to be made in the E or trans form, while the normal variety can only create the Z or cis form.
This reaction with a modification named after Schlosser has a phenylphosphine oxide byproduct which is
created from a phosphonium ylide (ih-lid) reagent. Initiated by reacting an aldehyde or ketone with an ylide,
for 10 points, identify this organic synthesis that is used to synthesize alkenes.
ANSWER: Wittig Reaction
One alternative to this reaction uses diorganochromium and is named for Takai, while one variant is further
modified by using KHMDS and is named for Still. The ability of one intermediate to interconvert is called
stereochemical drift, and one modification uses a sulfur-containing compound in order to create epoxides.
In addition to the Corey-Chaykovsky reaction, and ester version of this reaction was developed by Horner,
Wadsworth, and Emmons, while the erythro betaine can be converted to the threo version using
phenyllithium in a version named for Schlosser. The formation of an oxaphosphetane drives, FTP, this
reaction which uses a phosphonium ylide to create alkenes from carbonyls, named for a German.
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
Chris Wright was the first person to use this reaction with coordinated carbon dioxide nickel complexes and
Nguyen performed "green" versions of this reaction without solvents to create ethyl trans-cinnamate. Used
in the preparation of steroids, this reaction can also be used to produce large yields of unsaturated nitriles.
Using excess lithium salts during the addition step allows selective formation of the product and is known
as the Schlosser modification. For 10 points, name this reaction that reacts an aldehyde or ketone with an
ylide to generate an alkene.
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
Conversion of an intermediate in this reaction using phenyllithium can alter the diastereoselectivity of the
products. In the case of lots of steric hindrance, the Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons reaction is preferred
instead. Reagents for this reaction are prepared by a simple substitution in which a halide leaving group is
replaced by triphenylphosphine, resulting in a molecule with both a plus and minus formal charge known as
a zwitter ion. Unlike simple elimination, this reaction does not always follow Zaitsev's rule and is not
sensitive to acids or bases. The Schlosser modification can be used in, for 10 points, what reaction that
combines a triphenyl phosphonium ylide and an aldehyde or ketone to form an alkene?
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
According to Maryanoff and Reitz, interconversion of reaction adducts in this reaction results in
stereochemical drift. A triply eponymous alternative to this reaction uses the products of the Arbuzov
reaction. This chemical reaction is used in the production of Vitamin A1 by BASF. In a similar reaction to
this one, a beta-hydroxysilane undergoes an elimination; that reaction is named for Peterson. That previous
alternative is named for Emmons, Wadsworth and Horner. Using a phenyl lithium deprotonating agent
allows interconversion of erythreo to threo betaine in the Schlosser modification of this reaction. This
reaction can preferentially produce Z-alkenes and its intermediate is an oxophosphetane. For 10 points,
name this reaction in which aldehydes or ketones are reacted with a phosphonium ylide.
ANSWER: Wittig reaction
Anthony Cheng published a work subtitled after the "myth" of this man decrying the attributed impact
of his most famous experiment. While on vacation, this man discovered pure nickel. This teacher of
Adolphe Kolbe also purified aluminum, an endeavor at which Davy, Oerstedt, and Berzelius had failed. He
is better known for heating a mixture of potassium cyanate and ammonium chloride "without needing a
kidney, whether of man or dog" and thus disproving vitalism. For 10 points, name this German chemist
who became the first to make an organic molecule from inorganic materials with his synthesis of urea.
ANSWER: Fredrich Wohler
This man is the second namesake of a reaction wherein a cycloalkenyl oxime is exposed to strong
acid, giving an aniline derivative; he names that reaction along with Semmler. One reaction named
for this man was promoted by Arndt and Eistert by showing the diverse [2+2] cycloadditions that its
product could participate in; in that carbene-mediated [1,2] shift, an alpha-diazoketone will
rearrange to a ketene. This man is the first namesake of a reaction whose (*) one-pot modification uses
ethylene glycol as solvent; that two-step reaction includes the addition of hydrazine to give a hydrazone and
the elimination of that hydrazine with a base, and was modified by Huang Minglong. For 10 points, name
this German chemist, the first namesake of a basic reduction of carbonyl to alkane along with Kishner.
ANSWER: Ludwig Wolff
The Huang Minlon modification of it heats its elements, namely a carbonyl compound, potassium
hydroxide, and hydrazine hydrate in a one-pot ethylene glycol reaction, producing a hydrazone
which is later converted to a final state. Also producing nitrogen gas and first described in 1911, its
first two steps deprotonate nitrogen and then protonate carbon, after which the alkyl anion is eliminated as
the final step. Traditionally, hydrazine was heated to 180 degrees Celsius with sodium ethoxide in a sealed
vessel, with diethylene glycol as the solvent. For 10 points, name this doubly-eponymous chemical reaction,
in which a ketone or aldehyde can be reduced to an alkane.
ANSWER: Wolff-Kishner Reduction (or Reaction)
Bashore recently used this reaction to reduce twisted amides. Parquet and Lim used a standard microwave
to speed up this reaction, although it still required multiple steps. However, a modification of this heats the
reactants in one reaction vessel and one step with ethylene glycol. This reaction uses a diazene intermediate,
which is then protonated and reacted with base to form a carbanion. Driven by the release of nitrogen gas in
the second-to-last step, and improved in efficiency by the Huang-Minion modification, for 10 points, what
is this reaction that uses hydrazine, a base, and high heat to convert a carbonyl group to a methyl or
methylene group?
ANSWER: Wolff-Kishner reaction [accept Wolff-Kishner reduction]
The application of this process to electron-poor heteroaromatic hydrocarbons yields a Shapiro-type reaction
product, and it may be used in stereospecific deuterium labeling. In a potassium decylate system, the
addition of crown ethers accelerates the rate of this reaction. A variation of this reaction that gives rise to
allylic alcohols is known as the Wharton reaction, while a one-pot variation of this reaction in ethylene
glycol is known as the Huang-Minlon modification. Under strongly acidic conditions, its counterpart the
Clemmenson reaction proceeds. FTP name this reaction with a hydrazone intermediate which reduces a
carbonyl to an alkane by boiling it in a basic solution, named for two chemists.
ANSWER: Wolff-Kishner reduction or Wolff-Kishner reaction
A modified form of this organic reaction was used by Wang in 2005 to synthesize multi-walled carbon
nanotubes. A variation of this reaction involves a reflux of ethylene glycol and allows the reaction to occur
in a one-pot synthesis, which is called the Huang-Minlon modification. The original method for this
reaction involved heating a hydrazone with sodium ethoxide in a sealed vessel at 200 degrees Celsius.
Accomplishing the same goal as the Clemmenson reduction is, for 10 points, what reaction that can reduce a
ketone or aldehyde into an alkane and is named for two Germans.
ANSWER: Wolff-Kishner reduction
A synthesis of withasomnine makes use of a variant of this reaction to cleave bicyclic pyrazole rings.
Parquet and Lin report the time taken by this reaction may be reduced by use of a microwave oven, and it
requires the use of a polar, high-boiling solvent like ethylene glycol. One modification of this reaction puts
all of the reagents in one pot; that one is named for Huang-Minlon. In its third step, a resonance-stabilized
carbocation reacts with water to form a diazene, which is then deprotonated. After that step, the production
of nitrogen gas keeps the reaction from reversing. Its first step involves the conversion of the primary
reagent to a hydrazone by reaction with hydrazine. For 10 points, name this reaction that reduces ketones
and aldehydes to alkanes, the basic analogue of the Clemmensen reduction.
ANSWER: Wolff-Kishner reduction [or reaction]
Gardner, Rand, and Haynes used this reaction to synthesize docosanedioc acid. One modification of this
reaction uses scandium trifloromethane sulfonate and BTBSH to overcome the side production of dimers
and is named for Meyer, while another variation is used on alpha-beta epoxy carbonyls and is named for
Wharton. Modern instances of this reaction are performed in a pot of ethylene glycol instead of the sealed
tubes used in the original version, in a modification named for Huang and Minlon. Its second step relies on
three equivalents of hydroxide and is driven by the evolution of nitrogen. FTP, name this alternative to the
Clemmensen reduction, which uses hydrazine to reduce a carbonyl to an alkane in strongly basic conditions.
ANSWER: Wolff-Kishner reaction or reduction
Albert Behnke's studies of deep-sea divers were a precursor to John Lawrence and Stuart Cullen's separate
work on this element's clinical use. A liquid form of this element is being used in experiments like ZEPLINIII, which seeks WIMPs. Four atoms of this element form a divalent cation with gold. It forms an octahedral
compound with six atoms of fluorine, and a compound of this element bound to four atoms of fluorine was
the first binary group 18 compound discovered. This element appears after iodine on the periodic table, and
is used in arc lamps, flash lamps, lasers, and anesthesia. Name this noble gas with atomic number 54 and
symbol Xe.
ANSWER: xenon [accept Xe until mention]
This element is used in lamps that produce short, intense flashes of light like stroboscopes and highspeed photography. The existence of its 129 isotope in many meteorites suggest that it is a product of
the decay of iodine-129. Another isotope of this element, with atomic mass 135, is produced by
uranium fission, while its most common isotope has an atomic mass of 132. In 1962, Neil Bartlett
formed a red, crystalline solid out of this element's hexafluoroplatinate, and other compounds this
elements form include one with Cs2F8 and a series of fluorides, of which the easiest to prepare is (*)
tetrafluoride. These compounds all go against the conventional wisdom that compounds can not be made
from noble gases. First isolated by Sir William Ramsay and Morris Travers in 1898 by fractional distillation
of krypton, FTP, name this noble gas with atomic number 54 and chemical symbol Xe.
ANSWER: xenon (accept "Xe" early)
The pH indicator bromothymol blue is this color at low pHs. A class of accessory pigments of this
color in plants has a namesake cycle which converts pigments that do not quench energy into those
that do. That class of accessory pigments is xanthophyll. Hydrated iron (III) oxide is this color and is
also known as (*) ochre. An intermediate step in the processing of uranium ore yields a powder named for
this color. Conducting the flame test on sodium yields this color. Phosphorus appears to be this color when
it contains both red and white phosphorus. For 10 points, identify this color of crystalline sulfur at room
temperature.
ANSWER: yellow
This color indicates the reactivity of a chemical on the NFPA 704 label. The Briggs-Rauscher
reaction abruptly changes to blue from this color. Helium was first observed as a spectral line of this
color, and xanophylls and some cartenoids are pigments of this color. Sodium is used in fireworks to create
this color, and uranium oxide is also known as this color of cake. Sulfur is commonly of, for ten points,
what color, which is a primary color along with red and blue?
ANSWER: yellow (accept orange or amber or similar until "cake")
As it was originally stated, it does not apply if the product contains any elements other than carbon and
hydrogen, because it does not account for inductive effects or resonance. Using a very hindered base may
block the formation of the predicted product, forming the Hoffman product instead. It requires a strong
base and a tertiary alkyl halide to prevent the reaction from occurring via the SN2 mechanism. Concerning
the regioselectivity of an E2 reaction, FTP, identify this principle that states that the major product results
from the elimination of hydrogen from the carbon atom originally bonded to the fewest hydrogen atoms,
resulting in the alkene with the most substituted carbon-carbon double bond, an oppposite of Markovnikov's
Rule.
ANSWER: Zaitsev's Rule (also accept Saytzeff's rule)
In VSEPR ("vesper") theory, there are this many lone pairs on the central atom in trigonal bipyramidal
molecules. Each element in group 2 of the periodic table has this number of valence-shell p-orbital
electrons. In natural units, this is the dipole moment of a homonuclear diatomic molecule. When an element
undergoes beta decay, its mass number changes by this much. To the nearest integer, this is the pH of onemolar nitric acid. By extrapolating Charles's law and locating the x-intercept on the Kelvin scale, one can
find this temperature, which cannot be reached by any physical apparatus. For 10 points, give this number,
also the number of neutrons in the lightest isotope of hydrogen.
ANSWER: zero [or obvious equivalents like none, etc.; accept absolute zero]
In proton NMR, this is the value of the chemical shift of tetramethylsilane. This is the value of the angular
momentum quantum number of an s orbital. A reaction with a rate law of this order has a rate completely
independent of reactant concentration, and compounds form a perfect crystal at this temperature on the
Kelvin scale. For 10 points, give this number, which also denotes a law of thermodynamics relating two
systems in equilibrium with a third system.
ANSWER: zero
A reaction of this order will produce lines of identical slope when the rate is plotted on a molarity vs.
time graph. Having a bond order of this value indicates that a molecule is unlikely to exist due to its
instability, and this value is the smallest orbital angular momentum quantum number. This is the
number of pi bonds formed by the central carbon when it is sp3-hybridized in (*) methane. The
standard electrode potential of hydrogen takes on this value, and this is the number of neutrons found in the
hydrogen-1 nucleus. For ten points, identify this number used to represent the charge on a neutral atom.
ANSWER: zero (accept zeroth)
The yield of these compounds can be increased through ball milling of some of their components, and one
mode of operation of these compounds proceeds through a mechanism called enantiomorphic site control. A
process for the operation of these compounds that proceeds through migratory insertions and obeys the
"principle of least nuclear motions" was developed by Cossee and Arlman. Compounds such
bis(cyclopentadienyl)titanium chloride and bis(indenyl)zirconium dichloride, known as metallocenes, have
been developed as an alternative to the traditional compounds of this type. Those traditional initiators
include vanadium trichloride and triethylaluminum, and the product of the application of these compounds
to alkenes can result in syndiotactic, isotactic, or atactic products. For ten points, identify these
stereoselective compounds used to initiate polymerization, named for a German and an Italian chemist.
ANSWER: Ziegler-Natta catalysts
Corradini, Guerra, and Cavallo recently discovered homogenous and octahedral complexes that produce
compounds with microstructures very similar to those produced while using this complex. Borate anion
dissociates from the agostic complex, allowing polymerization to commence on the active site in another
similar advancement and termination of their reactions is usually by Beta-Hydrogen elimination.
Methylaluminooxane is sometimes often used as a co-catalyst, behaving like a Lewis acid to abstract a
halide. Producing no branching in a stereoselective process that creates either the isotactic or syndiotactic
form of the polymer, this describes, FTP, what organomettalic complex which often contains titanium and
aluminum that is named after a German and an Italian Chemist, a namesake polymerization.
ANSWER: Ziegler-Natta catalyst or complex
The hydroxide of the element exists in five polymorphs of which the distorted beta-cristobalite lattice
is the most stable. It acts as a Lewis acid in hydrolysis process involving carboxypeptidase and
alcohol dehydrogenase. Its principle ores are calamine, (*) sphalerite, and smithsonite and it occurs in
the iron sulfide mineral wurtzite. This element possesses a completely filled d orbital and its only oxidation
state is plus 2. For 10 points, name this element that is used in the galvanization of steel and exists in an
alloy with copper that results in brass.
ANSWER: zinc (or Zn)
The carbonate of this element is known as smithsonite, although its most common ore is sphalerite.
Anti-dandruff shampoos typically contain a complex of this element and pyrithione (pie-RITH-ee-own).
This element forms "gag-knuckle" and "treble-clef" structures, and a structural motif coordinating its ions
is known as this element's "finger" motif. For 10 points, identify this element from the periodic table with
atomic number 30 and symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc
This element is used in a reaction which produces beta hydroxy esters from a ketone and a beta bromoester, and one structure containing this element, along with a helix-turn-helix, forms a common DNA
binding domain. This element is bonded to three imidazole rings in the active site of a certain enzyme.
Spangles form when this metal solidifies from its molten state in one use. This metal's most common ore is
sphalarite, and it is used as a catalyst in the Reformatsky reaction. This element is used in the hot dip
method of a certain process in which it is used to coat iron. For 10 points, name this element that galvanizes
steel, which has atomic number 30 and symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc [accept Zn]
The treatment of a double bond with diiodomethane and a couple of copper and this element produces
cyclopropanes in the Simmons-Smith reaction. Oxides of this element tend to be n-type semiconductors due
to hydrogen impurities. The chloride of this element is combined with hydrochloric acid to make Lucas'
reagent. The formation of beta-hydroxy esters from alpha-haloesters and aldehydes involves the formation
of enolates with this element in the Reformatsky reaction, while the reduction of ketones to alkanes can be
performed in the presence of hydrochloric acid and an amalgam with this element in the Clemmensen
reaction. FTP name this metallic element whose sulfide ores include wurtzite and sphalerite, and which
forms a thin layer on steel to galvanize it.
ANSWER: zinc or Zn
The French and American processes are used to create this element's oxide, which is also one of the
most common particulates in sunscreen. Alkenes react with an amalgam of copper and this element
to form a cyclopropane; that reaction is the Simmons-Smith Reaction. A namesake protein structure
is used to stabilize folds in the cell is called this elements (*) "fingers". This metal, found in the ore
sphalerite, always has a plus-two oxidation state. It coats galvanized steel, and alloys with copper to make
brass. For ten points, name this metal with atomic number 30 and symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc (Accept zinc oxide before "element")
This element is reacted with a diiodomethane to create a cyclopropane ring on a carbon-carbon double bond
in the Simmons-Smith Reaction. Supplements of this element are often given to prevent Wilson's disease,
since it stimulates production of metallothionein. The French and American processes can be used to
produce an important oxide of this element, now being used in transparent LCDs. This element is used in
combination with a hydroxylic solvent and a strong acid like HCl in order to produce an alkane from an
aldehyde or ketone in the Clemmensen reduction. Gag knuckles and treble clefs are types of structures
named for this element that stabilize protein folds, and its most common ore is called sphalerite. For 10
points, name this element which can be found in namesake "fingers", and which forms brass when
combined with copper.
ANSWER: Zinc [or Zn]
Swi5 and tramtrack are variants of a structural domain named for this element, and an amalgam of
this element and hydrochloric acid is used to reduce ketones in the Clemmensen reduction. An ion of
this element plays a structural role in alcohol dehydrogenase, while other protein structural motifs
coordinate this element to form gag knuckles, treble clefs, and its namesake (*) finger. A protective
coat of this element is applied to steel during galvanization, while brass is an alloy of copper and this metal.
97.5% of pennies is composed of this metal, which is also commonly found with copper in half-cells. For
ten points, identify this silver-gray metal with atomic number 30 and chemical symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc (accept Zn before read)
This element catalyzes the addition of alpha-bromo esters to ketones in the Reformatsky reaction.
This element is coordinated by a water atom and three imidazole nitrogens in the active site of
carbonic anhydrase, and transcription factor II B has a "ribbon motif" named for this element. A
structure with folds called the (*) "gag knuckle" and "treble clef" uses cysteine and histidine residues to
bind an ion of this metal, its namesake "finger" domain. Its most often used ore is its sulfide, the mineral
sphalerite. With nickel, this metal is used in rechargeable batteries. For 10 points, name this metal, which
with a thin copper coating comprises pennies.
ANSWER: zinc
This metal is required for matrix metalloproteinases to function. This element was oxidized and
dissolved in the original voltaic pile invented by Alessandro Volta, where it was combined with copper.
Since it is the first one to fill both a d subshell and a valence s subshell, it technically isn't a transition
metal. A thin layer of this element is laid over iron in the process of galvanization. This element is
combined with copper in brass. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 30 and symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc [or Zn before it is read]
A couple of copper and this element is used to convert alkenes into cyclic molecules in the Simmons-Smith
reaction. An amalgam of this element is used to reduce compounds with carbonyl carbons to alkanes in a
reaction named for Clemmenson. The most common ore of this element is sphalerite. This element is
coordinated by amino acids in a protein motif called this element's finger. The hot-dip method is often used
to carry out a process involving the electrodeposition of this metal onto another to prevent rusting. For 10
points, name this metal used to coat iron in galvanization with symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc
In the presence of palladium, a thioester is reacted with an organohalide containing this metal to produce
ketones in the Fukuyama coupling, and this element is coupled with copper to produce cyclopropane in the
Simmons-Smith reaction. An amalgam of mercury and this metal is used in the Clemmensen reduction. Its
sulfide mixed with iron forms the mineral sphalerite, and a pyrithione of this metal was common in
shampoo before deemed harmful. The production of galvanized steel involves soaking the steel in this metal
and then using galvanization to coat the steel with it. Appearing with copper and tin in pennies, for 10
points, name this metal with symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc [or Zn before mentioned]
The presence of phytates in cereals decreases the absorption of this element, which lends its name to large
family of DNA binding proteins, whose typical example contains two cysteine and two histidine residues
and which resemble fingers. An atom of this element is associated with 3 histidine residues in carbonic
anhydrase, and its pyrithione salt is commonly found in anti-dandruff shampoos. Commonly used in
galvanization, for 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 30 and symbol Zn.
ANSWER: Zinc
When bonded to Iodine, this element can react with alkenes to form cyclopropanes in the Simmons-Smith
reaction. In the Clemmensen reduction, an amalgamate of this element is reacted with hydrochloric acid to
form alkanes. Ions of this element are bonded to residues of cysteine and histidine in "treble clefs" and "gag
knuckles", which can recognize DNA and package RNA, functions of this element's namesake fingers. This
metal is utilized in the galvanization of steel, and pennies made after 1982 are mostly comprised of this
metal. For 10 points, name this element with atomic number 30, which can combine with copper to form
brass.
ANSWER: Zinc [accept Zn]
Alkenes can react with an iodomethyl-iodide of this element to yield cyclopropanes in the Simmons-Smith
reaction. In another reaction, this element is used as a catalyst to form beta-hydroxy esters. An amalgam of
this element is used with hydrochloric acid in the Clemmensen reduction. This metal is present in a protein
domain with varieties including "treble clef" and "gag knuckle," which is named for the way two cysteine
and two histidine residues bind this metal, the namesake "finger" motifs. For 10 points, identify this element
employed in galvanization, which forms the alloy brass with copper.
ANSWER: Zinc [or Zn]
In the presence of this element, an alpha-halo ester and carbonyl compound react to yield a beta-hydroxy
ester in the Reformatsky reaction. This element's sulfide is the mineral sphalerite [SFAL-uh-rahy], and its
oxide is found in calamine lotion. Hydrochloric acid and this metal's amalgam are used to convert a
carbonyl group into a methylene group in the Clemmensen reduction. Brass is an alloy of copper and this
element, which is also used to coat metals, such as iron or steel, in a process known as galvanization. For 10
points, name this metallic element with symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc [prompt on "Zn"]
The Frankland synthesis makes organometallic compounds of this element. Dialkyl derivatives of this
element are transmetallation agents in the Negishi coupling. The carbonate ore of this element is
smithsonite, while its silicate is hemimorphite. Franklinite is a spinel of this metal but its most important
source is sphalerite ore . This element is present in the active sites of carboxypeptidase and carbonic
anhydrase, while a method of transforming alpha-haloesters to beta-hydroxy-esters uses an enolate of this
metal and is named for Reformatsky. This metal is also coordinated to two cysteine and two histidine
residues in some DNA binding domains, its namesake fingers. For ten points, name this transition metal
with atomic number 30 and chemical symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc
The blende of this element is used as a model crystal structure for semiconductors like indium
phosphide. In one reaction, this element is used with alpha-halo esters to condense ketones or aldehydes to
form beta-hydroxy-esters. When coupled with copper, this element reacts with alkenes to yield a
cyclopropane. Those reactions are named for Reformatsky and Simmons-Smith. Found in the ore
sphalerite, this element and hydrochloric acid reduce ketones to alkanes in the Clemmensen reduction. In
proteins, this element makes "gag-knuckles," "treble-clefs," and other structures known as "fingers."
Galvanized steel is coated in this element, and brass is an alloy of copper and this element. For 10 points,
name this element with number 30 and symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc [accept Zn before mentioned]
This metal is bounded to two ethyl groups or coupled to copper in a reaction which ultimately yields
cyclopropanes; that is the Simmons-Smith reaction. Its sulfide largely comprises its chief ore on earth,
which is called sphalerite, and the "gag knuckle" and "treble clef" are two classes of its namesake "finger"
domains. This element has an atomic mass of 65.38, and this d-block element has one less proton in its
nucleus than gallium. It is colorless or blue-green in a flame test, and with copper, it forms the alloy known
as brass. For 10 points, identify this metal with chemical symbol "Z-n."
ANSWER: zinc [accept Zn before mentioned]
This element's sulfide names a crystal lattice that is identical to diamond except for containing
alternating atoms at adjacent lattice sites. Using this element and an acid as reagents, alpha-halo
esters and aldehydes or ketones are converted to beta-hydroxyesters in the Reformatsky reaction. A
"couple" of copper and this element is used in the cyclopropanation of alkenes called the SimmonsSmith reaction. An amalgam of this element and mercury is used with hydrochloric acid to reduce aldehydes
and ketones to alkanes in the Clemmensen reduction. To prevent rusting or corrosion, a surface coating of
this metal is applied to steel or iron in the process of galvanization. For 10 points, name this metal with
symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc
Notable features of this region include nickel mountain and tin ridge, while areas falling outside it include
superheavy island. The boundaries of this region can be defined in terms of symmetry energy, and while it
naturally includes the magic numbers like 8 and 20, it unexpectedly does not contain any isotopes of
technetium. Atoms above this region are prone to spontaneous beta decay, while those below produce
positrons, and as atomic number increases, this region diverges from the line Z equals A minus Z. Ending at
atomic number 84, identify this zone on the protons-versus-neutrons scatterplot that includes all known nonradioactive nuclei.
ANSWER: zone of stability [or stability zone]
