John Woodruff and Cyrus Avery founded a national association to promote the use of this road, and CC
Pyle organized the "Bunion Derby" which was set on it. In The Grapes of Wrath, this road was called the
"Mother Road." Once called the "Main Street of America," a song sung by Nat King Cole implored the
listener to "get your kicks on" this road. Name this historic highway that ran from Chicago to Santa Monica,
California.
ANSWER: US Route 66 (accept Highway 66 or Will Rogers Memorial Highway)
The "father" of this location was an Oklahoma businessman named Cyrus Avery. A song about it notes
"don't forget Winona" and that "Oklahoma City is mighty pretty."This multi-state location was the site of
the first drive-through restaurant and the first McDonald's. This road was removed from the Highway
System in 1985 after it was effectively replaced by the Interstate Highway System. A Bobby Troup song
invited listeners to "get their kicks on" this location. For ten points, name this famous highway running from
Chicago to Santa Monica, once known as the "Main Street of America."
ANSWER: U.S. Route 66 [or Will Rogers Highway]
This mountain contains both the English glacier and the Polish glacier, the latter named for the
expedition led by Konstanty Narkiewicz-Jodko to reach its summit. The first attempt to scale it was
by Paul Gussfeldt, but it was Matthias Zurbriggen who would climb its peak first. From the Quecha
for "Sentinel of Stone," its summit is located in the Mendoza province of Argentina, near the border of
Chile. For 10 points, name this member of the Seven Summits, the highest mountain in the Andes Range
and South America.
ANSWER: Mt. Aconcagua
The Valle (VAY-ay) de las Vacas is located at the base of this mountain, and large glaciers on this
mountain include the Gussfeldt and the Horcones Inferior. Konstanty Narkiewicz-Jodko (nar-KAY-vitz
YOD-ko) was the first to use the Polish Route to the summit of this mountain, and a commonly used base
camp for ascents of this mountain is Puente del Inca. Matthias Zurbriggen was the first to climb, for 10
points, which mountain located in the Mendoza Province of Argentina, the highest peak in the Americas?
ANSWER: Cerro Aconcagua
The geologist Giorgio Poretti used a global positioning system to measure the height of this mountain
in 2001, though his team's figure has not been adopted by the National Geographic Society. Edward
FitzGerald led the first successful expedition to climb this mountain from a base camp in the Horcones
Valley, and its summit was first reached by Matthias Zurbriggen. The Bermejo Pass lies directly south of
this peak, and its two summits are connected by a ridge called the Cresta del Guanaco. This mountain is
located in the Mendoza province on the Argentina-Chile border. For ten points, give the name of the tallest
mountain in South America.
ANSWER: Aconcagua
The city of Berbera lies on this question of water. The Gulf of Tadjoura, at the westernmost edge of this
question of water, lies adjacent to Lake Assal. The Maritime Security Patrol Area was organized in this question
of water by Combined Task Force 150. The Sheba ridge passes under this question of water, and was formed
by seafloor spreading between the easternmost plates in the Afar triple junction. Its northwestern terminus
is the Bab el Mandeb. This so-called "Pirate Alley" makes up the entirety of Djibouti's coastline. For the
point, name this gulf south of the Red Sea that separates Somalia from Yemen.
ANSWER: Gulf of Aden
Designated in 1892, the largest state or national park in the U.S. outside of Alaska is an area named for
these mountains, which includes the Upper and Lower Wolfjaw Mountains. Its name derives from a derisive
term meaning "eater of tree bark". At the eastern edge of these mountains, the Saranac River flows into a
larger question of water near Plattsburgh, the site of an important battle in the War of 1812. The first European
sighting of this range occurred when Samuel de Champlain explored the area in 1609. The southern extent
of these mountains is marked by the Mohawk River, the major tributary of the Hudson, and other borders
are formed by the St. Lawrence River and Lake Champlain. FTP, name this sparsely populated region of
mountains in northern New York State.
ANSWER: Adirondack Mountains
A museum of this mountain range is found at Blue Mountain Lake. Both of the wollastonite mines in the
U.S. are in this mountain range. One peak in this mountain range is named for its near-vertical side as
Whiteface Mountain. This range contains recreational hotspots around the Saranac River, Lake George, and
Lake Placid. It was formed as part of the Canadian Shield rather than the Appalachians, and it extends from
the St. Lawrence valley near Lake Champlain to the Mohawk valley. For 10 points, name this mountain
range of northeastern New York.
ANSWER: Adirondack Mountains [or the Adirondacks]
A club called the "Forty-Sixers" includes people who have climbed all forty-six of this range's
mountains over 4000 feet, its namesake "High Peaks." Ebenezer Emmons named this range, which
contains the Raquette River in its far northern terminus. The Finger Lakes lie at the southwestern
end of this range, which includes Mount Haystack and Algonquin Peak. Lake Tear-of-the- (*) Clouds
lies between Mount Skylight and Mount Marcy in this range, which is the source of the Hudson River. For
10 points, name this extension of the Appalachian Mountains located in the state of New York.
ANSWER: Adirondack Mountains
The MacIntyre Ironworks redirected and dammed several streams in this mountain range to create a site
called the Flowed Lands. The Tug Hill Plateau is located west of this range across the Black River.
Titanium is abundant in these mountains, where the Ausable Chasm and the Fulton Chain of Lakes are
located, and the Roosevelt Trail in these mountains marks the route Theodore Roosevelt took from
Tahawus to the nearest train station to take the oath of office. Lake George borders this range on the east
while the high peaks region of this range includes Whiteface Mountain as well as Lake Tear of the Clouds,
which is located on the slopes of Mount Marcy. For 10 points, identify this mountain range west of the
Green Mountains and north of the Catskills, located in upstate New York.
ANSWER: The Adirondack Range [or Adirondacks]
In the late 19th century, oceanographic studies of this question of water were led by Wolf and Luksch, and
during the 1st World War, the Tegethoff class battleships operated here. Notable islands in this question
include Premuda and Cres, and a minor port on it is Risan. This question receives the Cetina, Neretva, and
Krka rivers, while the Orjen Massif overlooks a fjord in this question known as the Bay of Kotor. This question
includes the lesser and greater Kvamer Gulfs, and its deepest points come at its middle and southern pits,
which are separated by a deposit called the Palagruza [palagruzha] Sill. This question, which was traditionally
said to end at Mt. Gargano, contains the Gulf of Manfredonia, and major cities on this question include Durres
and Split. Ranging from the Strait of Otranto to the port of Trieste, for 10 points, name this arm of the
Mediterranean that separates Italy from the Balkans.
ANSWER: Adriatic Sea (prompt on "Mediterranean" until mentioned)
This sea includes the Gulf of Manfredonia, the Kvarner Bay to the east of Istria, and numerous small islands
along the coast north of Dubrovnik. The Tremiti Islands lie north of the Testa del Gargano, a peninsula
north of Bari. A port during its time as the de facto Roman capital, Ravenna is now several miles inland
from this sea, whose other ports include Trieste and Venice. FTP, name this sea to the east of the Italian
peninsula.
ANSWER: Adriatic Sea
Border disputes concerning coastline on this sea focus on the Klek Peninsula and the Bay of Kotor
next to the Prevlaka Peninsula. Another boundary dispute concerns access to an inlet of this sea, the
Gulf of Piran. The island of Hvar in this sea attracts tourists to the protected city of Stari Grad, and
other cities on this sea include Rijeka and Ancona. The most populous city on this sea is the only site
of chemical warfare in the European theater of World War II, (*) Bari. The largest port on the eastern
side of this sea is Split. This sea has been in the news because of a proposed gas pipeline across it to San
Foca, just south of Brindisi. Venice is at the northwest tip of, for 10 points, what sea between Croatia and
Italy?
ANSWER: Adriatic Sea [or Deti Adriatik; or Mare Adriatico; or Jadransko Morje; or Jadransko More]
This question of water is home to the Brijuni Islands, which lie across the Fazana Strait from the Istrian
Peninsula. Extensions include Kvarner Gulf and the Gulf of Manfredonia, the latter of which lies
south of Mount Gargano. Ports found on its eastern shores include Durres, Split, and (*) Dubrovnik.
Known in ancient times as Mare Superum, it is connected to the Ionian Sea by the Strait of Otranto and has
its northern extension at the Gulf of Trieste. The Po River empties near the city of Venice into, for 10
points, what European sea that separates the Balkan and Italian peninsulas.
ANSWER: Adriatic Sea
An island in this question of water produces a sheep's milk cheese called Paski Sir. The tide peaks in the
northern part of this question of water which cause flooding are known in one language by a name meaning
"high water." Most of the largest islands in this question of water lie in the Kvarner Gulf, including the
aforementioned Pag Island as well as its two largest islands, Cres and Krk. One city on this question was
formerly known as both Epidamnus and Dyrrhachium. Aside from Durres, cities on this question of water
include Dubrovnik and Trieste. This question of water, which is connected to the Ionian Sea by the Strait of
Otranto, is home to ports such as Bari, Split, and Venice. For 10 points, name this arm of the Mediterranean
which lies between Italy and Croatia.
ANSWER: Adriatic Sea [prompt on "Mediterranean Sea" before mention; accept Kvarner Gulf before "high water"]
Invading troops in this country were killed in a 1982 fire in its longest road tunnel. The northern
part of this country can be accessed from its capital by taking the Salang or Kushan passes. This
country's highest peak is Noshaq, located in the (*) Hindu Kush range. The Registan desert is located in
this country's Kandahar province. This country's southeastern city of Jalalabad lies near the Khyber Pass,
which is on this country's border with its southern neighbor, Pakistan. For 10 points, name this country
whose capital is Kabul.
ANSWER: Afghanistan
In this country, issues such as the adoption of a constitution can be decided by a mass assembly called a
Loya Jirga. This country's border with its southeastern neighbor is called the Durand Line. This country
has the largest population of Hazara and the second largest population of its dominant ethnic group, the
Pashtun. In 2002 and 2005, this country contained the epicenter of several earthquakes in the Hindu Kush.
For ten points, name this country northwest of Pakistan and east of Iran.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Brent Huffman is directing a documentary about the battle between copper miners and archaeologists in
this country over the ruins of a Buddhist city at Mes Aynak. A 2005 documentary by Christian Frei focuses
on another Buddhist site in this country, which was once the site of the Kingdom of Gandhara. In March of
2001, two large statues in this country were dynamited for being "false idols" according to Mullah
Mohammad Omar. For ten points, name this central Asian country where the Buddhas of Bamiyan were
destroyed on the orders of this country's Taliban leaders.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan [or Jamhuri-ye Islami-ye Afghanistan]
The eastern border of this nation was drawn in 1893 and is known as the Durand Line. On its south and
southeast is the ancient province of Baluchistan, while the Wakhan Corridor connects this nation's eastern
edge to China. The Barmal and Jubruz districts of this nation lie on its eastern border, which is populated by
the namesake tribes of Waziristan. The Wazirs are a sub-tribe of the largest ethnicity of this nation, the
Pashtun. FTP what landlocked Asian nation includes the cities of Herat and Kandahar, as well as the capital
Kabul?
ANSWER: Afghanistan
Part of this country's northeast border is formed by Lake Zorkul, which lies by its Wakhan Corridor. The
western part of this country includes the city of Farah and the Mosallah Complex at Herat, while the
northern part includes the Shrine of Hazrat Ali in Mazar-i-Sharif (mah-ZAHR ee shah-REEF). This country
includes Foladi Mountain in the Baba Range, which is a southwestern arm of the Hindu Kush. Its second
largest city is Kandahar, and its eastern border contains the Khyber Pass linking it to Pakistan. Name this
landlocked country whose capital is Kabul.
ANSWER: Afghanistan
This city's namesake "great gun," a gigantic cannon, was melted down to raise money by the
modernizing Lord William Bentinck. Jean Baptiste Tavernier visited this city in 1665, spreading
the rumor that there was a mythical "black" structure across the Yamuna River. The most famous
structure here was created after the birth of Gauhara Begum. Founded by Sikandar Lodi, it was
where Aurangzeb placed his father in house arrest. This city is the home of the Sikandra, the
tomb of Akbar the Great. It is also home to the Red Fort and a mausoleum dedicated to Mumtaz
Mahal, the wife of Shah Jahan. For 10 points, name this city in India where the Taj Mahal is.
ANSWER: Agra
These non-Trobriand Islanders were studied by Polish anthropologist Bronislaw Pilsudski. Shiraoi is
one village initially founded by these people, who let an animal into the wild in their Iomante ceremony.
The name of the short-lived Ezo Republic was also used to refer to these people, who use the word kamui
to refer both to spirits and their sacred animal, the bear. These hairy people once inhabited the Kuril islands
and Sakhalin Island, and the Matsumae clan traded for their fish catch before their classification as "former
aboriginals" in the Meiji era. For 10 points, name these indigenous people of Hokkaido.
ANSWER: Ainu people
In this people's creation myth, Kamui created the world on the back of a giant trout
and land was created by a wagtail. These stories, the Yukar, were recounted in oral
tradition, since this people's language has no native written form. Their language, now
almost extinct, is a language isolate, though attempts have been made to tie it to Korean or a
paleo-Siberian language. Unlike the Yamato, males grow full beards, women are heavily
tattooed, and they have rounder eyes than their Japanese neighbors. Once believed to be of
Caucasiuan background, this is for ten points what native people of Sakhalin, the Kuril
islands, and Hokkaido.
ANSWER: Ainu (accept Ezo)
The Black Warrior River flows through the western portion of this state. This state is home to New
Echota and also names a river whose northern section is known as the Coosa. In the north of this
state lies a cities home to the Marshall Space Flight Center. In its south lies a port city where during
the Civil War Admiral Farragut is believed to have exclaimed "damn the torpedoes, full speed
ahead!" Those two cities are (*) Huntsville and Mobile respectively. For 10 points, name this state of the
Southeastern U.S. home to the cities of Birmingham and Montgomery.
ANSWER: Alabama
This state's geographic center is located near Clanton in its Chilton County. Its highest point, Mount
Cheaha, is located in the Talladega National Forest. Other features include Russell Cave National
Monument in Bridgeport and the Rockwood Caverns State Park. Physiographical regions here include the
Highland Rim and Piedmont Upland. Robert Jemison Van de Graaff was born in a famous mansion in
Tuscaloosa here. For 10 points, name the state bordered by Tennessee, Georgia, Florida and Mississippi,
with its capital at Montgomery.
ANSWER: Alabama
This state is the location of the five mile wide Wetumpka Impact Crater. The capital of this state is
located at the confluence of the Coosa and Tallapoosa rivers. Its town of Muscle Shoals has been a music
recording center. A giant statue of Vulcan overlooks this state's largest city, which is nicknamed the "Magic
City." For 10 points, name state, the home of Mobile and Birmingham.
ANSWER: Alabama
This state hosts a unique boat-based extension of the U.S. Postal Service, which brings mail to
residents along the Magnolia River. The largest cast-iron statue in the world is found in this state and
depicts Vulcan, honoring the steel industry here. Its city of Enterprise hosts a memorial to the end of
(*) cotton cultivation, the Boll Weevil Monument. For 10 points, name this state where NASA's Marshall
Center is in Huntsville and the Vulcan statue stands in Birmingham.
ANSWER: Alabama
This map line is crossed by a continuous nature preserve known on one side as Blackwater River State
Forest and the other as Conecuh National Forest. This boundary runs north-south along the eastern side of
Baldwin County, and is mostly parallel to the "Redneck Riviera." The Perdido River was the end of the
"Addition of 1812" that created the "foot" on the west of this boundary. A bar sitting on Perdido Key has
space on both sides of this border, which runs through an area often jokingly referred to as "L.A." and is
just a few miles west of Pensacola. For ten points, identify this boundary which mostly runs east-west and
separates the western side of a panhandle from another state.
ANSWER: the border between Alabama and Florida [order not important, but do not accept or prompt if only one answer is given]
This state contains Wiki Peak as part of the Nutzotin Mountains, and it contains the George C. Thomas
Memorial Library. The Homer Spit is located in the Kenai Peninsula of this state, and is bordered by an arm
of the Cook Inlet. A collection of totem poles can be found in its Sitka National Park, and the Iditarod Trail
Race occurs in this state. The Yukon River empties into the Bering Sea in this state, and it contains the
highest mountain in North America, Mount McKinley. For 10 points, name this northernmost U.S. state
with cities such as Fairbanks, Anchorage, and Juneau.
ANSWER: Alaska
This state's Matanuska Valley, which is located in the shadow of the Chugach Mountains, is one of
its main agricultural regions. This state's fishing industry is based in Dutch Harbor on Amaknak
Island, and much of the economy around Norton Sound in this state is based on mining. Another
agricultural region here is the Kenai Peninsula. Although this state's largest city is located on (*)
Cook Inlet, its more accessible port is on Prince William Sound; that city, Valdez, is connected with
Prudhoe Bay by an above-ground pipeline and was the namesake of an Exxon oil tanker that ran aground
here in 1989. For 10 points, name this state home to Fairbanks and Anchorage.
ANSWER: Alaska
This state is home to the volcanoes Mount Shishaldin and Mount Novarupta, and it contains the
Wrangell Mountains. Barrow is the northernmost point in this state, which is south of the Beaufort
Sea. This state includes the islands of Adak and Amaknak, as well as the bear-populated [*] Kodiak.
This state's Denali national park contains the tallest mountain the United States, Mt. McKinley and this
state is separated from Russia by the Bering Sea. Containing the Aleutian Islands, for 10 points, name this
northernmost US state, whose cities include Fairbanks and Anchorage and whose capital is Juneau.
ANSWER: Alaska
A national park in this state contains a valley filled with ash from the 1912 explosion of Novarupta, the
Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. Mount Chamberlain and Mount Michelson are in the Brooks Range in
the North of this state. Katmai National Park and Wrangell-St. Elias National Park are both in this state,
and another national park here has a name meaning "the high one" in Athabaskan. Its Denali National Park
contains Mount McKinley. For 10 points, name this US state that contains the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge.
ANSWER: Alaska
The islands of Baranoff and Wrangell help make up this state's Alexander Archipelago. The Tanana
Valley is among this state's best sites for agriculture, while above the Brooks Range lies its
northernmost point, (*) Barrow. In 1968, large reserves of natural gas were discovered near this state's
Prudhoe Bay on its North Slope. Across the Shelikof Strait lies this state's Kodiak Island, while its cities
include Valdez, Nome, and Fairbanks. For 10 points, identify this state that possesses the Aleutian Islands,
contains the U.S.'s highest point, Mt. McKinley, and has its capital at Juneau.
ANSWER: Alaska
This state is home to the most symmetric mountain on Earth, Mount Shishaldin, which is located on
Unimak Island. A planned bridge from Gravina Island to Ketchikan was never built, and islands off
the coast of this state include (*) Attu, Nunivak, and the second largest island in the United States,
Kodiak. Cities such as Wasilla and Fairbanks can be found in, for ten points, what non-contiguous U.S.
state containing Anchorage and Juneau?
ANSWER: Alaska
Among this state's possessions are Little Diomede Island. Prudhoe Bay is found in the extreme
north of this state. This state's former capital was Sitka. Other sites in this state include Prince
William Sound, the site of the 1964 Good Friday Earthquake, and the city of (*) Nome on the Seward
Peninsula. This state also controls the Aleutian Islands. For 10 points, name this state, this site of the Exxon
Valdez oil spill, whose cities include Fairbanks and Anchorage.
ANSWER: Alaska
Mount Spurr can be found in this state, as can the Colville River. This state features the Saint Elias Range
and the Wrangell Mountains, and it contains the Copper River. The 1912 eruption of Novarupta formed a
region in this state with numerous fumaroles called the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. Large islands in
this state include Umnak and Unimak, and its other islands include the Alexander Archipelago. It contains
the two largest cities in the U.S. by area with Sitka and its capital. A diphtheria epidemic in 1925 happened
around its city of Nome. For 10 points, identify this U.S. state that is home to cities such as Fairbanks and
Anchorage.
ANSWER: Alaska
The city of Soldotna [sol-DOT-nah] is found on this state's Kenai peninsula. Norton Sound separates this
state's St. Lawrence Island from the mainland. The Copper River Basin is found between the Chugach
[CHOO-gach] and Wrangell mountains in this state. Home to Tongass National Park, its Misty Fjords
National Monument is found near Ketchikan. Its major sea ports include Barrow, Kodiak, and Anchorage.
Name this largest US State, with its capital at Juneau.
ANSWER: Alaska
In this state, Knife Creek Gorge and the River Lethe cut through the ashfall of Novarupta in a
national park. The Messenger Feast was once celebrated in this state while the Nalukataq ceremony
is still practiced and involves tossing people on a blanket. The Ahtna River drains the Chugach
Mountains in this state, which contains Mt. Redoubt and several other active volcanoes. Controversy
has arisen in this state over the potential contamination of Pebble Creek and (*) Bristol Bay by a
copper and gold mine while another question of water in this state contains Bligh Reef. A bus along the
Stampede Trail in this state was the home of Christopher McCandless until he starved to death in a national
park named for a mountain called "The Big One," Denali. For 10 points, identify this state that includes
Kodiak Island and the highest point in North America, Mt. McKinley.
ANSWER: Alaska
This state is home to the Misty Fjords National Monument, which is part of Tongass [TON-gus] National
Forest. Some cities in this state, such as Wrangell [RAIN-gul] and Yakutat [YA-kuh-tat] are considered
their own boroughs. This state's Bush is home to such towns as Kotzebue [KOTZ-bway] and Barrow. This
state contains Denali National Park and Preserve, the home of Mount McKinley, and this state also includes
the Aleutian [ah-LOO-shun] Islands. Called "Seward's Folly" upon Russia's sale of it to the US, name this
northernmost state.
ANSWER: Alaska
Much of this state's southeastern area is dominated by the Tongass National Forest. Just off its shore is
Endicott Island, an artificial island where BP is in the process of drilling a two mile deep well. That island
which lies in the Beaufort Sea is part of the Prudhoe Bay oil field, the largest in the United States. This
state's capital is larger than Rhode Island and Delaware; that city lies west of British Colombia. For 10
points, name this state with capital at Juneau, the northernmost and largest state in the United States.
ANSWER: Alaska
A mountain range in this state begins at Cape Yakataga, and includes Mount Marcus Baker. In this
state's southeast, the Inside Passage begins. Ash flow from the 1912 eruption of Novarupta in this
state created the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes, which is in its Katmai National Preserve. Much of
this state's land is part of the so-called Unorganized Borough. A bridge connecting Gravina Island in
this state's Alexander Archipelago to its city of Ketchikan was never built, and became nicknamed "the
bridge to nowhere." The golden king crab is native to this state's island of Kodiak. A historic dog race in
this state ends at Nome after departing from Anchorage. For 10 points, name this state with capital Juneau.
ANSWER: Alaska
In 1968, this state was discovered to have North America's largest oil field at Prudhoe Bay. This
state's longest-serving Senator was found guilty in a federal corruption trial in 2008 and (+) died in a
2010 plane crash. Another politician from this state was mocked for sponsoring the Gravina Island
Bridge, a so-called (*) "bridge to nowhere." The Exxon Valdez ran aground in 1989 by this state. For 10
points, name this state once governed by John McCain's running mate, Sarah Palin.
ANSWER: Alaska
This country's Shkumbin river is the major dividing line between its namesake language's two main
dialects, Gheg and Tosk. This country has suffered from a revival of blood feuds called the Gjakmarrja. Its
port-city of Vlore was the site of its proclamation of independence, as well as the site of major riots after
this country's economy collapsed from a gigantic system of Ponzi schemes. Located across the Strait of
Otranto from Italy, it borders Greece to the south, Macedonia to the east, and Kosovo and Montenegro to
the north. For 10 points, name this Balkan nation with a capital at Tirana.
ANSWER: Albania
One social group originating in this country's culture is the burrnesha, or "sworn virgins," women who
live their entire lives as men. Its Malesia e Madhe district is a center of the gjakmarrja, a blood feud that
exacts honor under the code of Kanun. The Shkodra area is another center of ritualized violence in this
country, whose economy collapsed in 1997 as the result of a pyramid scheme. Its largest port was renamed
Durazzo during a World War II occupation by Italy. For 10 points, name this eastern Balkan state, which is
found on the western borders of Macedonia and Greece.
ANSWER: Republic of Albania [or Republika e Shqiperise]
National Parks in this province include Waterton Lakes and Wood Buffalo National Parks. Cities in this
province include Grand Prairie and Medicine Hat, and the Peace River flows into the Slave River in this
province. One city in this province is home to an annual rodeo called the city's "Stampede." One national
park in this province is home to Lake Louise, and this province has a huge oil industry due to the Athabasca
oil sands located within this province. The home of Banff and Jasper National Parks, for ten points, identify
this westernmost of Canada's prairie provinces which contains the cities of Calgary and Edmonton.
ANSWER: Alberta
This city was the subject of Mohammed Atta's master's thesis in urban planning, which rather
unsurprisingly criticized Andre Gutton's Westernization of its architectural infrastructure. It is
home to the Mosque of the Drop of Blood as well another building which reportedly houses the tomb
of Zachary, the father of John the Baptist, while the Armenian Church of the Forty Martyrs can be
found in this city's Jdeide Christian section. Quduz negotiated passage through this city's Frankish
rulers prior to meeting the Mongols at Ain Jalut, while the atypical use of the imala characterizes a
dialect of Arabic based around and sometimes named for this city. A rebuilt version of the Ayyubid
Palace of Glory is contained within a defensive structure used by Seleucus Nicator, this massive (*)
Citadel of this city, outside of which Tamerlane built a tower of 20,000 skulls after taking it from the
Mamluks. After the fall of Jerusalem, a major Hebrew codex was transferred to the large Central Synagogue
of this city, which lay just beyond the Crusader Kingdom of Antioch. The site of a massive 1138
earthquake, FTP, identify this second-largest city of Syria.
ANSWER: Aleppo
This group is in part separated by the Fenimore and Seguam passes. Major groups of islands in this chain
include the Fox, Rat and Near Islands, as well as the Islands of Four Mountains. This archipelago's oldest
permanent settlement is Dutch Harbor, built in the 1770s, while an important U.S. naval station during
World War Two was located on Adak Island. A former U.S. Coast Guard station patrolled the sealing
grounds of the Pribilof Islands, located to the north of this larger archipelago. Its farthest U.S. extents are
Attu and Unimak Islands, although technically the Komandor Islands, controlled by Russia, are also part of
this chain, which separates the Bering Sea from the northern Pacific Ocean. FTP, name this eleven hundred
mile long island chain of southwestern Alaska.
ANSWER: Aleutian Islands
This archipelago is split by the Amchitka pass. Its settlement of Dutch Harbor was manned after its
Attu and Kiska islands were attacked by imperial Japan. Parts of the eastern portion of this archipelago
were discovered by second-in-command Aleksey Chirikov, whose Danish captain on the St. Peter died on
this chain's Commander Islands. For ten points, name these American-controlled islands south of the Bering
Sea, which are between Russia and Alaska.
ANSWER: Aleutian Islands
Archaeologists are working on this area's Island of the Four Mountains to find more evidence of the hunter-
gatherers called the Unangan. The Akutan Volcano lies on a namesake island in this group; the group's
namesake tribal people inhabit the volcano's foothills. Popoff Island features Sand Point, home of the
Russian-built St. Nicolas Chapel. Its westernmost and largest island was site of fighting between US and
Japanese forces in WWII despite its harsh arctic conditions. Attu is the largest island in, FTP, what chain
off the southern coast of Alaska?
ANSWER: Aleutian Islands
This country's government-run energy company is Sonatrach, which runs the oil port of Bejaya, and two
major cities in the eastern part of this country are Setif and Constantine. The so-called "Triangle of Death"
was located south of this country's capital during its 1991 to 2002 civil war, which pitted the Islamic
Salvation Front against a government now led by Abdelaziz Bouteflika. This country's second-most
populous city is Oran, another major port for oil exports from this OPEC member, and the southern part of
this country contains the Ahaggar Mountains. For 10 points, identify this second-largest African country,
which in 1962 gained independence from France.
ANSWER: Algeria
The central portion of this country contains the large Tademait Plateau. One portion of this
country's population was formally known as Pied-Noirs, or black foot. This country is the largest
both in area and population in the Maghreb Union and the majority of the Tell Atlas Mountains are
found in this country. This country's northern portion is home to its largest cities like Constantine
and Oran and it has a name meaning the islands in Arabic, a similar etymological root to the television
station Al Jazeera. For 10 points, name this North African nation west of Tunisia and Libya once ruled by
France.
ANSWER: Algeria
The large southern provinces of this country include Adrar, Tamanghasset, and Illizi, while the
majority of its divisions are clustered around the capital and include Media, Blida, and Boumerdes.
Despite being watered by the Wadi Saour and Wadi Djaret, it is covered by several deserts, including
the Great Western Erg and Great Eastern Erg. Cities of over half a million people in this country
include Constantine and (*) Oran . The eastern Atlas Mountains stretch across, for 10 points, what
country, which borders both Tunisia and Morocco, has a northern Mediterranean coast, and is a large
former French colony in North Africa?
ANSWER: Algeria
The Weald-Artois Anticline was formed during this region's namesake orogeny. It contains the limestone-
rich greywacke zone. One subrange is drained by the Tanaro river into the Ligurian sea. Containing a
pyramid-shaped peak with famously steep faces, one pass through this mountain range is the St. Bernard
Pass. It contains the Monte Rosa, Weisshorn, and Matterhorn, as well as its highest peak, Mount Blanc. For
10 points, name this mountain range stretching through France, Italy, and Switzerland.
ANSWER: the Alps or Alpine mountains
Subranges of this mountain system include the Albula, the Bernina and the Jura. Passes through this
mountain range include the Brenner and Great St. Bernard. A rail tunnel under this mountain range is slated
to be completed in 2016 and will become the longest rail tunnel in the world. Ski resorts in this mountain
range include Courmayeur, Innsbruck and Chamonix, which hosted the first Winter Olympic Games and is
on this range's highest peak, Mont Blanc. For 10 points, name this major European mountain range in the
southern portion of central Europe, which contains Matterhorn.
ANSWER: the Alps
A western division of this mountain range contains the subterranean Trummelbach Falls. An ascent of a
mountain in this range is depicted in the last of Richard Strauss's tone poems. Divisions of this mountain
range include the Julians, Dinarics and Dolomites. Lakes bordering this mountain range include Como and
Lucerne. This range is the source of the Po and Rhone Rivers. One of the major achievements of the
Second Punic War involved Hannibal crossing these mountains. Four-thousanders in this range include the
Matterhorn. For 10 points, identify this crescent-shaped mountain range in Europe whose highest peak is
Mont Blanc.
ANSWER: The Alps [or Bernese Alps before "Julians" is read]
This mountain range was where Lord Francis Douglas died during Edward Whymper's 1865 climb. It is
traversed by the St. Bernard Pass, where namesake dogs try to find lost travelers. A peak in this range is
named after the co-founder of the Red Cross, and it is the location of the Matterhorn and Mont Blanc. For
10 points, name this mountain range found in Austria and Switzerland.
ANSWER: Alps
The highest peak of the eastern portion of this mountain range is Piz Bernina, which is one of the many
mountains over four thousand meters in this range. The tallest mountain in this range was first ascended in
1786 and two plane crashes have occurred on it. This mountain range stretches over twelve hundred
kilometers in a crescent shape over eight countries. The highest mountain in this range has been an issue for
two of the countries that share it, France and Italy. For 10 points, name this mountain range of Europe that
contains peaks like Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn.
ANSWER: The Alps
The Todi, Albula, and Silvretta groups and the Ortler and Adamello ranges make up part of the main chain
of this mountain range, whose eastern section has its highest peak at Piz Bernina. Karl Blodig was the first
person to climb all the major 4000-meter peaks of this mountain range, which is formed by the collision of
the African and the European tectonic plates. With various passes connecting cities of Italy, Switzerland,
Austria, France, and others, for 10 points, this is what mountain range in Central Europe with highest peak
at Mont Blanc?
ANSWER: the Alps or Alpen or Alpi or Alpes
The "Australian" mountain range with this name is a section of the Great Dividing Range, and the
"Southern" mountain range with this name is in New Zealand. The Jura (JOOR-uh) Mountains are a section
of the major range with this name. The Brenner Pass, which is near Innsbruck, runs through this mountain
range, which includes the peaks of Jungfrau (YOONG-FROW) and Mont Blanc. The Matterhorn is another
peak in this mountain range, which is the site of Lake Geneva. For 10 points, name this European mountain
range that runs through Austria, Italy, France, and Switzerland.
ANSWER: Alps
While climbing a peak in this range, Edward Whymper lost four members of his party. Sub-ranges of
this range are named Graian [GRAY-an] and Bernese. The Brenner Pass goes through this range, which
contains such peaks as Dom and Monte Rosa. This range's highest peak is known as the "White Lady,"
and it also contains the Matterhorn. For 10 points, name this mountain range, primarily in Switzerland,
whose highest peak is Mont (moan) Blanc.
ANSWER: Alps [or Alpen; or Alpi; or Aups]
The "Golden Age" of this area occurred in the early to mid-nineteenth century and inspired the actions of
Alfred Willis and Edward Whymper. The near complete extinction of the ibex led to the foundation of Gran
Paradisio National Park in this region, and this region contains a state called the Tyrol. The Julian
Mountains are a part of this region, which is subdivided into the Graian, Bernese, and Pennine ranges and
contains the Jura mountains. For 10 points, name this mountain range containing such peaks as Mont Blanc
and the Matterhorn and spans Italy, Germany, France, and Switzerland.
ANSWER: the Alps
The High Tauern is a subset of the central part of this mountain range, and the Greywacke zone separates
the two eastern subsets of it. The Jura Mountains lie to the north of it, and the Brenner Pass is the lowest
pass through this range. The Frejus Road Tunnel and Frejus Rail Tunnel connect two countries spanned by
this range. The St. Bernard Pass goes through this mountain range between Monte Rosa and Mont Blanc.
For 10 points, name this European mountain range containing Lake Geneva and Matterhorn.
ANSWER: Alps
Foehn winds were first observed in this mountain range, where the 5,000-year-old mummy "Otzi" was
discovered. The Mer de Glace and the Aletsch are two glaciers in it. The Great St. Bernard Pass runs
through this mountain range. Lake Constance lies at the foot of this mountain range. Its highest peak is
Mont Blanc, and it contains the Matterhorn. For 10 points, name this European mountain range that passes
through Switzerland and Northern Italy.
ANSWER: the Alps
This river is joined to another river system to its north by the Casiquiare canal. At the mouth of this river are
the island of Marajo and the city of Belem, while a major city on this river is Iquitos. It is formed by the
conuence of the Maranon and Ucayali rivers, and it is joined by a the blackwater Rio Negro at the city of
Manaus. This river is home to a namesake species of dolphin. Flowing from the Andes to the Atlantic
Ocean, for ten points, name this largest river in the world by volume found in South America.
ANSWER: Amazon River
This is the largest river which is not spanned by any bridges, and its source has been confirmed to be
the Nevado Mismi. It is connected to a northern counterpart via the Casiquiare canal, the longest
bifurcation in the world. Its largest tributary is the Madiera, and the (*) Rio Negro connects the
Orinoco river to it. For ten points, what is this South American river, considered by many to be the longest
in the world?
ANSWER: Amazon River
This river begins as the Apurimac River and the western portion of it is known as the Solimoes River.
At the mouth of this river, formerly called the Mar Dulce by European explorers, lies the large
Marajo island. The Xingu is a long southern tributary of this river, whose western portion flows
through Iquitos. The Rio Negro, one of the largest tributaries of this river, flows into the Casiquiare
canal, thereby connecting this river to the more northern Orinoco River, and large cities on this river
include the rubber producing center of Manaus and Belem. For 10 points, name this longest river in South
America.
ANSWER: Amazon River
The Meeting of Waters, located in Manaus, is the confluence between this river and the largest blackwater
river in the world. Not a single bridge crosses this river, although the cities of Santarem and Iquitos are
situated on it. One of its tributaries was discovered by Theodore Roosevelt in 1913 and is now called the
Rio Teodoro, while it was first navigated in 1515 by Vicente Pinzon. Its source, marked only by a wooden
cross, is the Apacheto cliff in Peru, and the natural Casiquiare canal links its basin with that of the Orinoco
river. For 10 points, name this river, which contains one-fifth of the world's total river flow and is the
longest river in South America.
ANSWER: Amazon river
One tributary of this river is the Tapajos, and it is formed by the confluence of the Maranon and
Ucayali Rivers. Marajo Island lies at the mouth of this river, and the city of Belem lies near this
river's delta. The pororoca, a famous tidal bore, travels up this river, and the city of (*) Manaus lies
near this river's confluence with the Rio Negro. Traveling through a namesake rainforest, for 10 points,
name this longest river of South America.
ANSWER: Amazon River or Rio Amazonas
Belem serves as the major port city on this river's estuary, and at this river's mouth, the Para river
joins with it to form the island of Marajo. In 1541, Francisco de Orellana followed this river in a
quest to find El Dorado, and the Country of Cinnamon and the Casiquaire (kaz-ik-yea) canal
connects this river's basin to the [*] Orinoco river. This river's tributaries include the Manaus and
Madeira, and it is home to species such as the giant otter, its namesake river dolphin, and the piranha. For
10 points, name this South American river, nicknamed the River Sea for its immense volume, which flows
through the world's largest tropical rainforest.
ANSWER: Amazon River
The Balbina Reservoir lies to the northeast of the largest city on this river, whose western tributaries include
the Maranon and the Apurimac. Marajo Island is at the mouth of this river, whose length was first sailed by
Francisco de Orellana. The city of Manaus is located at the confluence of the Rio Negro and this river,
which often floods rainforests in its gigantic basin. FTP, name this huge South American river.
ANSWER: Amazon River [or Rio Amazonas or Solimoes]
The city of Manaus (mah-NOW-us) marks the endpoint of large commercial shipping on this river.
Francisco de Orellana (oh-ray-YAH-nuh) was one of the first people to explore this river; later, Alexander
von Humboldt found that the Casiquiare (KA-see-kee-AH-ray) River connects it to the Orinoco. This
waterway is the namesake of the largest species of river dolphin, has major tributaries called the Madeira
and Rio Negro, and originates in the Peruvian Andes before flowing across northern Brazil. For 10 points,
identify this South American river which, in volume of water and area of drainage, is the world's largest.
ANSWER: Amazon River [or Rio Amazonas; or Rio Maranon; or Rio Solimoes]
This river is surrounded by terra preta soil, characterized by high charcoal content produced by
swidden. Its mouth contains a Switzerland-sized island, once home to the Marajoara people. Its basin is the
primary habitat of the giant otter and electric eel. The largest city on its shores is Manaus, Brazil. It is
named for a mythological race of female warriors and passes through the rainforest of the same name. For
10 points, name South American river.
ANSWER: Amazon River [or Rio Amazonas]
An unfinished highway started in 1970 that was planned to travel along this river had its endpoint set for
Benjamin Constant. This river is the namesake of a species of dolphin that is also called the pink dolphin.
In 2011, the first bridge to cross a major part of this river system was constructed to link Iranduba
(EE-ron-DOO-nuh) and Manaus (mah-NAH-oos) across the Rio Negro. For 10 points, name this river that
has the largest drainage system in the world and is found in South America.
ANSWER: Amazon River
Manacapuru and Obidos are cities along this river that is formed by the confluence of the Ucayli and
Maranon rivers. The confluence of the largest blackwater river in the world and this river is located at the
Meeting of Waters in the city of Manaus, and it is connected by the Casiquiare canal to the Orinoco River.
This river is home to a namesake river dolphin, and the Rio Negro is one of its biggest tributaries.
Containing one-fifth of the world's total river flow, making it the world's most voluminous river, is, for 10
points, what longest river of South America?
ANSWER: Amazon River
This river's delta, located partially in the state of Para, sometimes includes the large island of Marajo.
Formed from the confluence of the Ucayali and Maranon rivers, cities along its banks include Manacapuru
and Obidos. Its navigability changes near the capital of Loreto and Maynas in Peru, the city of Iquitos, as
well as near the city of Manaus, where it receives one of its major tributaries, the Rio Negro. For 10 points,
name this river that flows through much of Brazil, a long South American waterway.
ANSWER: Amazon River
Henry Bates's work on the butterflies of this river led to the theory of Batesian mimicry. Marajo
(mah-rah-HO) Island is in the estuary of this river, which is known as the Solimoes until it receives the Rio
Negro. The species Inia geoffrensis, a namesake river dolphin, lives here. It was named when Francisco de
Orellano (or-ey-AH-no) claimed to have fought women on its banks. For 10 points, identify this river
which dominates a namesake South American rainforest.
ANSWER: Amazon River [or Rio Amazonas]
One fruit that grows in this region is variously called puruma, uvilla, or this region's tree-grape. A
2011 photography exhibit to bring attention to this region used the work of Per-Anders Pettersson and
Sebastiao Salgado. A river in this region is home to pink river dolphins, and freshwater areas in this region
are home to Black Caimans. This region is sometimes known as the "Lungs of the World," and it is the
leading producer of guarana. For 10 points, name this large, biodiverse region home to one in ten known
species on Earth, and which receives a lot of precipitation along its namesake river in South America.
ANSWER: Amazon rainforest [or Amazon basin; prompt on Amazon]
This geographical term derives ultimately from a Gothic name meaning "work-ruler." A fringe theory
claims that it was actually the last name of a Welsh merchant named Richard. This word first appears in the
Cosmographiae Introductio of Martin Waldseemuller, who made an atlas in 1507 while under the belief
that the first European to sight the new world was an Italian named Vespucci. For ten points, give this term
for the New World continents.
ANSWER: "America" [or the Americas, etc.]
Manuel Moroun owns the only privately-owned one of these structures. Moroun has sued Michigan for
approving another of these Moroun fears would compete against his. Charles Ellet organized a kite-flying
contest in order to begin building one of these structures. Before working on a similar structure in
Brooklyn, John Roebling took over that project begun by Ellet. The busiest one of these is the Ambassador
between Windsor and Detroit, which is south of the Blue Water between Port Huron and Sarnia. For the
point, name these structures often over rivers which connect roads between two North American countries.
ANSWER: American-Canadian bridges [or obvious equivalents; or bridges to Canada; o Michigan-Canadian bridges before "kite-flying contest"]
The government of this city began the controversial Galliara beautification project. Legend has it that
Hazrat Mian Mir laid the foundation of one building in this city. The Sarovar is a tank here which contains
holy water. Its name comes from the "Pool of the Nectar of Immortality," an item created by this city's
founder, Ram Das. Adherents of a particular faith were horrified when troops entered this city as part of
Operation Blue Star. The most famous building in this city is officially titled the Harmandir Sahib. That
gurdwara was completed by Arjun Dev and houses the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this city in India,
home to the Sikh Golden Temple.
ANSWER: Amritsar [or Ramdaspur; or Ambarsar]
An old wooden house in this city has stood since 1528 along a courtyard once used by medieval lay sisters
called beguines. One historical building in this city maintains a traditional sand floor as Sephardic emigres
used it. This home of the Magere Brug drawbridge and the Portuguese synagogue is served by Schiphol
airport. Its visitors must distinguish bars called "cafes" from "coffeeshops," which actually sell cannabis.
This European city's center contains a floating flower market within the Canal Ring and features De
Wallen, a red-light district. For 10 points, name this home of the preserved Anne Frank house, the largest
city of the Netherlands.
ANSWER: Amsterdam
The old town walls of this city include the semicircular Weepers' Tower, so named because sailors'
wives used to say goodbye to their husbands there. This city contains the largest dependency of St.
Petersburg's Hermitage Museum. This city's canals form concentric belts. This city's neighborhood
of De Wallen contains its famous (*) red-light district, the largest in Europe. Home to the Rijksmuseum
and the Van Gogh Museum, for 10 points, name this city whose coffeeshops sell cannabis.
ANSWER: Amsterdam
In 1996 the "Defence Line" surrounding this city became a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Just east
of this city is the neighborhood of IJburg (A-burg), which is built on artificial islands. This city is on
the southwestern shore of the IJsselmeer (A-sell-mere), a freshwater remnant of the (*) Zuider Zee
(ZI-der ZAY). It is sometimes known as the "Venice of the North" for its many canals. This city is served
by Schiphol airport, which, like most of this city, is located below sea level. For 10 points, name this largest
city in, and capital of, the Netherlands.
ANSWER: Amsterdam
This city's "South Axis" business district is home to the headquarters of ING Group. The 1287 St. Lucia's
flood changed the coastline and led to the rise of this port city, whose largest park is the Vondel. Many
glass doors are found in its De Wallen district, and its semicircular rings of canals flow from the central
Grachtengordel. A question of water called the IJ in this city is connected to the Rhine and the North Sea by a
series of canals. This city, the most populous in the Randstad conurbation that also includes Utrecht, is
located on polders built up around the Amstel River. For 10 points, name this city that is, with the Hague,
the capital of the Netherlands.
ANSWER: Amsterdam
This river forms from a river that itself is the confluence of the Onon and the Ingoda, and another one which
originates from the Greater Khingan Range. It passes through the city and county of Huma and is traversed
by hovercrafts carrying people to the city of Heihe on its southern bank. Tributaries include the Ussuri and
the Zeya, and in 2007, its namesake bridge project was announced by the chairman of the Jewish
Autonomous Oblast which is adjacent to it. This river was affected by petrochemical leaks from the
adjacent Songhua River, and it is located next to the massive Daqing oilfield. Ending at the Strait of Tartary
that separates it from the Sea of Okhotsk, for 10 points, name this river forming much of the Sino-Russian
border.
ANSWER: Amur River [or Heilong Jiang; prompt on Black River before mentioned]
Railroad manager Otto Ohlson controlled this city for decades, and its Turnagain-by-the-Sea
subdivision was destroyed in a natural disaster, which also destroyed the five story tall "Penney Building."
This city is near the very large Chugach State Park. It was only seventy-five miles from the epicenter of the
1964 Good Friday Earthquake. The airport here is named in honor of former Senator Ted Stevens. The
Iditarod dog race begins in this city, and more state employees live in this city than the capital of Juneau.
For ten points, name this most populous city in Alaska.
ANSWER: Anchorage
In Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's The Sign of the Four, Jonathan Small admits to having escaped from a
penal colony on this island chain. To its east lies a group containing Henry Lawrence Island known as
Ritchie's Archipelago. To its north lies the politically important Coco Islands and its principal town is Port
Blair. They name a sea that lies to west of the Isthmus of Kra and they lie about 200 miles south of
Myanmar. For 10 points, name this island group in the Indian Ocean that forms a political territory with the
nearby Nicobar Islands.
ANSWER: Andaman Islands
This mountain range was mythically home to spirits called "apus." The highest mountain in this range
features the Polish glacier, and another mountain in it is farther from the center of Earth than any other
location on the planet's surface. This mountain range features such native animals as chinchillas and the
alpacas. It is home to mountains such as Chimborazo and Aconcagua. For 10 points, name this long
mountain range on the west coast of South America.
ANSWER: Andes [or Andean range]
In this mountain range, eight glaciers can be found on Tronador, which is an extinct stratovolcano, and
Alpamayo is notable for being a near-perfect ice pyramid. Hotspots in this region include the forests of El
Choco and its hypersaline lakes, which are inhabited by grebes and flamingos. This region, which includes
Lake Titicaca, possesses rich deposits of salt in its south, and in its north are silver mines located at Potosi.
For 10 points, name this mountain chain, the longest in the world, which contains Mt. Chimborazo and Mt.
Aconcagua.
ANSWER: Andes Mountains
The largest lake in this mountain range is split by the Strait of Tiquina (tick-EE-nuh). This range is
bordered on the northeast by Los Llanos (YAN-os). Split into regions called the Cordillera
(cor-dee-YEAR-uh), its Occidental portion contains the extinct volcano Chimborazo, and its Oriental Range
includes Lake Titicaca. Its highest point is Aconcagua. For 10 points, name this mountain range that runs
along the western edge of South America, from Venezuela to Chile.
ANSWER: Andes Mountains
This mountain range includes Mount Tarn on Brunswick Peninsula. This range includes the highest volcano
in the world, which is near its San Francisco Pass. Active volcanoes in this mountain range include Mounts
Hudson and Yate [YAH-tay]. Its eastern section juts up against the Altiplano [ahl-tee-PLAH-noe], and this
is the longest continental mountain range in the world. Name this mountain range including Mount
Aconcagua [ah-kone-KAH-gwah] in Argentina, a long range located in South America.
ANSWER: Andes Mountains
In this mountain range, the British airliner Star Dust disappeared over its Mount Tupungato in 1947. That
peak is connected to another more famous peak by the Uspallata Pass, which, though not in Rio, features a
notable statue of Christ the Redeemer of this mountain range. Due to the Earth's equatorial bulge, a
dormant volcano in this range is the spot in the world farthest from the center of the Earth. In addition to
Chimborazo, this mountain range features the tallest peak in the western hemisphere, Mount Aconcagua.
Running from Venezuela to Chile, for 10 points, name this longest continental mountain range in the world
which extends for most of the western coast of South America.
ANSWER: Andes
This range boasts the highest active volcano in the world, one whose name translates as Source of the
Salt River. Another mountain has a summit that is the farthest from the Equator. With a formation
beginning in the Jurassic period, it is undergoing an orogeny at this day. Paul Gussfeldt was the first
person to try to climb the highest peak in this range, while Edward Fitzgerald was the first to
succeed; today climbers enter from the Mendoza province to climb a mountain in this range. For ten
points, name this mountain range that runs from Colombia to Chile, and features Aconcagua in Brazil.
ANSWER: Andes
The peak of Mt. Chimborazo in this mountain range is the farthest point on Earth's surface from the center
of Earth, and Tupungato and Cotopaxi are volcanoes found in this mountain range. Ojos del Salado, the
world's highest active volcano, is located here, and the Altiplano plateau is the world's second highest
plateau. Cities such as Arequippa and Medellin can be found in other plateaus in this mountain range, and
Mendoza is a frequent stop for climbers of Aconcagua. For 10 points, identify longest continental mountain
range on Earth, stretching from Colombia and Venezuela to Chile and Argentina.
ANSWER: the Andes
The Qori Kalis Glacier and Cutervo National Park are sites found within this mountain range, in
which one can find the headwaters of the Chubut and Maule Rivers. The site of Illimani and Pissis
peaks, this range passes through the Scotia Plate and helped form the ABC islands. Running parallel
to the (*) Humboldt Current, it is home to the Potosi silver mine as well as the summit farthest from the
earth's center, Mount Chimborazo. Formed, in part, from movements of the Nazca Plate, this range is home
to the highest peak outside of Asia, Mount Aconcagua. For 10 points, identify this major range of South
America.
ANSWER: Andes Mountains [prompt on "Peru" before "mountain range"]
This range is divided into the Cordilleras (CORE-dee-YER-ahs) Occidental and Oriental. This mountain
range contains the land that is farthest from the earth's core, Mount Chimborazo (CHIM-bore-AH-zoh). The
Atacama desert lies to the west of the dry part of these mountains. The lost city of Machu Picchu lies within
this mountain range, which is also the origin of alpacas and llamas and the site of Santiago, Chile. For 10
points, name these mountains, which run through western South America.
ANSWER: Andes Mountains
The Pichincha Volcano in this mountain range was the site of a battle where Jose de Sucre defeated
Melchor Aymerich. The Potosi silver mine is found in this mountain range. The Altiplano region of this
mountain range contains a question of water where the Uros people piloted reed boats, Lake Titicaca. The
Urubamba Valley, adjacent to this range, is located near Cuzco, a ruin of the Incan Empire. For ten points,
identify this mountain range located along the west coast of South America.
ANSWER: Andes Mountains [or Andean Mountains]
Formed during the Jurassic Period, it is a Mesozoic-Tertiary orogenic belt of mountains. Scientists often
divide it into two ranges, the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera Occidental, while UNESCO divides this
mountain range into southern, central, and northern or humid regions. It is located on the Western
Hemisphere side of the Pacific, in the Ring of Fire. It's the highest mountain range outside of Asia, and was
home to the ancient Inca civilization. Name this mountain range running through Bolivia, Argentina, Chile,
and other countries in South America.
ANSWER: Andes mountain range
In 1911, this geographical feature was reached by Aleksandrs Laime while, in 1910, this geographical
feature had been spotted by Ernesto Sanchez La Cruz. In 1937, while on a search for golden ore, the
Flamingo crashed into Auyantepui leading to the immortalization of this geographical feature. Along with
Mount Roraima, this three thousand two hundred twelve feet tall geographical feature is found in Canaima
National Park. This waterfall forms the Churun River. Falling for two thousand six hundred forty-seven
feet, for 10 points, name the world's largest waterfall which is found in Venezuela.
ANSWER: Angel Falls [or Salto Angel; or Salto Churun Meru; or Parakupa-Vena; or Kerepakupa Meru]
This landmark was discovered by a party that nearly starved to death before reaching Kamarata. It is located
in the western part of Canaima National Park in the Gran Sabana region, along the Kerep River. This
geographical feature begins atop the Auyantepui, a flat top mountain, and ends in the Devil's Canyon. Its
current name honors the American aviator who discovered it when he crash-landed his plane nearby, but it
was nearly renamed in 2009 by Hugo Chavez. For 10 points, name this waterfall located in Venezuela, the
highest in the world.
ANSWER: Angel Falls [accept just Angel after "waterfall"]
An account of this location is given by Chinese ambassador Zhou Daguan. This location has two artificial,
rectangular lakes called Barays, both of which include temples on islands in their centers. It served as the
capital for a dynasty led by Jayavarman and Suryavarman, and it sits on the Siam Reap River. A large
temple dedicated to Vishnu is found at this location, whose other archeological sites include the Preah
Khan. For 10 points, identify this location where many temples, such as the 'Wat,- were constructed by the
Khmer empire in Cambodia.
ANSWER: Angkor [accept Angkor Wat; accept "Khmer empire" until "artificial"]
After raids by the Chams at this site, one king moved his capital a few miles north of this structure. This
structure's design represents a mythical mountain at the center of the universe, Mount Meru. Despite a war
in a neighboring country, Jacqueline Kennedy was hosted by Norodom Sihanouk at this structure. This
structure, whose name translates to "City of Temples," is near the town of Tonle Sap. This structure, which
is depicted on the flag of the country in which it is located, was the capital of King Suryavarman II's Khmer
Empire. For 10 points, name this largest religious structure in the world, originally a Hindu temple complex,
a Buddhist temple located in Cambodia.
ANSWER: Prasat Angkor Wat
It is different from other buildings of its style because its bas-reliefs depicting the churning of the
Ocean of Milk proceed in a counter-clockwise direction and it faces west instead of east. The
quincunx of towers represents the five peaks of Mount Meru. This building was used as the capital
city for King Suryavarman II, and is surrounded by a moat. It appears on the flag of the country it's
located in, and was once dedicated to (*) Vishnu, but is now a Buddhist temple. Its name comes from
Sanskrit for capital and Khmer for temple, and it is an example of the high classical style of Khmer
architecture. FTP, name this Cambodian temple built in the 12th century.
ANSWER: Angkor Wat or Angkor Vat
The libraries at this complex open to both the East and the West, and gopuras in this complex are
located facing each of the cardinal directions. This temple was made famous by Henri Mouhot. A bas-relief
in this complex depicts 92 asuras and 88 devas using Vasuki to churn the sea under the direction of Vishnu.
This complex was replaced as the state temple by Bayon, which was built by Jayavarman VII. Built by
Suryavarman II in the 12th century, this complex is a prime example of Khmer architecture. For 10 points,
name this large Hindu temple complex that is located in Cambodia.
ANSWER: Angkor Wat
Several previously unknown parts of this structure were revealed in a 1994 radar scan conducted by the
space shuttle Endeavor. It is decorated with several hundred statues of apsaras, and is arranged to simulate
the position of the mythical Mount Meru. It was built in the twelfth century by Suryavarman
(SUR-yuh-var-mun) II, and its walls depict scenes from Hindu epics. For 10 points, name this temple
complex devoted to Vishnu, which is found in Cambodia.
ANSWER: Angkor Wat
September 17 is National Heroes' Day in this country. Other countries hosted the Bicesse and Lusaka
agreements, which were failed attempts to end the civil war in this country. One organization that fought
for this country's independence was founded by Holden Roberto. Its largest ethnic group is the Ovimbundu.
Its first president after independence was the poet Agostinho Neto. The civil war in this country was ended
by Jonas Savimbi's death in 2002. Cabinda is a province and exclave of this country, whose civil war was
between UNITA and MPLA. For 10 points, name this country, led since 1979 by Jose Eduardo dos Santos,
that has its capital at Luanda.
ANSWER: Republic of Angola
The political geography of this nation was shaped by the Treaty of Simulambuco and the more recent Treaty
of Alvor, which ended one war of independence but started inspired another separatist movement. The Bie
Plateau lies in the center of this country, which includes the highest mountain in this country, Mount Moco,
and the large cities of Benguela and Huambo. The Cuanza and the Cunene are two of this country's main
rivers, and it is also the sourceof the Kasai and Okavango rivers. One of its more notable features is its
exclave of Cabinda, separated from the rest of the country by the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Also
bordered by Zambia to the east and Namibia to the south, FTP, identify this African country with capital at
Luanda.
ANSWER: Angola
This country's central region is dominated by the Bie plateau, and major cities include Luena, Malanje, and
Uiga. Major ethnic groups include the Kimbundu and Makongo. The Cunene forms a southern border of
this country, while the Kasai and Kwango rivers form part of the boundary with its neighbor to the north.
Huambo and Namibe are other large cities, and after achieving independence in 1975, it collapsed into a
bloody and lengthy civil war between the pro-Soviet MPLA and the US-backed UNITA separatists. For 10
points, name the African country that has been at fragile peace since 2002 while also struggling to maintain
control of Cabinda, with a capital at Luanda.
ANSWER: Angola
This place is home to Kirkpatrick basalt, found on Mt. Kirkpatrick, and one mountain chain here
are the Pensacolas. The Onyx river flows into lake Vanda near the McMurdo sound on this
landmass, and it is divided into east and west by mountains named for it. An island near it is named
(*) Deception island, and one settlement here is called Vostok. It is split into places like Wilkes land, Queen
Maude Land, and Ellsworth Land, and the Amundsen sea is adjacent to it. Home to Mount Erebus and the
Ross Ice Shelf, for 10 points, name this continent where people can visit the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica
Many fossils on this landmass are preserved in the Beacon Sandstone, and this landmass is generally
divided into Andean and Gondwanan provinces. Volcanoes on this landmass include Gaussberg and
Deception Island, and the AMANDA observatory is found on this landmass. The Queen Maud Mountains
form part of this landmass's dividing range, and this landmass's largest settlement lies near the volcano
Mount Erebus. That settlement, McMurdo, lies in, For 10 points, what continent with highest point at
Vinson Massif and which notably contains the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica
The Lemaire Channel separates this question from Booth Island. Sturge, Young, and Buckle are the three
largest of the Bellany Islands, which lie near this land mass. This entity's namesake mountain system has its
highest point at Mt. Kirkpatrick, and its subdivisions include the Horlick, Pensacola, and Dufek ranges.
Much of this entity's namesake peninsula is known as Graham Land, while the tip of it is called the Trinity
Peninsula; to its west lie Alexander Island and the Bellingshausen Sea. It is divided into areas such as Marie
Byrd Land and Queen Maud Land, and is home to the active and inactive volcanoes Mt. Erebus and Mt.
Terror. Its highest mountain is Vinson Massif, and it is indented by the Weddell Sea and Ross Sea, for 10
points, name this icy land mass, the southernmost on Earth.
ANSWER: Antarctica
The 300-mile-wide Wilkes Land Crater is located on this landmass, and the ANSMET mission has found
meteorites in this landmass hypothesized to be from Mars. The highest point on this landmass, located in the
Ellsworth Mountains, is the 16,050-foot-tall Vinson Massif. This landmass was explored by Ernest
Shackleton in the early 1900s. Its largest population center is McMurdo Station, near the Ross Ice Shelf.
For 10 points, name this landmass known for its native penguin population, the southernmost continent and
the location of the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica
Nazi Germany claimed a portion of this region and called it New Swabia. This region also contains
Enderby Land and the Ellsworth Mountains. Its Lake Vanda serves as the mouth of the Onyx River,
and its Palmer Land borders the Belingshausen Sea. This region's Ross Island is home to McMurdo
(*) Station and Mount Erebus. This region's highest point, Vinson Massif, lies on the Ronne Ice Shelf,
which borders the Weddell Sea. Lake Vostok lies in this region, parts of which are claimed by seven
different countries and which borders all the oceans except the Arctic. For ten points, name this
southernmost continent where one can find penguins and the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica
Regions in this desert include Graham Land and Victoria Land, which is home to Cape Adare. Mount
Ellsworth is the highest point in the Queen Maud Mountains, and the highest point in this desert is Vinson
Massif. Seas surrounding this desert include the Ross Sea and the Weddell Sea. The largest subglacial lake
in this desert is Lake Vostok. This continent is home to the southernmost active volcano, Mount Erebus.
For 10 points, name this cold desert continent located around the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica
The Concordia Research Base is located on this region's Dome C. Mt. Melbourne is a stratovolcano near
this region's Terra Nova Bay. This land contains a hidden rift lake, Lake Vostok. Deception Island lies off
the coast of this land. Another volcano off its coast is Mt. Erebus, which lies on Ross Island. The Ellsworth
Mountains contain the highest point of this land, Vinson Massif, and McMurdo Station is built on this land.
For 10 points, name this continent that is covered by an ice sheet and contains the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica
The Drake Passage separates the South Shetland Islands of this landmass and Hornos Island of a nearby
landmass. Seas that border it include Scotia Sea and Bellingshausen Sea. Part of the landmass is named
Queen Maud Land, and that is bordered by the Weddell Sea. The Ellsworth mountain range contains the
largest mountains on this continent. Several features of the continent are named after Amundsen including a
bordering sea and an ice shelf. For 10 points, this is what continent notable for having penguins and the
South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica
Renewed interest in the exploration of this place was due to Clements Markham. An expedition to this
place marked the last use of the Fridtjof Nansen-commissioned Fram. It is home to the Valkyrie Dome and
Dome Argus. The South Shetland Islands of this place are the southern boundary of the Drake Passage. It is
bordered by the Weddell and Ross seas and its highest point is Vinson Massif. An expedition here was led
by Roald Amundsen. This region is the driest desert. For 10 points, identify this southernmost continent
that is the location of the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica [prompt on South Pole]
The Admirality Mountains stand behind Cape Adare peninsula in Victoria Land, part of this desert. The
Theron Mountains are found in the Coats Land regions of this desert, whose other regions include Wilkes
Land, Adelie Land, and Queen Maud Land. Lakes in this desert include Ellsworth and Vostok, the largest
subglacial lake. The highest point in this desert is Vinson Massif, and Mount Erebus is an active volcano in
this desert. The Ross Sea and Weddell Sea border this continent which is covered by glaciers. For 10
points, name this continent at the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica
Point Alden and Cape Gray border Commonwealth Bay in this region. The oldest settlement still occupied
in this region is Orcadas Base, and the King Haakon VII Sea borders this region's Queen Maud Land.
Deception Island surrounds Port Foster in this region's South Shetland Islands. Weddell Sea lies between
this region's namesake peninsula and Coats Land. The Ellsworth Mountains contain the highest point on
this landmass, Vinson Massif. Mount Bird is an inactive volcano on this landmass's Ross Island, which also
contains Mount Erebus. Vostok is a subglacial lake under this landmass. For 10 points, name this continent
covered by ice that contains the South Pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica [accept Adelie Land or Terre Adelie before "Orcadas"]
This location is home to the settlements of Villa Las Estrellas and Esperanza, the latter of which is situated
on Hope Bay. This region is bordered by bodies of water like the D-Urville Sea and the Mawson Sea.
Deception Island lies off the coast of this region, as does Alexander Island, the largest landform off its
coast. Other features located here include the volcano Erebus and a peak named for a long-serving Georgia
Congressman. Exploration in this home of Queen Maud Land and the Ross Ice Shelf was pioneered by
Ernest Shackleton and Roald Amundsen. For 10 points, name this icy landmass that constitutes the world's
southernmost continent.
ANSWER: Antarctica
[
One mountin in this range is Mount Alvernia, and one subrange of this range is the Sibillini. A war
including the Battle of Caudine Forks, the Samnite wars, took place in this mountain range. This
range includes the Maritime Alps(*), and the tallest mountain in this range is Corno Grande. This range is
home to San Marino, and it ends in Calabria and runs through Umbria. The Tiber River flows from, for 10
points, which mountain range, often called the "backbone of Italy"?
ANSWER: Apennines
One group with this name includes its so-called "Showplace," Raspberry Island. The group with this
name in the United States, located off the coast of Bayfield, includes twenty-two islands, the largest of
which has the small town of La Pointe and is named Madeline Island. This name was given to a collection
of structures near Port Campbell once called the Sow and Piglets. That group is located just off of the Great
Ocean Road in Victoria. For 10 points, give this name shared by islands north of Wisconsin in Lake
Superior and by eight limestone stacks in Australia, with both sites having the a mismatched number
despite being named after a Biblical group of twelve.
ANSWER: Apostles [or Apostle Islands; or Twelve Apostles]
Mount David and Spruce Knob, each the highest point in their states, can be found in this range. The
Berkshire Hills run through Vermont as an extension of this chain, and Mount Washington can be found
in its White Mountains. The Blue Ridge Mountains in this chain are followed by Skyline Drive, and
another subchain mostly in West Virginia gets its name from a river that forms the Ohio, the
Alleghenies. For 10 points, name this mountain chain of the eastern United States whose namesake trail
runs from Maine to Georgia.
ANSWER: Appalachian Mountains [or Appalachians]
The Atlas Mountains in Morocco are an extension of this mountain range that was created during the
Taconic Orogeny. Only the New River cuts through this mountain range. Its peaks include Mt. Mitchell,
Katahdin, Clingman's Dome, and Mt. Washington. Smaller ranges that are included in this one are the
Poconos, Berkshires, White, Green, Blue Ridge, and Cumberland Plateau. This range extends from the
Gaspe Peninsula at the north to Alabama in the south. For 10 points, name this mountain range of eastern
North America with a famous namesake trail.
ANSWER: Appalachian Mountains
Cades Cove was a settlement in this mountain range before it was bought out by 1930, and Newfound Gap
is a pass through a portion of these mountains. The northernmost mountains in this range are the
Shickshocks and the Notre-Dame Mountains, but the highest points in this mountain range can be found in
its southern portion, including Clingman's Dome and its highest point, Mount Mitchell. Including the Blue
Ridge and the White Mountains, For 10 points, name this Eastern North American mountain range
stretching from Georgia to Canada.
ANSWER: Appalachian Mountains [accept Great Smoky Mountains before Shickshocks]
Springer Mountain is the southern end of an important entity in these mountains, and subranges of this
mountain range include the Black, Catskill, and Pocono Mountains. Mount Katahdin is the northern
terminus of its namesake trail, and Mount Mitchell, the highest point east of the Mississippi, is found in this
range. For ten points, name this mountain range running the entire eastern coast of the United States.
ANSWER: Appalachian Mountains (Accept Appalachian Trail before "mountains")
This mountain chain's northernmost section is known as the Shickshocks. Mt. Equinox is the highest point
of the Taconics, part of this system. A valley named for this chain contains the Kittatinny River Valley.
James Hall formed his geosynclinal theory of mountain building by studying these mountains. In Pangaea it
was connected to the Anti-Atlas Mountains. Its largest peak was named for a university professor who
fatally fell from it. A large section of this chain consists of alternating ridges and valleys as its name
suggests. It was created in the Alleghenian orogeny. Ranges in this mountain system include the Catskills,
the Blue Ridge range, and the Great Smoky Mountains. Containing Mount Katahdin and Mount Mitchell,
for 10 points, name this mountain chain traversed by a namesake trail that goes along much of the eastern
United States.
ANSWER: Appalachian Mountains
Inhabitants of this geological feature speak a namesake dialect with rule-governed a-prefixing of
progressive verbs. One end of this range contains the Shickshocks and Baxter State Park. Further south,
mines in this range are the largest source in the Americas for anthracite coal. This range contains Springer
Mountain and Mount Katahdin, has Blue Ridge and Great Smoky subchains, and features Mount Mitchell,
the tallest in America east of the Mississippi river. For 10 points, name this long mountain range whose
namesake trail can be hiked north from Georgia to Maine.
ANSWER: Appalachian Mountains [prompt "Appalachia" until "range" is read]
Baxter State Park contains one of the higher northern peaks in this mountain range, Mount Katahdin,
which is near the Mahoosuc Range. One belt of these mountains is the Ridge and Valley Province.
An early attempt to build a path through these mountains was the Wilderness Road. The highest
mountain in this range is Mount Mitchell. This range includes the Blue Ridge and Great Smoky
Mountains. The western part of this mountain range, called its plateau, is divided into the Catskills,
Cumberlands, and Alleghenies. Name this mountain range extending from southeast Canada to
Alabama that goes through many eastern U.S. states.
ANSWER: Appalachian Mountains [or Appalachians]
This location was the subject of a 1921 article subtitled "a project in regional planning" by Benton
McKaye. Randall Lee Smith murdered two people at this multi-state location, which features eight
huts near the (+) White Mountains to provide lodging and meals. Governor Mark Sanford claimed to
be here while he was actually with his mistress. It runs about (*) 2200 miles from Springer Mountain to
Mount Katahdin, and the highest point on this location is Clingman's Dome. For 10 points, name this
famous hiking trail that extends from Georgia to Maine.
ANSWER: Appalachian National Scenic Trail
The southwest portion of this landmass is adjacent to the Bab al-Mandeb strait. Its southern third is a
large sandy desert known as the Empty Quarter. Its west coast is called the Hejaz. This peninsula contains a
city that has the Kaaba. For ten points, name this peninsula consisting of countries like Yemen and a
namesake Saudi country.
ANSWER: Arabian Peninsula [or Arabian Subcontinent]
This region is where a festival honoring a city's patron saint begins with a mass in the Saint Chapel of
the Basilica del Pilar. The "Solemn Mass of Infants" and "The Offering of Flowers" are a part of the Fiesta
del Pilar held in this autonomous community. In this region, Pedro de Arbues was assassinated in the Leo
Seo Cathedral. This region is home to Aneto, the highest mountain in the Pyrenees, and a monarch of this
region issued the Alhambra Decree with his wife Isabella. That monarch was Ferdinand II. For ten points,
name this autonomous community of northeastern Spain that includes Zaragoza.
ANSWER: Aragon [or Arago]
A former center of this question of water's fishing industry was Moynaq, a city whose population has
plummeted since the 1980s. This question of water was split by the construction of the Dike Kokaral
across the Berg Strait in 2006. The now-uninhabited town of Kantubek on Rebirth Island in this
question of water was once the world's largest dumping ground for anthrax. One river flowing into it is
tapped by the Kara Kum Canal, which was built to provide irrigation for cotton. That tributary, the
(*) Amu Darya, as well as the more northerly Syr Darya, have been so taxed that this lake's namesake city
now lies 12 kilometers away from it, while in 2008 its eastern portion ceased to exist. For 10 points, name
this shrinking lake in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.
ANSWER: Aral Sea
The rivers known in ancient times as the Oxus and the Jaxartes emptied into this question of water. A
biological research station was located on Vozrozhdeniya island in this question of water. The Karakum canal
once connected to this question of water, and the region around it is an important cotton-growing region. This
question of water receives little water from the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya Rivers. Since 1960, this lake has
shrunk to only a fraction of its original size. For ten points, identify this saline question of water located
between Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan.
ANSWER: Aral Sea
This question of water is bordered to the east and south by the Kyzyl and Kara deserts, and to the west by the
Ust'-Urt Plateau. The Russian-administered Baikonur Cosmodrome lies on one of the two major rivers
flowing into it, and the Dike Kokaral separates its northern and southern sections. The Amu Darya and Syr
Darya drain into this saline lake, which is rapidly shrinking due to irrigation. FTP, name this central Asian
lake.
ANSWER: Aral Sea
Changes to this lake destroyed its half-million-head per year muskrat trapping industry. This lake's
diversion to irrigate cotton farms caused a salinity crisis. This destination of the Syr Darya and Amu Darya
rivers is home to an island where Soviet scientists researched biological weapons. For 10 points, name this
once-vast lake on the Kazakh-Uzbek border that has nearly disappeared since 1960.
ANSWER: the Aral Sea
Military presence on this question of water began in 1847 with the construction of two ships at Orenburg; that
presence coincided with the founding of Fort Raimsk on this question of water. One island in this question of
water, Vozrozohdeniye Island, was a main site of biological weapons testing in the Soviet Union. Scientists
believe this question of water will continue to shrink rapidly until it totally vanishes. Name this sea between
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.
ANSWER: Aral Sea
The Turan Lowlands lie to this question's southeast, while cities of Nukus and Muynok are in Karakalpakstan,
which lies to the south of this question of water. Nuclear tests were performed on its Vozrozhdeniya Island, and
deserts near it include the Kyzyl Kum. The Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers both flow into this.
Construction of the Qaraqum Canal off the Amu Darya to irrigate the desert for cotton farming was highly
inefficient, allowing loss of 50% of the water it carried and was a chief contributor to the severe desiccation.
Having lost more than 80% of its volume since 1960, this is, for 10 points, what formerly 4th largest lake in
the world located in central Asia?
ANSWER: Aral Sea
This question of water's Vozrozhdeyina (vahz-RAHZ-din-ey) Island was once the site of a bioweapons
facility. The construction of the Dike Kokaral (koh-kuh-RAHL) Dam raised the northern half of this sea by
eight meters. That is in sharp contrast to the effects of the construction of the Qaraqum (KAR-uh-koom)
Canal and other irrigation measures, that caused its water levels to plummet drastically during the twentieth
century. The Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers feed, for 10 points, which Asian sea, shared between
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan?
ANSWER: Aral Sea
This question of water once contained Rebirth Island. The Great Plan for the Transformation of Nature
caused the high salinity of this endorheic question of water, which borders Karakalpakstan to the south. The
Amu Darya formerly emptied into this question of water, and it has no outflows. For ten points, name this lake
in central Asia that has shrunk to a tenth of its original size.
ANSWER: Aral Sea
I.V. Rubanov made an extensive study of this question of water, focusing on the nearby geology. The
Khwarezm Oasis lies south of this lake. Bioweapons such as anthrax and smallpox, the latter of which was
accidentally released, were stored on an island in this lake. After the diversion of the Amu Darya and the
Syr Darya rivers, which both flow into this lake, its salinity has increased as it split in two. For ten points,
name this question of water in Central Asia, which has shrunk in area in the last several decades.
ANSWER: Aral Sea
This location-specific geographic process ruined a large muskrat trapping industry in the town of
Muyank. This process has forced the Karakalpak people to switch to Islam Karimov's preferred
livelihood, cotton farming, in fields affected by (+) salt storms. An abandoned bioweapons lab is no
longer isolated on Rebirth Island due to this process. It began due to the Karakum canal and other
diversions of the (*) Syr Darya and Amu Darya rivers for Soviet irrigation projects. For 10 points, name
this ecological disaster affecting Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, the near total dry-up of an Asian sea.
ANSWER: shrinking of the Aral Sea [accept disappearance, dessication, or other close equivalents implying that there is less water in the Aral Sea as time goes on rather than "shrinking"; do not accept or prompt general answers such as "desertification" or "climate change"]
Edward Abbey recounted being a ranger of this park in the memoir Desert Solitaire. Hungarian-born
prospector Alexander Ringhoffer first discovered an area in this national park with many erosion-produced
rock fins, which he termed the Devil's Garden, but which is now known as the Klondike Bluffs. Popular
locations in this park include a gigantic Balanced Rock, as well as a landmark nicknamed "delicate" that is
popular as a screensaver choice for Windows users everywhere. For ten points, name this national park in
Utah, known for its many natural bridging formations.
ANSWER: Arches National Park
A 2007 scientific mission named for this question of water established the 35th out of 40 Russian NP drifting
stations. This question's Makarov Basin lies on one side of the Lomonosov Ridge, which divides this question into
two major parts. The Fram Strait passes by Svalbard on the way to this question of water, the namesake of an
"amplification" of climate-change effects. After the Norwegian Current passes through the Barents Sea, it
supplies water to this question. In July 2007, a Northwest Passage opened up due to the melt of sea ice in this
question. For 10 points, what question partly comprised of Baffin Bay, the Beaufort Sea, and the Kara Sea is the
smallest of the world's oceans?
ANSWER: Arctic Ocean [or Arctic Sea; or Arctic Mediterranean Sea]
One landmass that extends into this question of water was named by Julius von Payer and Karl Weyprecht,
who led 1873's unofficial Austro-Hungarian Expedition. That is why a Russian-controlled archipelago in
this question is called Franz Josef Land. One of its extensions names the oldest North American commercial
corporation; that extension is Hudson Bay. Murmansk's port on the White Sea is on this question of water that
also includes the Beaufort, Norwegian, and Siberian Seas. For ten points, name this ocean surrounding the
North Pole.
ANSWER: Arctic Ocean
The lowest point in this question of water is the Fram Basin, which is interrupted by the Nansen
Cordeilla. It includes the Lomonosov Ridge, which may contain oil and gas reserves and is the subject of
competing land claims due to dubious continental shelf extensions. Touching Cape Morris Jesup, this question
of water has the highest percentage of continental shelf of any other ocean and includes ports at Barrow,
Prudhoe Bay and Murmansk. For 10 points, identify this ocean which in 2007 lost nearly 10 million
kilometers of sea-ice during the summer thaw.
ANSWER: Arctic Ocean
The Limay and Neuquen rivers are located near this country's city of Bariloche, and this country is
home to the Perito Moreno glacier. Comodoro Rivadavia is a center for oil production in this
country, and this country shares Iguazu Falls(*) with its neighbor. Provinces in this country include
Mendoza, which is home to this country's tallest mountain, and this country's capital city includes the
district of San Telmo and landmarks such as the Pink House. That city is located on the Rio de la Plata. For
10 points, name this country home to the mountain Aconcagua, with capital at Buenos Aires.
ANSWER: Argentina
This country's Mendoza region is an internationally important wine center. This country's
southernmost city is Ushuaia, which is at the foot of the Martial Mountains and north of the Beagle
Channel. This country shares the (*) Patagonia region with its western neighbor, and it continues to
claim possession of the Malvinas or Falkland Islands. It is bordered to the east by Uruguay and is where
"gauchos" ride on the Pampas. For 10 points, name this South American country which shares a long
border with Chile.
ANSWER: Argentina
This nation possesses the Ibera Natural Reserve in its province of Corrientes, and the Le Maire Strait
separates La Isla de los Estados from its mainland. Its city of Rosario sits on the Parana River, which
ultimately merges into the Rio (*) de la Plata. Containing half of the spectacular Iguazu Falls and all of
the summit of Aconcagua, this country's southern half helps comprise the fertile Pampas, and it splits
Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego with neighbor Chile. For 10 points, identify this second-largest nation in
South America with capital at Buenos Aires, named for its supposed silver deposits.
ANSWER: Argentina
This country contains its continent's lowest point, Laguna del Carbon. This country's northwest part lies
within the Gran Chaco region. This country owns the eastern part of Tierra del Fuego. Regions in this
country include Patagonia in the south and the plains known as the Pampas. It disputes ownership of the
Falkland Islands with the United Kingdom. For 10 points, name this South American country whose capital
is Buenos Aires.
ANSWER: Republica Argentina [or Argentine Republic]
The oldest metro line in this country's capital was once known as the Anglo. The salt lake Mar Chiquita is
the terminus of the Segundo River in the Cordoba province of this nation. The Ibera wetlands in this
country lie within a region consisting of Misiones, Entre Rios, and Corrientes, the Mesopotamia region. The
Gulf of San Jorge contains its port city of Comodoro Rivadavia. San Martin island lies in this country's
section of a natural landmark, as does the southern part of the Devil's Throat. This country's capital lies on
the southwestern shore of a question of water whose northern shore contains another country's capital,
Montevideo; that question is the Rio de la Plata. It shares Iguazu Falls with Paraguay and Brazil, and its
northern grassland is called the Pampas. For ten points, name this South American nation with capital at
Buenos Aires.
ANSWER: Argentine Republic [or Republica Argentina]
This nation's city of Magdalena was the site of the world's largest oil spill ever, and this nation
claims the South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands. Along with its western neighbor, this country
is home to the Mapuche, and it is also the site of the southern half of the river (*) Parana. This nation
also claims the Malvinas Islands and is divided from two of its northern neighbors by the Rio de la Plata.
This nation is home to the pampas, which are home to its gauchos. For 10 points, name this nation with
capital at Buenos Aires.
ANSWER: Argentina
This country's Mar Chiquita is northeast of its second-largest city. Its capital city contains a planetarium
named after Galileo and the 9th of July Avenue, which honors this country's independence day. Its province
of Corrientes is separated from the Chaco province by the Parana River, and it is home to the Mapuche
tribes, which inhabit its eastern pampas and Patagonia regions. The tallest mountain in this country as well
as the entire Western and Southern Hemispheres, is Aconcagua. For 10 points, name this South American
country claiming sovereignty over the Falkland Islands, with capital Buenos Aires.
ANSWER: Argentina [or Argentine Republic; or Republica Argentina]
This nation's lake district contains Nahuel Huapi National Park, and a peak containing the Polish Glacier
lies in this nation's Mendoza Province. The Perito Moreno Glacier is found in its south and the north of this
country lies in the Pampas. The Rio de la Plata flows north of the capital of this nation that contains
Aconcagua. Sharing an Andean border with Chile, this is, for 10 points, what South American nation with a
capital at Buenos Aires?
ANSWER: Argentina or Republica Argentina [accept Argentine Republic]
This country's province of Mendoza contains the continent's highest peak. This country and the UK have
disputed claims over South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands. The Iguazu River, known for its namesake
falls, flows into the Parana River in this country. This country's southern portion contains most of the
Patagonia region, and it owns the eastern half of Tierra del Fuego. The northern part of this country is home
to plains known as the Pampas, and the Rio de la Plata lies between it and Uruguay. For 10 points, name
this South American country with capital Buenos Aires.
ANSWER: Argentina
The Iguazu joins the Parana river as it enters this country. The highest peak in this country is one of the
Seven Summits, and is the highest peak in both of the hemispheres it is in. This country's northern border is
formed by the Rio de la Plata. This country still claims that it is the owner of the Falkland Islands. For 10
points, name this South American country where one can climb Mount Aconcagua (AH-con-COG-wah),
ride through Patagonia, and visit Buenos Aires.
ANSWER: Argentina
According to a magazine article about the 2005 version of this event, the nickname "hitching post" was
given to a tourist who watched this event and couldn't sit down during it. This event includes thousands of
students who are trained to flip colored cards to create mosaics inside the May Day Stadium. This event is
commonly named after a popular folk song, and it requires around one hundred thousand performers. For
the point, name this multiple-month long festival that was originally held in 2002 to celebrate the birth of
Kim Il Sung, and which is held every year in Pyongyang.
ANSWER: Arirang Festival [or North Korean mass games; or mass gymnastics and artistic performances]
Redington Pass runs between the Santa Catalina and Rincon mountains in this state, which includes
the unfortunatelsy-named historical site of Homolovi. The Mogollon Rim separates them from their
Western neighbors, while its city of Two Guns lies on Diablo Canyon, which borders the Barringer
Meteorite. Cliff Dwellings abound in its Montezuma Castle and (*) Walnut Canyon parks, while Chile
Formations can be seen in the Painted Desert region. Also home to the Saguaro Petrified Forest National
Parks, it is separated from Nevada by Lake Meade and Hoover Dam. Home to cities like Glendale, Mesa,
and Flagstaff, FTP, identify this Southwestern state whose cities also include Tempe and Tucson, as well as
its capital, Phoenix.
ANSWER: Arizona
This state's mountain ranges include the Huachuca, Peloncillo and Chiricahua, the latter two of which lie
near the Sulphur Spring Valley. The Mogollon Rim separates the high plateaus in the north of this state
from the lower southern portions. Nogales is a town on its southern border, and the Imperial and Laguna
dams are on the river forming its western boundary. Other rivers in this state include the San Pedro and the
Salt. The San Francisco Peaks lie south of this state's most famous natural feature, and north of Flagstaff.
FTP, name this U.S. state, home to the Painted Desert and the Grand Canyon.
ANSWER: State of Arizona
According to local legend, Jacob Waltz established the Lost Dutchman's Gold Mine near this state's
Superstition Mountains. Brigham Young's son John built Fort Moroni on this state's San Francisco Peak,
which includes its highest point, Humphreys Peak. This state's northern border straddles Monument
Valley, where John Ford filmed many of his movies. Its largest cities include Chandler and Scottsdale, and
it is home to the Big Horn Mountains and Sonoran Desert. The Colorado River forms this state's most
notable feature. For 10 points, name this home of the Grand Canyon.
ANSWER: Arizona
One city in this state, named for a tree that Edward Beale destroyed, was the site of the personal observatory
where Percival Lowell discovered Pluto. Mountains surrounding the capital in this state include the White
Tank Mountains and the Superstition Mountains. This state's city of Window Rock is the seat of
government for the Navajo Nation. It contains the Painted Desert, Petrified Forest, and Saguaro National
Park. Its cities include Winslow, Flagstaff, Yuma, and Tucson. For 10 points, name this southwest state,
home to the Grand Canyon and Phoenix.
ANSWER: Arizona
Though it is not California, this state contains the "best-preserved meteorite crater on Earth," the
Barringer Crater, which lies about forty miles from the San Francisco volcanic field. This state's town of
Globe contains the Coolidge Dam on the Gila (HEE-lah) River, which lies near the reservations of the
Navajo and Hopi. This is the southwestern member of the states that form the Four Corners. For 10 points,
name this southwestern state where Flagstaff and Tucson are found.
ANSWER: Arizona
A company called EnviroMission has announced plans to build the world's tallest solar power plant in this
state. This state is home to the most populous county in which John McCain defeated Barack Obama, and
that county contains four of the fastest-growing cities in the United States, including Buckeye, Surprise, and
Goodyear. That county, the fourth most populous in the United States, is Maricopa County, where Joe
Arpaio holds office. This state is also home to Gila County and Yuma County. Jan Brewer is the governor
and Gilbert and Scottsdale major cities in, for 10 points, which state where Senate Bill 1070 has been
criticized as the legalization of racial profiling?
ANSWER: Arizona
Nearly every saguaro cactus in the United States is found in this state's Catalina State Park. On its
western border, a replica of London Bridge extends to an island in Lake Havasu. Its northeastern counties
of Apache and Navajo are the site of the Petrified Forest. For 10 points, identify this southwestern U.S.
state containing Tucson and Phoenix.
ANSWER: Arizona
This state is home to the Yavapai people. It contains the fourth most populous county in the United
States, Maricopa County. That county contains the cities Chandler and Glendale, as well as Tempe. Its
northeast section contains part of the Navajo Nation, the only area of this state which observes Daylight
Saving Time. It is home to the cities of Yuma and Mesa, as well as the Grand Canyon. For 10 points, name
this state whose capital is Phoenix.
ANSWER: Arizona
Two neighboring counties in the southeast of this state are Greenlee and Graham, whose county seats
are Clifton and Safford, respectively. The highest point in this state is Humphrey's Peak, and its
second most populous county is Pima County. [*] Notable features of this state include Petrified Forest,
Monument Valley, the Painted Desert, and the Sonoran Desert, while its longest river is the Gila [HEE-lah]
and its second-most populous city is Tucson. For 10 points, name this state that includes Grand Canyon
National Park, with capital at Phoenix.
ANSWER: Arizona
Tuba City is located in this state, which was the target of a tourism boycott until adopted Martin Luther
King, Jr. day in 1992. The South Rim and the Sonoran Desert are components of a landmark in this state.
Tucson (TOO-sahn) is a city in this state's southeast. For 10 points, name this state that contains the Grand
Canyon.
ANSWER: Arizona [or AZ]
One city in this state was once a gambling mecca under the control of Mayor Leo McLaughlin's
machine. Its museum of military history honors the birthplace of General Douglas MacArthur. A former
tribe in this state, the Quapaw, names both a section of its capital city and a building at "Bathhouse Row."
It is home to the only publicly accessible diamond-bearing site in the world, Crater of Diamonds State Park.
Tyson Foods is based in this state, whose biggest private employer is located in Bentonville and operates
Sam's Club. For 10 points, name this state, the location of Wal-Mart's home offices, and also the site of
cities such as Hot Springs and Little Rock.
ANSWER: Arkansas
This state's Bathhouse Row is located in its only National Park. This state's capital is located in Pulaski
County and its second largest city is Fort Smith. Much of the Boston Mountains are in this state as well as
the southern half of the Ozarks. For 10 points, name this home of Hot Springs and Little Rock.
ANSWER: Arkansas
The Rohwer War Relocation Center housed Japanese-Americans during WWII in this state's Desha
County. The headwaters of this state's White River are located in the Boston Mountains in its
northwest. The Ouachita Mountains run through the center of this state, which also includes the (*)
Ozarks in its north. This state's namesake river originates in Leadville, Colorado, and flows through
Oklahoma and Kansas before passing its cities of Fort Smith and Pine Bluff. For 10 points, name this
southern state with capital at Little Rock.
ANSWER: Arkansas
The Purgatoire River flows into this river near the John Martin Reservoir, and this river's
namesake navigation system enters it northeast of Muskogee. The Trail of Tears Overlook is
located along this river at Fort Smith, and this river is the location of a city that is home to the
Phillips Oil "Philcade" and the John Hope Franklin Reconciliation Park. That city on this river
was the loction of a 1921 race riot that killed 300 people, as well as Oral Roberts University, and
is Tulsa. Another city on this river is located at the foothills of the Ouachita Mountains and is the
location of Central High School. For 10 points, name this river that flows through the capital of
its namesake state, Little Rock.
ANSWER: Arkansas River
The Aurora Highlands, now a wealthy residential neighborhood in this city, have been declared a
registered historical place for their role in the Civil War. This city is connected to the neighboring
communities of Bailey's Crossroads and (+) Annandale by the Columbia Pike. Residential areas in
this city include Ballston. This city's commercial areas include Crystal City, home to many aerospace
companies, and Rosslyn, which is near the southern end of the Memorial Bridge. This city is home to
the world's largest office building by (*) area, and to an airport named for the 40th President. For 10
points, name this city across the Potomac River from Washington DC, home to the Pentagon and a
namesake cemetery.
ANSWER: Arlington, Virginia
It is separated from its western neighbors by the Aras and Arpacay rivers. The cities of Goris and Mogrhi
are found in this country's southernmost area, Syunik. The provinces of Tavush and Gegharkunik in this
country border its major question of water, Lake Sevan. Its military administers a neighboring country's
province of Nagorno-Karabakh, and in turn this country separates the exclave of Naxcivan from Azerbaijan.
For 10 points, name this homeland to a group that was once the object of genocide by Turkey, a former
Soviet republic whose capital is Yerevan.
ANSWER: Armenia
This country controls the exclave of Bashkend in its eastern neighbor, while four spots within this country's
borders, including Barkudarly, are controlled by that same neighbor. The east-central of this country
includes the city of Zod but is dominated by Lake Sevan. Its southeast borders the noncontiguous
Nakchivan area, while this country vies for influence in the secessionist Nagorno-Karabakh area of
Azerbaijan. Also bordering Georgia, Iran, and Turkey, for 10 points, name this Caucasian republic whose
capital is Yerevan.
ANSWER: Republic of Armenia [or Armenia Hayastan; or Hayastani Hanrapetut-yun]
The ALZHIR camp, formerly located outside this city, was designated for the wives of Stalin's enemies.
This city was renamed "Virgin Lands City" in 1961 to mark it as a hub for Khrushchev's grain production.
Its concert hall resembles a flower in bloom, while its Pyramid of Peace is intended to hold constructs for
several different religions. Kisho Kurakawa drafted the initial plans for this city's reconstruction, a project
that has been taken up by Vladimir Laptev. Formerly called Ak Mola, this city's Bayterek resembles an egg
in a poplar tree. Located on the Ishim River, it is the second-largest city in its country, after Almaty. For 10
points, name this capital of Kazakhstan.
ANSWER: Astana [or Ak Mola before mention]
A monument in this city is meant to represent the destination of the sacred bird Samruk. This city
includes a 150-meter tall transparent tent that is as wide as ten football fields. A tower in this city was
designed to resemble the tree of life holding a golden egg and also contains the Ayaly-Alakan, a handprint
from the president of this city's country. Residents of this city gave the nickname Chupa Chups to a tower
called Baiterek. For ten points, name this city that became a capital city in 1997 when Nursultan Nazarbayev
moved the government from Almaty, Kazakhstan.
ANSWER: Astana
American and British aid in the building of this structure was scuttled due to a country's decision to
engage Czechoslovakia in an arms deal. This structure's negative impact on the fertility of its control area
has required the spreading of approximately one million tons of artificial fertilizers per year, and it is
credited with the reduction of anchovies in the eastern Mediterranean. The building of this structure
required the dismantling and reassembling of the temples of Abu Simbel, and it impounds the Lake Nasser
reservoir. For ten points, name this Egyptian dam that controls the annual flood of the Nile River.
ANSWER: Aswan High Dam [or Al Sadd al-Ali]
One city on western edge of this region is known as La Villa Sur, and the city of Calama is located in
the interior of this region where the Church of San Pedro is located. The Paranel Observatory is
located in this region because there is little interference from artificial light or radio waves. Part of
this region receives a fog known as the Camanchaca which produces enough moisture to support
lichens and some cacti and the Loa River flows through this region. The Cordillera de la Sal are located
in this region that is surrounded on the east by Cordillera Domeyko. This region is composed mainly of salt
basins, sand and Felsic lava flows, which have led it to be compared to Mars, and parts of this region have
not seen rain in over 400 years. For 10 points, name this driest desert in the world, located mostly in Chile.
ANSWER: Atacama Desert
The four-unit VLT or "Very Large Telescope" of the Paranal Observatory is located in this region. It is the
location of the abandoned Escondida copper mine as well as 170 abandoned nitrate mining towns. National
Geographic and the World Wildlife Fund disagree on this region's boundaries with National Geographic
arguing it extends further into Peru. The town of Yungay in this region receives less than a millimeter of
rain a year. FTP, name this primarily Chilean desert near the Andes that is widely considered the driest
place in the world.
ANSWER: Atacama Desert
This region experiences a type of fog that is known as camanchaca. The main river that passes
through this area is the Loa River. This region is bound on the west by the Cordillera de la (*) Costa
and on the east by the Cordillera Domeyko. For 10 points, name this location often considered to be the
driest on the Earth, which runs alongside the Andes Mountains and is a desert located in northern Chile.
ANSWER: Atacama Desert [or Desierto de Atacama]
The Grandfather geyser field is located in this region. The Very Large Telescope is located in the
Paranal (pah-rah-NAHL) Observatory in this region. The few mammal species native to this area
include a variety of grey fox, Darwin's leaf-eared mice, and the (*) viscacha (vees-CAH-chuh). Owing
to El Nino, the southern portion of this desert annually flowers between September and November. This
desert is rich in copper and nitrate deposits, the latter of which sparked the War of the Pacific. For 10
points, name this driest hot desert in the world, located to the west of the Andes.
ANSWER: Atacama Desert
The upper limit of this region is formed by the Loa river. A megaport to the east of this region is Mejillones.
The Battle of Topater took place in this region near the cities of Iquique and Antofagasta, and this region
was disputed due to its heavy deposits of nitrate. Life in this desert is supported by fog due to the cold water
of the Humboldt current, as this region averages less than a millimeter of rain per year. Lying in the rain
shadow of the Andes, for ten points, name this Chilean desert, the driest in the world.
ANSWER: Atacama desert
This location is home to the Very Large Telescope. Animals that survive here include Darwin's
leaf-eared mouse and some Humboldt Penguins. This desert has a region south of Antofagasta which
resembles Martian soil. It was once home to the world's largest supply of sodium nitrate, but now
features numerous abandoned (*) "saltpeter" mining towns. This desert typically gets about fifteen
millimeters of rain a year. For 10 points, name this South American desert, the driest in the world.
ANSWER: Atacama Desert [prompt on Chile]
This region is legendarily home to a bird with metallic wings who brings luck to any miner who can
follow it without being caught. This region was once home to the world's largest natural supply of sodium
nitrate, but is now riddled with over a hundred abandoned mining towns. The weather in this area can
possibly be blamed on the Humboldt current and the South Pacific High creating an inversion layer which
results in the high level of aridity. For 10 points, name this South American region west of the Andes which
is considered the driest desert in the world.
ANSWER: Atacama Desert
Pakistani immigrant Shehzad Luqman was stabbed to death in this city's Petralona
neighborhood. Santiago Calatrava designed a white Velodrome and a stadium with a retractable
glass roof for an Olympic Games hosted in this city. This city contains many traditional
restaurants in its old Plaka neighborhood. In this city, journalists on the upper floors of the Hotel
Grande Bretagne are able to take pictures of protests in Syntagma square. Accessed via
Venizelos airport to the east, its older landmarks include the octagonal Tower of the Winds and
the Keramikos district. For 10 points, name this capital city which recently built a new museum
in hopes of housing the Elgin Marbles near the Acropolis.
ANSWER: Athens [or Athina]
The Kolonaki neighborhood is found on the slopes of Mount Lycabettus, the highest point in this city,
which is home to such sites as Syntagma Square and Panathinaiko Stadium. Located in the periphery
of Attica, to its east lies the Hymettus range while to its southwest is the (*) Saronic Gulf. Located near
Mount Parnitha, this city, the original site of the Elgin Marbles, was home to such figures as Solon and
Themistocles, the latter of whom helped lead this city to victory at the Battle of Marathon. For 10 points,
identify this European city famed for its Acropolis and Parthenon, the capital of Greece.
ANSWER: Athens, Greece
This city's suburb of Chaidari is home to the Daphni Monastery, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This city
includes the Lycabettus and the Ilissus River, which flows west of Mount Hymettus before joining the
Cephissus River. It is east of the Thriasian Plain and south of Mount Parnitha. The Saronic Gulf, an arm of
the Aegean Sea, separates this Attican city from Salamis. The Erechtheion and Theater of Dionysus are
found on its Acropolis alongside the Parthenon. For 10 points, name this capital of Greece.
ANSWER: Athens
One American city of this name is the site of Ohio University, and another one, in Alabama, is the site of
Browns Ferry nuclear plant. A third American city of this name is the seat of Clarke County and is where
Sanford Stadium is found at the University of Georgia campus. A European city by this name is supplied
with water from the Marathon reservoir and is the site of the Agora, Erectheum, and Parthenon. For 10
points, name this capital of Greece.
ANSWER: Athens
This city contains an organ called the "Mighty Mo" at the historic Fox Theater. During the civil rights
era, it was called "the city too busy to hate." The majority of people who live in the ACF River Basin are
found in this city's metropolitan area. Security guard Richard Jewell was blamed for a bombing in this city,
which was actually carried out by Eric Rudolph and directed against the Centennial Olympic Park. The
headquarters of CNN and the Coca-Cola Company are located here. For ten points, name this city that is the
most populous in Georgia.
ANSWER: Atlanta
In 1997, this city's Otherside Lounge lesbian bar was the target of a bombing. A park in this city houses a
statue of a woman holding aloft a phoenix, titled for [This city] from the Ashes. In addition to Woodruff
Park, this city is home to Piedmont Park, which hosts the annual Music Midtown festival. After Chicago
and New York, this city has the 3rd tallest building in America, the Bank of America Plaza. Security guard
Richard Jewell was wrongly accused of a series of bombings in this city, which Eric Robert Rudolph
actually committed in its Centennial Olympic Park. The central Five Points stop connects four lines of its
MARTA subway system. This city's Hartsfield-Jackson airport is the busiest in the world, and its outskirts
house the CDC headquarters. For 10 points, name this capital of Georgia.
ANSWER: Atlanta, Georgia
A man named Hardy Ivy was the first non-indigenous settler of what is now this city in 1833. Always a
regional transportation center this town had an original name of Terminus indicating its position at the end
of an important railroad line. That town was later renamed Marthasville, but it received its current name,
derived from that of its railroad line, in 1845. Sites in and around this city include Ebenezer Baptist Church,
Fort McPherson, the birthplace of Margaret Mitchell, and the Carter Presidential Center. Located in the
foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains, FTP, name this largest city and capital of Georgia.
ANSWER: Atlanta, Georgia
According to the heat piracy model, the northern part of this region removes heat from its southern half.
The TAG mound field can be found near the center of this area of the Earth. Particular layers of debris here
define Heinrich Events. A popular explanation for the Younger Dryas is that this question received an infusion
of extra material, decreasing heat transport here. Its formation began with the Late Triassic-Jurassic rifting.
Its Deep Water is formed by the thermohaline circulation. Its northern component has a namesake Drift
Current as well as the Labrador Current. It is also home to the Gulf Stream. For 10 points, name this question
of water whose namesake mid-ocean ridge contains Iceland.
ANSWER: Atlantic Ocean [accept North Atlantic Ocean]
During the Mesolithic era, this mountain range was home to the Capsian culture. This mountain range is
divided into several sub-ranges, which include the "anti-" range of this name, as well as its "High" sub-
range, which boasts the man-made lake Lalla Takerkoust. To the north of this range lies the region of Rif,
and to the south of this range's highest peak, Toubkal, lies Marrakesh. Berbers populate, for 10 points, what
mountain range of Northern Africa, that covers most of southern and central Morocco?
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
The Barrage Cavagnac is located on this landform and forms the artificial Lake Takerkoust, and this range
contains "high" and "middle" subranges and covers Ouarzazate province. The peak Chelia can be found in
the Aures Mountains, a subrange of this feature. The Tell Mountains and a region called the Rif are lesser
parts of this larger mountain range. Cities in this feature include Tin Mal, and this range contains the peak
Jebel Toubkal. It is home to Berbers and is often seen as an extension of the Alps. For 10 points, name this
chief mountain range of Northern Africa, named for a mythological titan.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
The Maghribian wadis run out of these mountains, as do the Moulouya and Chelif rivers. Mount Siroua
links this chain's High and Anti ranges. The Taza Pass breaks this chain between the Rif and the Middle
range of this system. The World War II Battle of the Kasserine Pass took place in this mountain system.
The highest point in this range is Mount Toubkal. For 10 points, name this North African mountain system.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
An eastern extension of this mountain range is home to the Shawia people and is called the Aures Range.
The Tell Range of this larger mountain range is bounded to the west by the Rif Region. The Kassarine Pass
is a mountain pass located in this range, and the Barbary Macaques on the Rock of Gibraltar originally
came from this mountain range.This mountain range is an extension of the European Alps, and its highest
peak is Jebel Toubkal. For ten points, identify this mountain range of northwestern Africa that derives its
name with a Titan that help up the earth.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
This mountain range includes the easternmost range formed in the Alleghenian Orogeny. The Draa River
runs through part of this mountain range and Jbel Toubkal is the highest peak of this mountain range.
Marrakech lies not far from this mountain range, which forms part of the southern boundary to the Strait of
Gibraltar. For 10 points, name this mountain range that runs through Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco in
North Africa.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
The Chaoui and Kabyle people are indigenous to the eastern parts of this range, in which one can
find the Rif region, the location of Cape Spartel and the city of Tetouan. Sub-ranges include the
Ksour, Tell, and Aures Mountains, and its eastern terminus borders the Gulfs of Hammamet and
Gabes. Cities in this range include Constantine, Sale, (*) Oran, and Fes, and its highest point, Jebel
Toubkal, is located only 40 miles south of the city of Marrakech. Native home to the Berbers and namesake
of a mythological Titan who held the heavens on his shoulders, for 10 points, identify this mountain range
of North Africa.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
This geographic feature is the origin of the Sebou River, which is the largest in its region. The Draa
Valley is found within the lesser version of this mountain range, and the Kabylia region, located
within this range, is a major exporter of cork. Sub-ranges within this range include the High, Middle,
and Tell ranges. These mountains were once the home to a now-extinct species of bear, the only kind
found within its continent. Mountains in this range include (*) Tazaghart, Afella, and Ouanoukrim.
Marrakesh, Fes, and Rabat are major cities in the west of this range, whose tallest mountain is Toubkal. For
10 points, name this mountain range of northwest Africa that shares its name with the mythological titan
that holds the Earth.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
One ruler whose kingdom included much of this mountain range was Massinissa, and this mountain
range was the site of some fighting in the Jugurthine War. One of the more permanent rivers whose source
is in this mountain range is the Moulouya River. The highest peak in this mountain range is Mount
Toubkal. The main inhabitants of this mountain range are Berbers. It separates the Sahara from the
Mediterranean basin. For ten points, name this mountain range in northwest Africa.
ANSWER: Atlas mountains
The Capsian people lived in the northern foothills of this mountain range. This range, whose
easternmost subrange is the Aures Mountains, was home to an extinct species of bear, the only bear
native to the continent. It is south of the Rif Mountains, and its highest peak, (*) Jebel Toubkal, is
visible from Marrakesh, Morocco. For 10 points--name this North African mountain range named for a
Titan who held up the heavens.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
The Chelif River rises in this mountain range. This range is comprised of many subranges, which include
the High, Tell, and Aures Ranges, and it is located to the south and east of the Rif Mountains but north of
the Great Western Erg. Its highest peak is Jebel Toubkal. Marrakech is in the foothills of this range, where
people speak both Arabic and Berber languages. For 10 points, name this mountain range that runs parallel
to the Mediterranean coast and passes through Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
This geographical feature was once home to its continent's only native bear species, now extinct. Containing
the Draa valley, its "Tell" subrange contains the Er-Rif region, while its "Anti" range connects to the "High"
range via Mount Siroua. Its eastern portion, home to the Chelif river valley, is populated by Berbers. With
its highest peak at Jbeb Toubkal, 60 kilometers south of Marrakesh, it is bordered to the south by the Sahara
Desert. For 10 points, name this mountain range spanning Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia, named after a
Greek titan who held up the sky.
ANSWER: Atlas Mountains
The Mangere bridge connects two of this city's suburbs, and the Dilworth building is one of the few
remaining older buildings along Queen Street, this city's central thoroughfare. This city renamed in honor
of George Eden contains the Stardome Observatory in Cornwall Park, which, together with the grave of its
"father," John Campbell, lies atop the volcanic peak One Tree Hill, while the volcanic Rangitoto lies to the
northeast of this city. Originally known as Tamaki Makau Rau, this city boasts the Sky Tower, the tallest
structure in the southern hemisphere, and its metropolitan area includes neighboring North Shore City and
parts of Waitakere and Manukau. Bounded by the Hauraki Gulf and Manukau Harbor and nicknamed the
"City of Sails," this is, for 10 pointa, what city on North Island, the largest city of New Zealand?
ANSWER: Auckland
This city's suburb of Western Springs contains its namesake zoo, and MOTAT, the Museum of
Transportation and Technology. The western half of this city is bordered by the shallow Manukau Harbor,
while the eastern part overlooks the Coromandel Peninsula and the Hauraki Gulf. Part of this city's central
district was remodeled into the Viaduct Basin for the 2000 and 2004 America's Cup. The two halves of the
city are connected by the Harbor Bridge that spans the Waitemata Harbor. The most striking feature of this
city's skyline is the tallest free-standing building in the southern hemisphere, the Sky Tower. Located on the
North Island along with Wellington, for 10 points, name this largest city in New Zealand.
ANSWER: Auckland [or Akarana; or Tamaki-makau-rau]
Abraham Bristow discovered an island group with the same name as this city which is home to Carnley
Harbor and Port Ross. In 2005, a controversy erupted in this city when Adidas put up a promotional
sculpture on the sacred Watchman Island in its harbor. The so-called "Nippon clip-ons" were an innovative
way of expanding capacity on its namesake bridge. This city sits on an isthmus that runs between the
Hauraki Gulf's Waitemata Harbor and the Manakau Harbor. For 10 points, name this city on the North
Island, the most populous in its country, which was replaced as capital in 1865 by Wellington.
ANSWER: Auckland, New Zealand
This country's national day celebrates the establishment of a settlement at Port Jackson. This
country's highest point is named after a Polish general in the American Revolution, while its lowest
point is located in its largest lake, Lake (*) Eyre. In its southwest is a vast, nearly treeless area known as
the Nullarbor Plain. One province in this country, which was formerly known as Van Diemen's Land, is
the island of Tasmania, and major cities in this country include Darwin and Perth. For 10 points, name this
country whose capital is Canberra.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
An object in this country named for Augustus Gregory is advertised as the "world's largest monolith."
Its southern portion is home to an almost treeless region called the Nullarbor Plain. One island belonging to
this country is where the Royal Penguin population goes to breed and is named "Macquarie Island." This
country's central lowlands are home to its largest river systems, the Murray-Darling Basin and the Lake
Eyre Basin. Off this country's eastern coast is the Great Barrier Reef. For 10 points, name this country
which is also the world's smallest continent.
ANSWER: Australia
This country's popular tourist destination Cairns lies on Trinity Bay. Its northern coast is indented by the
Gulf of Carpentaria, to the west of the Cape York Peninsula. This country is home to the Gibson Desert and
Great Sandy Desert. Many oxbow lakes in this country are known as billabongs. Its Northern Territory
contains the massive Ayers Rock, and its other regions include Queensland, Victoria, and New South
Wales. For 10 points, name this country whose largest city is Sydney.
ANSWER: Australia
A tourist resort in this country is called Monkey Mia and is known for featuring bottlenose dolphins. A
proposed new state in this nation would have had a capital at Kalgoorlie. This country is home to a flat
region called the Nullarbor Plain and a sandstone formation referred to by the natives as Uluru. This nation
contains Ayers Rock and has its eastern landmass dominated by the Great Dividing Range. For 10 points,
name this country whose longest river is the Murray and whose states include New South Wales and
Queensland.
ANSWER: Australia
This country contains the dry, iron rich Pilbara region, which holds the Hamersley mountains. That
region is west of the Tanami Desert and south of the Kimberley. Mount Augustus, the world's largest
monolith, is located in this country, and its highest point is Mount Kosciuszko, which is located in the
Great Dividing Range. For 10 points, identify this nation that is home to Ayers Rock, Melbourne, and
Sydney.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
This nation's capital city was designed by Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahoney Griffin. The Arafura
Sea is directly north of this country's Gulf of Carpenteria. The south of this country is home to the
Nullarbor Plain, which is north of its "Great Bight." Hobart and Darwin are the capitals of two of its states.
Deserts in this country include the Gibson, Great Sandy, and Great Victoria. A giant sandstone formation in
this country is called Uluru by its aboriginal inhabitants, and is also known as Ayers Rock. For 10 points,
name this country whose cities include Perth, Canberra, and Sydney.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
One national park in this country contains area sacred to the Anagu people. That park contains a set of
domed rock formations known as The Olgas and the largest extrusive sandstone in the world. That park is
located near Alice Springs, the second largest city in this country's Northern Territory, and is called
Uluru-Kata Tjuta (oo-LOO-roo KAH-tah teh-YOO-tuh) Park. The largest city in this country is home to a
performing arts center that has a white, sail-like roof. For 10 points, name this country that contains a
notable opera house in Sydney.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
The McLaren Vale and Barossa Valley of this country are known for their shiraz wines. This
country was the site of mines in the Golden Mile of its western city of Kalgoorlie. Polish explorer
Pawel Strzelecki (struh-LECK-ee) was the first man to climb this country's highest peak, Mount (*)
Kosciuszko. This country's city Alice Springs is the nearest to the rock formation known as either Uluru or
Ayers Rock. For 10 points, name this country that is the only one to also be a continent and whose western
half is mostly made up of the Outback, which is the home of many kangaroos.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
In this country, the Jansz-Io is part of the Greater Gorgon field, a resource tapped on Barrow Island. The
temperature difference between the ocean and land gives rise to a wind called the Fremantle Doctor, named
for a coastal city in this country. Its only active volcanoes are found on McDonald and Heard Islands,
whose Mawson Peak is higher than the highest peak on the mainland, Mount Kosciuszko. Its lowest point is
Lake Eyre, located in a state with capital Adelaide. For 10 points, name this country with capital Canberra
that contains Sydney.
ANSWER: Australia
This country's extinct Mt. Gambier forms four crater lakes and it is bounded to the north by the
Arafura Sea. A treeless limestone plateau called Nullarbor Plain lies on its large southern bight. The
Bass Strait separates an island state from its mainland, and this country's Cape Yorke Peninsula
serves as a border to the Gulf of (*) Carpentaria and as the northern terminus of the Great Dividing
Range. Other features of it include Lake Eyre and the Great Sandy Desert. Tasmania lies to the south of, for
10 points, what island nation whose largest city is Sydney?
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
The Tanami Desert is located within this nation, and its extreme north is known as Arnhem Land, which is
separated from the Cape York Peninsula by the Gulf of Carpentaria. Two states within this nation are
separated by the Bass Strait, and its longest river, the Murray, forms just west of Mt. Kosciuszko (KOH-see-
ew-sko). The lowest point in this nation is also at its largest question of water, Lake Eyre ("AIR").
Tasmania is the southernmost state of, for 10 points, what island nation that borders the Great Barrier Reef
and features such cities as Brisbane and Sydney?
ANSWER: Australia
A national park and bird sanctuary in this country is named "the Coorong (COO-wrong)." Native animals
in this country include a perch named for the Macquarie River and a cod named for this country's longest
river, the Murray. A landmark located here is also called "Uluru (oo-LOO-roo)" by the natives and is a
sandstone rock formation in the Northern Territory. Ayers Rock is located in this country, whose states
include Victoria and Queensland. For 10 points, name this country whose eastern coast contains the Great
Barrier Reef.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
The Hamersley Range, in the western part of this country, accounts for over 90% of this country's iron ore
production. The Great Artesian Basin covers one-fifth of this country, the Murray-Darling Basin covers
another one-seventh, and it is home to the Great Sandy Desert. The Great Dividing Range, in its eastern
sections, is the 4th longest in the world and includes Mount Kosiuszko. Bass Strait separates Tasmania from
the main island of - for 10 points - what country that occupies the Great Barrier Reef has its capital at
Canberra and is home to Melbourne and Sydney?
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
This country's west portion includes a river formed from salt lakes near Peak Hill in the south edge of its
Robinson Ranges, and which flows to the sea at Kalbarri. Northwest of its town of Meekatharra is Mount
Augustus, one of the claimants to the title of "world's largest monolith." Jervis Bay Territory is often
considered a state on its east seaboard, which also features the Great Dividing Range. Also featuring the
Yarra River, Ayers Rock, Darwin, and Alice Springs, for 10 points, name this country next to the Great
Barrier Reef, whose capital is Canberra.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
Cape Barren Island lies off the shore of this country, whose Wellesley Islands lie in the Gulf of
Carpentaria. Deserts in this country include Tanami, Simpson, and Gibson, and its mountain ranges include
Hamerslay and Macdonnel. The Nullarbor Plain lies in this country that is home to Lake Eyre. The Torres
Strait separates this country from Papua New Guinea. For 10 points, name this country that is home to
Ayers Rock and the cities of Perth, Brisbane, and Melbourne.
ANSWER: Australia
This country contains the world's largest piece of limestone, the Nullarbor Plain. The Morning Glory
Cloud can be seen off the north of this country in the Gulf of Carpentaria. The lowest and highest points in
this nation are Lake Eyre and Mount Kosciusko, respectively. This home of the Great Dividing Range
contains the cities of Darwin, Adelaide, and Brisbane and is separated from Tasmania by the Bass Strait.
The
home of the Great Barrier Reef is, for 10 points, what country that occupies an entire continent?
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
This country's Jack Hills contain minerals from the Hadean Eon. Some ancient plant species
comprise this country's Gondwana Rainforests. Its Top End includes Kakadu National Park, which
is part of the Arnhem Land region. Much of this country is drained by the (*) Murray and Darling
Rivers. In this country, Kata Tjuta lies west of a "island mountain" called Uluru near Alice Springs. Mount
Kosciuszko (COZ-ee-OO-skoh) lies in this country's Great Dividing Range. For 10 points, name this
country, home to Ayers Rock.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
The WACA stadium can be found in a city in the southern portion of this country. The basin of one
lake in this country contains cities such as Marreem. "Shires" along the longest river in this country
include Deniliquin and Wakool, while sights in one city in this country include the Paddy's Market
and Harbour Bridge. This country's interior contains such sites as Alice Springs and Uluru. One delta in
this country is formed by the Murray and Darling rivers, while the lake in this country is Lake Eyre and its
largest mountain is Mount Kosciuszko. For 10 points, name this country that contains states such as New
South Wales and Victoria.
ANSWER: Australia
The Tanami Desert in this country borders its Kimberley Region, while the lowest point is its largest lake,
Lake Eyre. In the southeastern portion of this country two rivers form part of the Murray-Darling Basin.
This nation is separated from a nation to the north by the Torres Strait, and it is also home to Ayers Rock.
For 10 points, name this country whose states include Victoria and Queensland, which has cities like Perth
and its capital, Canberra.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
Palawa is the name of the indigenous people located in one state of this country whose cities include
Glenorchy and Clarence. The highest point of this country, located in the Great Dividing Range, was named
by Paul Strzelecki after a Polish hero. Its longest river flows through cities such as Albury and Wodonga,
forms the border between two states, and is called Murray River. Its lowest point, Lake Eyre, can be found
in the state whose cities include Adelaide. Mount Kosciuszko and states such as Queensland and New South
Wales are in - for 10 points - which country with capital at Canberra?
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
In this nation, the Macdonnell Ranges lie to the south of the Tanami Desert. The Nullarbor Plain
in the south of this country is bordered by this nation's namesake "Great Bight." The Gulf of
Carpenteria indents the northern part of this nation, whose east coast is lined by the Great (*)
Dividing Range. This nation includes an island separated from the mainland by the Bass Strait, Tasmania.
Brisbane and Melbourne are cities in, for 10 points, what country, whose largest city of Sydney is located
far from the Outback?
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
This country is home to the Big Ben Volcano, which contains Mawson Peak and is located on Heard Island.
The large monocline Mount Augustus is located in its namesake national park in the western region of this
country. In the northern part of this country is Amadeus Basin, which contains the formation Kata Tjuta,
also known as Mt. Olga. Nearby is the more famous monolith Uluru, or Ayers Rock. The Murray River is
the longest river in this country. For 10 points, name this country dominated in the east by the Great
Dividing Range, which is home to the Great Barrier Reef and whose capital is Canberra.
ANSWER: Australia
Henry Deane engineered railways in this country. A railroad in this country is called the "Ghan" or
"Afghan Express" and was first laid in 1912, starting in Port Augusta. The world's longest stretch of
straight railway tracks lies between Ooldea and Loongana in this country, crossing the Nullarbor Plain.
Kalgoorlie, the site of a gold rush in the 1890s, is at the western terminus of this country's major railroad.
The Alice railway connected this country's largest city to Alice Springs. For ten points, name this nation
where a transcontinental railroad connects the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
This country's Pyrhn Pass is nicknamed the "Fremdarbeiterweg," or "foreign workers' route," because
foreign workers in this country use the route to go back home. This country's Pasterze Glacier is located in
the Hohe Tauern mountain range, directly beneath Grossglockner Mountain. Graz is the capital of Styria, a
state within this country. The Drau River begins in Italy and flows through this nation before reaching
Slovenia. The Danube River flows past this country's city of Linz. For 10 points, identify this European
nation which has cities like Salzburg and Vienna.
ANSWER: Republic of Austria
Neuseider Lake can be found in this country, which also features the Arlberg Mountain range in this
country's Tyrol province. The Danube River flows through this country's city of Linz before heading into
this country's capital, which features the Schonbrunn Palace. Thoroughly covered by the Alps, this country's
highest mountain is the aptly-named Grossglockner. Home country to the 1815 Conference that set the
balance of power after the Napoleonic Wars, for 10 points, name this central European country with capital
at Vienna.
ANSWER: Austria or Osterreich
The League of Nations granted this status to one of the Aland Islands. Two regions described by this
adjective exist in Portugal: the Azores and Madeira. The highest level of territorial organization in Spain
consists of communities described by this adjective. In China, regions described by this adjective have a
high population of a minority group, like Uyghurs or Tibetans. There are five of those Chinese regions,
which are grouped with provinces and municipalities. For ten points, identify this adjective that describes a
region or country having a degree of self-government.
ANSWER: autonomous
This question of water is bounded on the south by the Taman peninsula, which features many mud volcanoes.
In classical antiquity, this question of water was known as Lake Maeotis, and it was called the Sea of Surozh by
medieval Russians. Its average depth is only 23 feet, making it the shallowest sea in the world. Major rivers
that flow into this question of water include the Kuban and the Don. The city of Mariupol in Ukraine is the
most populous city located on this question of water. For 10 points, name this arm of the Black Sea that borders
the Crimean peninsula.
ANSWER: Sea of Azov
One mountain on this island has the world's steepest purely vertical drop in its Auyuittuq National Park. The
aforementioned Mount Thor and Mount Asgard are in this island's namesake mountain range. The eastern
shore of this island is indented by the Cumberland sound, and the Foxe Basin separates the Melville
Peninsula from this island, which is located west of the Davis Strait and south of a namesake Bay. Frobisher
Bay is the site of this island's largest city, Iqaluit. Located to the north of the Hudson Strait in Nunavut is,
for ten points, this fifth-largest island in the world, the largest in Canada.
ANSWER: Baffin Island
Named "Meta Incognita" upon its discovery, this island's Koukdjuak River drains Nettilling Lake
west of the Cumberland Peninsula, on which one can find Mts. Odin and Asgard inside Auyuittiq
National Park. Prince Charles Island lies in the Foxe Basin off the western shores of this island,
whose largest city lies on (*) Frobisher Bay. Bordered to the north by the Lancaster Sound and to the east
by the Davis Strait, it is separated from Quebec by the Hudson Strait and from Greenland by a namesake
bay that is named after a 17th century English explorer named William. For 10 points, identify this site of
Nunavut's capital, Iqaluit, the largest island in Canadian.
ANSWER: Baffin Island
After a trip to this island, Franz Boas believed that geography was not a definite constraint on human
behavior. The parachute ski-jump opening scene of The Spy Who Loved Me was shot on this island's
twin-peaked Mount Asgard, which is in its namesake mountain range in Auyuittuq National Park. This
island is probably the Helluland of the Viking Sagas. Its largest city lies on the iron-pyrite rich Frobisher
Bay. The Davis Strait and a namesake bay separate this fifth-largest island in the world from Greenland.
For 10 points, name this Nunavut island that contains Iqaluit and is the largest in Canada.
ANSWER: Baffin Island [or Qikiqtaaluk; or Ile de Baffin; prompt on Helluland until it is read]
This city's upscale areas include Abu Nuwas Street and the Al-Mansur district. In the Middle Ages, this
city was the home to the House of Wisdom, a major center of translation and science. This former capital of
the Abassid Empire is divided in two by the Tigris River. Its current neighborhoods include the fortified
Green Zone and a large slum known as Sadr City. For 10 points, name this former seat of power for Saddam
Hussein, which remains the capital of Iraq.
ANSWER: Baghdad
This archipelago includes the eastern banks of Mouchoir, Silver, and Navidad. Its large southern island of
Great Inagua is home to a monstrous colony of American Flamingoes. Several of its larger northern islands
contain pineyard ecosystems, as do the Caicos Islands. Islands in this group include Great Abaco, Cat, and
Eleuthera. The Tongue of the Ocean separates its tripartite Andros Island from the Exuma Cays and New
Providence Island. The nation named for these islands has its capital at Nassau. For 10 points, name this
archipelago north of Cuba and east of Florida.
ANSWER: Bahamas
In Euclides da Cunha's 1902 book, Rebellion in the Backlands, he describes the massive battle between
civilizations in this region. Livio Sansone focused his study of racial identity on this area in his 2003 book,
Blackness Without Ethnicity. The bay on which its capital sits is named for the holiday it was discovered
on, All Saints Day, and it contains Almas Peak, the highest in the Diamantina chain. Between 1893 and
1897, thousands of believers gathered around Antonio the Counciler, who preached against materialism and
the "godless republic" here, causing Canudos to surpass the state capital in population. Home to a massive
1835 slave conspiracy by the Arabic-speaking Muslim Males, the region was chronicled in literature by
Jorge Amado and Mario Vargas Llosa in The War of the End of the World. FTP, name this region of
Northeastern Brazil, noted for its vast indigenous population, widespread poverty and the cities of Ilheus
and capital at Salvador.
ANSWER: Bahia (prompt on "Brazil")
This lake will be the location of the HiSCORE, which will be the world's largest cosmic ray
observatory. Its only outflow is the Angara River, and the Chikoy and Selenga rivers flow into it.
Goryachinsky (GOE-ree-uh-CHIN-skee) is a resort located on its shores, as is the Barguzinsky
(BAR-goo-ZIN-skee) Nature Reserve. This lake is the home of the nerpas, the world's only freshwater
seals, as well as the golomyanka, a fish that gives birth to live young. For 10 points, name this Siberian
lake, the deepest in the world.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
Known to the Chinese as the North Sea, this question of water was examined starting in June 2008 by the Mir-1
and Mir-2 submersibles. The largest island in this question of water, inhabited mostly by Buryats, is Olkhon.
The town of Severobaykalsk, located on the northern shore of this lake, is the starting point of a railroad
running from the lake to the Amur River. Fed by hundreds of inflowing rivers, its only outlet is the Angara
River. Located at the bottom of a five-mile-deep continental rift, it contains roughly twenty percent of the
world's surface fresh water. For 10 points, name this Russian lake, the deepest in the world.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
This lake-which isn-t Lake Ladoga-is home to an endangered whitefish called omul. This lake receives
the Barguzin River, as well as the Selenge, which in turn received the picturesque Orkhon, which flowed
past the ruins of Karakorum. Olkhon Island in this lake is home to many Buryat people, who mostly live
south of this lake in a republic with capital Ulan-Ude. This lake's only outflow is the Angara River, which
flows past Irkutsk to join the Yenisei. This lake was discovered by the Cossack Kurbat Ivanon, and before
1904, a ferry across this lake interrupted the Trans-Siberian Railway. For 10 points, name this lake just
north of Mongolia in Russia, the deepest in the world.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
Endemic oligochaete worms and sponges live in this lake's Frolikha hot springs, and it is home to the nerpa,
the only freshwater seal. Most of its Academic Range is underwater. The Holy Nose Peninsula juts into its
eastern side. A Transneft pipeline was planned to pass by this lake, but was diverted north to prevent
environmental damage. Its chief source is the Selenga River, while the Angara River flows out of it. An
archipelago in this lake comprises Big, Narrow, Round, and Long Islands and is called the Ushkany Islands.
To its south lies the North Mongolian Steppe. This lake's namesake mountain range is the source of the
Lena, and it is located near Irkutsk. It contains about one-fifth of the fresh water on the Earth's surface. For
10 points, name this lake in Siberia, the oldest and deepest in the world.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
This question of water can be accessed through the city of Ulan-Ude, and the Barguzin Mountains and the
Primorskiy Mountains surround this question of water. This question of water is home to many Buryat tribes, and
its largest island is Olkhan. The Turka, Sarma, and Selenga Rivers drain into this question of water, and it is
located in the Yenisei River basin via its outflow in the Angara River. Holding one fifth of the world's fresh
water, it is the world's second most voluminous lake to the Caspian Sea. For the 10 points, the city of
Irkutsk lies near what Russian lake, the oldest and deepest in the world?
ANSWER: Lake Baikal [accept Ozero Baykal]
An European convict song called "The Wanderer" describes crossing this question of water. A native
species in this question of water is the oilfish "golomyanka" (go-lo-mye-ank-uh). The largest island in
this question of water is named Olkhon. It is drained by the Angara River and saw its water level
increase after the impounding of the (*) Irkutsk (UR-kootsk) Dam. For 10 points, name this question of
water once crossed by the Trans-Siberian Railway, the world's deepest and most voluminous freshwater
lake.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
It contains the islands of Olkhon and Bolshoy, and this lake's Proval Bay was created by an 1862
earthquake in the Selenga Delta. This lake is fed by the Selenga River, and the town of Listvyanka is
located on it. The Angara River flows from this lake, and this lake is the home of the golomyanka fish,
which gives birth to live young. Containing one fifth of the world's surface fresh water, for 10 points, name
this Siberian lake, the oldest and deepest lake in the world.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal [accept Ozero Baykal; or Ozero Bajkal]
One city near this question of water, Ulan-Ude, is the capital of the region named for the indigenous Buryats,
who inhabit the largest island in this lake, Olkhon. Another city near this lake is Irkutsk, which lies on the
only river flowing out of this lake, the Angara. The Serenge and Lena Rivers flow into this lake, which is
the oldest in the world. For 10 points, name this incredibly deep lake in Russia, the largest freshwater lake
in the world by volume.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
Environmentalists prevented Transneft from building an oil pipeline near this question of water,
whose northern tip lies near a railroad nicknamed "the BAM." The highest point in this question is
Mount Zhima, located on its island of Olkhon. Exiles from the (+) Decembrist revolt were sent to
Irkutsk, near this lake. This lake is home to nerpa seal and golomyanka fish, and it feeds the Angara
river at its southern end. Twenty percent of the (*) world's river and lakewater is in this lake. For 10
points, name this lake in southwestern Russia, the deepest in the world.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
Buryats are the people who are indigenous to this question's largest island. Dauria is a mountainous region to
the east of this question of water. Golomyankas are species of fish endemic to this question of water, and another
species here is the nerpa. The aforementioned largest island is Olkhon; the first European to reach this question
of water was Kurbat Ivanov. The rivers that drain into this lake include the Selenga and Barguzin Rivers,
while the Angara River is this lake's sole outlet. For 10 points, name the world's second most voluminous
lake after the Caspian Sea, which is also the world's deepest lake, and is located in Siberia.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
About every four years at this geographic location, most recently in 2009, space observations find
three-mile-wide dark circles on its surface ice. In this question, golomyanka fish are fed on by its
namesake seals, which are also known as Nerpa. Also containing the Ushkani Islands and [*] Olkhon
Island, the Selenga River flows into this question of water, while the Angara River, on which the town of
Irkutsk is located, flows out of it. Containing about 20 percent of the world's surface freshwater, for 10
points, name this eastern Russian lake, the oldest and deepest in the world.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
The western portion of this question of water contains the Small Sea Strait, which forms a
passageway to its largest island of Olchon. The Angara, a tributary of the Yenisei, is the only river
that flows out of this question of water located just south of the city of Irkutsk. One of the challenges of
building the Trans-(*)Siberian railway was circumventing this question of water which lies north of Ulan
Bator. For 10 points, name this source of roughly 20% of the world's fresh water, the deepest lake in the
world located in eastern Russia.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
Golomyanka and a species of freshwater seal are among the hundreds of unique species found in this
question. Primorsky to its west, Barguzinsky to its east, and Khamar-Daban to its south are among the
mountain ranges that surround it. Straddling the border between the Buryat Republic to its
southeast and (*) Irkutsk Oblast to the northwest, this narrow lake receives the Uda, Barguzin, and Selenga
rivers, while its only outflow is the Angara River. Containing as much fresh water as all of the Great Lakes
combined, it is the largest freshwater lake in the world by volume. For 10 points, name this lake located in
Russia that, at sixteen hundred thirty-seven meters, is also the world's deepest.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
Bolshiye Koty is a town located on the western shore of this lake, and the largest bay in it is the Barguizin
Bay. The mountain region Dauria lies to the east of this lake, whose Proval Bay was created by an 1862
earthquake at a river delta. The islands of Ushkani and Olkhon are located in this lake, and the Selenga and
Barguzin rivers drain into it. Its sole outlet is the Angara River, and it is located in the republic of Buryatia
and the province of Irkutsk. For 10 points, name this Russian lake, the oldest and the deepest in the world.
ANSWER: Lake Baikal
The Sierra de la Giganta runs down this region's southern portions, and its Vizcaino Desert is home to a
subspecies of Pronghorn Antelope. To its east is Angel de la Guarda Island, while to its west is Cedros
Island, as well as an island which used to be infested with goats, Guadalupe Island. Ferries travel between
Mazatlan and this region's city of La Paz, and its southernmost point is Cabo San Lucas. Other cities include
Mexicali and one just south of San Diego, Tijuana. It separates the Gulf of California from the Pacific
Ocean. For 10 points, name this peninsula on the west coast of Mexico.
ANSWER: Baja California [accept Baja California Sur until "Guarda"]
A 3000-mile walk through this region is the subject of Graham Mackintosh's book Into a Desert Place.
The San Lucan xeric scrub grows in dry parts of this region. This region's wine grapes grow near the city
of Ensenada, and due west of it, blue-footed boobies live on the four Coronado islands. Its most
tourist-traveled city is home to a spherical cultural center on Avenida Revolucion. A non-Bolivian state
capital on this peninsula sits on La Paz Bay. The fish taco originated on this peninsula, whose lower half is
home to a state with the suffix "Sur." For 10 points, name this peninsula west of the Sea of Cortez, where
Tijuana is just south of a similarly-named US state.
ANSWER: Baja California peninsula [prompt on Baja; do not accept "Baja California Sur"]
Missionaries settled this area in Loreto in 1697, and the sixty foot tall cardon cactus is endemic to this
region. La Paz is the capital of a state on this landmass. An island off of this landmass, Cedros, is located in
Sebastian Vizcaino Bay and has a large colony of elephant seals. Las Tres Virgenes is a volcanic group of
this area, which is the location of the San Quintin Volcanic Field. The Sierra de San Lazaro is located in
this area, and the resort city of Cabo San Lucas is located on its southern tip. For ten points, name this
peninsula that is bordered by the Gulf of California to the east and is located in northwestern Mexico.
ANSWER: Baja California
The Boojum Tree is almost entirely found in this region. A number of enormous Cardon Cactuses are found
in its "valley of the giants," just south of the the town of San Filipe, which experiences a 7-meter tidal bore
near the Isla Coronado. The Vizcaino Desert is located in this region along with the gray whale birthing
spot of Laguna Ojo de Liebre. The Sierra de San Pedro Martir in this peninsula contains a national
observatory. A lack of railroad infrastructure here may be corrected by a new rail-line to Punta Colonet,
where a deep-water megaport is planned near Ensenada. Cabo San Lucas is at the extreme Southern end of
this peninsula, which also includes the city of Rosarito Beach. For 10 points, identify this Mexican
peninsula bordered by Sonora and the US State of California, which includes Tijuana.
ANSWER: Baja California
The Palace of the Shirvanshahs is a UNESCO World Heritage Site located in this city's Inner City, wherein
the Maiden Tower also lies. This city's Crystal Hall hosted the 2012 Eurovision Song Contest. The SOCAR
Tower, which is currently under construction, will be this city's tallest building, and other buildings being
built in this city include the Flame Towers. The March Days was an event in this city where Bolsheviks
killed between 12,000 and 30,000 civilians, mostly Muslims. For 10 points, name this city which once
produced over half of the world's petroleum, the current capital of Azerbaijan.
ANSWER: Baku
It can be entered by traveling south through the Little Belt, and the Archipelago Sea is a northern portion of
it. The Bornholm Basin is this question of water's central area, and the islands of Falster and Funen can be
found in its western portion, where it joins the Kattegat. The Kalmar Strait separates the island of Oland
from the coast, and Gotland is a prominent island in the middle of it. The Heligoland Bight is connected to
it via the Kiel Canal. The Gulf of Bothnia is a branch in the north, and along the southern coast we find the
Bay of Gdansk and the Gulf of Riga. For 10 points name this question of water bordered by Sweden, Poland,
and some former USSR republics.
ANSWER: Baltic Sea
This sea is separated by the Curonian Spit from the Curonian Lagoon. The Guldborg Sound is located
next to this sea, which is drained through the Little Belt and Great Belt, the latter of which sits underneath
and above the Great Belt Fixed Link. The Silja and Tallink ferries operate on this sea. This sea is the
location of Bornhom and the Aland Islands, and it empties into the Kattegat. To the west of this sea is the
Kiel Canal, which links it to the North Sea. For ten points, name this sea that stretches from Germany and
Denmark to its three namesake states, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.
ANSWER: Baltic Sea
The Oresund indirectly connects this sea to an ocean, and the Aland Islands lie at the southern end of
its northern branch in the Archipelago Sea. It is connected to the Kattegat by the Great and Little
Belts, while the Oder River flows into the Bay of Pomerania at its southern end. The city of (*)
Gdynia also lies in the south, while the eastern exclave of Kaliningrad provides one country with access to
it. This question is connected to another question of water to its west by the Kiel Canal. For ten points, name this
question of water on which Riga and Stockholm lie, a sea with arms known as the Gulfs of Bothnia and
Finland.
ANSWER: Baltic Sea
This question of water is separated by a spit from the Curonian lagoon, which is at one end of the Sambia
Peninsula. Islands in this question of water include Muhu, Usedom, and Saaremaa, and part of this question is
known as the Archipelago Sea because it contains the Aland islands. To the west of this question of water are
three straits, known as the Great Belt, the Little Belt, and the Oresund. It drains into the Kattegat, and gulfs
of it include the Gulf of Bothnia and the Gulf of Finland. For 10 points, name this sea which borders
Sweden and Latvia.
ANSWER: Baltic Sea
Delis in this city are known for a codfish patty usually served with mustard between two saltines. In this
city, Isaac Emerson copied Florence's Palazzo Vecchio, but moved the clock face up, to design a tower
owned by Bromo-Seltzer. I.M Pei designed a pentagonal, 405-foot World Trade Center for this city, whose
neighborhoods include Locust Point and Fells Point. Suburbs of this city include the largely-Jewish
Pikesville and Towson, and it was the eastern terminus of an early railroad out to the Ohio River, which
was partly named for it. This city recently renovated its Inner Harbor, and it's home to the Pimlico race
course. For 10 points, name this city once guarded by Fort McHenry, the largest in Maryland.
ANSWER: Baltimore, Maryland
A famous tulip garden in this city is situated on property once owned by the newspaperman A. S.
Abell; that garden is the Sherwood Gardens. One neighborhood in this city is Fell's Point. This city is
located on the Patapsco river, which forms its (*) Inner Harbor. It is named after Lord Calvert, a founder
of the state in which it is located. For 10 points, identify this largest Maryland city.
ANSWER: Baltimore
The Jim Thompson House in this city commemorates that American's attempt to preserve its nation's
culture, and its Erawan Hotel contains a shrine to Brahma. The port of this city is located at Klhong Toei,
and this city was formerly divided into two municipalities, one of which was Thon Buri. The Chatuchak
shopping extravaganza occurs weekly in this city, whose major sites include Wat Pho University and Wat
Phra Kaew, which houses the Emerald Buddha. This city is located in the Chao Phraya River delta, and was
modeled after the former capital Ayutthaya. For 10 points, name this home of the King Rama IX Park, the
capital of Thailand.
ANSWER: Bangkok [or Krung Thep]
A tourist attraction in this city is the ancient Hindu Giant Swing. Five statues of soldiers surround an
obelisk in the Victory Monument at one of its intersections. Fish and vegetables are sold from boats in this
city's Taling Chan Floating Market. This city contains many canals from the Chao Phraya River. This
modern-day city was founded by the Chakri Dynasty ruler Rama I. For 10 points, name this capital of
Thailand.
ANSWER: Bangkok
A western division of this nation is known for its mangoes and is the namesake of its most populous
city, Rajshahi. This country contains the majority of the Sundarbans, the world's largest mangrove
forest, which is home to a unique species of (*) "tiger." One region in this country contains hill tracts
named for the port city of Chittagong. The majority of this nation consists of a delta formed by the
confluence of the Padma and Meghna Rivers, which meet at the bay directly south of this nation. For ten
points, name this South-Asian nation with capital at Dhaka that is located to the east of India.
ANSWER: People's Republic of Bangladesh
The Sangu and Feni are two rivers in a system which cuts through some namesake Hill Tracts of one of its
cities, and the Mru, Chak, and Marma are indigenous peoples of this country. Seasonal lakes called "beels-
form in the city of Sylhet in this nation. Bordered on the east by the states of Tripura and Meghalaya, it
contains the seaport of Mongla and cities of Khulna, Rajshahi, and Chittagong. The eastern portions of the
Sundarban forests can be found in this country which sees a large delta formed by the confluences of the
Meghnad, Padma, and Jamuna river, also called the Ganga-Bramhaputra delta. For 10 points, name this
nation with its capital at Dhaka.
ANSWER: People's Republic of Bangladesh
This country was home to the Gangaridai kingdom in the 300s, while Shashanka is usually considered one
of its first kings. This country's city of Bagerhat contains the Sixty Dome Mosque. This country's
independence is celebrated by the Jatiyo Sriti Soudho, a monument in Savar which lies about 35 kilometers
northwest of its capital. In that capital can be found the parliament of Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban and the
Shaheed Mirar. Containing the Meghna, Padma, and Brahmaputra rivers, for 10 points, name this neighbor,
almost completely bordered by India with capital at Dhaka, which separated from Pakistan.
ANSWER: Bangladesh
An 18th-century captain who aided refugees in what is now this country lends his name to a market
town here with the world's longest natural sandy beach, Cox's Bazar. The 1952 Language Movement
is commemorated at the Shaheed Minar in this country, which is home to the "Rickshaw Capital of
the World." The documentary My Architect features this country's parliament building, which was
designed by (*) Louis Kahn. Innovations in microfinance at this country's Grameen Bank won Mohammed
Yunus the Nobel Peace Price. Most shipping is conducted through the city of Chittagong in this country,
where the Padma River is formed from the Meghna, Jamuna, and Ganges. For 10 points, name this nation
consisting of the former East Pakistan.
ANSWER: People's Republic of Bangladesh
This nation contains the world's longest sand beach, Cox's Bazar. Its northeasterly region of Sylhet contains
many tea gardens, and its seven divisions are themselves divided into upazilas. This country contains the
eastern half of the Sundarbans mangrove forest. This nation's capital is home to the Grameen Bank, which
gives out microloans, and its second largest city is Chittagong. Frequent floods disturb the delta of the
Brahmaputra and Ganges rivers in, for 10 points, what country that seceded from Pakistan, found east of the
Indian state of West Bengal?
ANSWER: People's Republic of Bangladesh [or Gonoprojatontri Bangladesh]
This country's highest point is either Mowdok Mual or Keokradong. One large city in this country contains
Foy's Lake and is the namesake of a region known as its Hill Tracts. It contains the world's largest
mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, and the resort town Cox's Bazar. Its capital and a major city in its
neighbor are connected by the Maitree Express. This country is bordered by its neighbor's states of Tripura,
Mizoram, and Assam, and its second largest city is Chittagong. Most of the area of this country lies within
the broad delta formed by the Ganges and the Brahmaputra rivers. India contains a state named after the
"West" area of this country's namesake, and mostly surrounds this country. For 10 points name this country
once known as East Pakistan whose capital is Dhaka.
ANSWER: People's Republic of Bangladesh [or Gonoprojatontri Bangladesh]
These people extricated the Khoisan from their native lands, and they later branched off into the Nguni
and the Sotho-Tswana. The movement of these people is mostly traced from evidence of iron and the use of
agriculture, branching out from their origin near Cameroon. For 10 points, name these people who spread
their namesake language family around Africa.
ANSWER: Bantu people
The southeastern end of this city is overlooked by the hill of Montjuic (mont-joo-eech), at the foot of which
is the German Pavilion designed by Mies van der Rohe for the 1929 International Exposition held in this
city. Its El Raval neighborhood is separated from its very old Barri Gotic, or Gothic Quarter, by the broad
pedestrian street La Rambla. West of the Barri Gotic is Parc Guell, which like Casa Mila and the unfinished
Sagrada Familia Cathedral, was designed by Antonio Gaudi. FTP what is this second-most-populous city in
Spain, capital of Catalonia?
ANSWER: Barcelona
The Llobregat river runs southwest of this city, which features a namesake pavilion designed by Mies
van der Rohe. Resting atop the Tibiado mountain near this city is the Torre de Cosserola, and some
of its neighborhoods include the Gothic Quarter and El Carmel, which contains Park (*) Guell. This
city includes the Camp Nou soccer stadium and is home to the unfinished Sagrada Familia cathedral. This
city lies to the south of the Pyrenees along the Mediterranean coast and is the capital city of Catalonia. For
10 points, identify this second most populous city in Spain after Madrid, and home to a wildly successful
"Futbol Club."
ANSWER: Barcelona
A music festival focusing on electronica is held annually in this city's commerce street, La Rambla
and that festival is SONAR. This city's Montjuic or "Hill of the Jews" district is home to a light,
music and water show at its Font Magica which is located in front of an art museum called The Palau
National. This city is located between the mouths of the Besos and Llobregat rivers. A dragon
staircase leads to this city's Park (*) Guell which like this city's ornate church, Sagrada Familia was
created by the architect, Antoni Gaudi. Home to the rival soccer team of Real Madrid, FTP, identify this
most populous city of the northeastern province of Catalonia; the second largest in Spain.
ANSWER: Barcelona
Major motorways passing through this city include Diagonal Avenue and Meridiana Avenue, and it is
served by Sabadell Airport. The plain on which this city rests is bounded to the north by the Besos River, to
the south by the Llobregat River, and elsewhere by a ring of mountains peaking at Tibidad. On April 23, the
feast day of St. George, this city hosts a large book fair. In 2008, the AVE high-speed rail was extended to
this largest metropolis on the Mediterranean Sea, which contains the Palace of the Generalitat. A mosaic
salamander can be found in Park Guell in this city, built by the architect of its Casa Mila. For 10 points,
name this home of the still incomplete Sagrada Familia, second largest city of Spain and capital of
Catalonia.
ANSWER: Barcelona
This city includes a hill home to the Palau Nacional and the Font Magica, both dating from the 1929
International Exposition, as well as a telecommunications tower designed by Santiago Calatrava. A central
street running almost to the sea in this city is called La Rambla. It lies on the coast north of Tarragona, and
Montjuic is a large hill overlooking its harbor. The Torre Agbar, a multicolored monstrosity, is located
here, but this city is more famous for the Parc Guell, Casa Mila, and another project by Antoni Gaudi whose
Nativity facade was completed before his death, the Sagrada Familia. For 10 points, name this second-largest 
city of Spain which is part of Catalonia.
ANSWER: Barcelona
On Christmas, these people believe that they receive gifts from Olentzero, a Santa figure from among
their Jentilak group of giants. These people sought further devolution in their homeland under the failed
Ibarretxe (ee-BAH-ruh-chay) Plan. The world's oldest transport bridge, the Puente Colgante, is found in a
territory controlled by these people, whose capital is Vitoria-Gasteiz. In their territory, the Nervion River
runs past a titanium-clad building designed by Frank Gehry. For ten points, name this group whose
"autonomous region" includes Bilbao in northern Spain.
ANSWER: Basques
This region's president is known as the Lehendakari. Companies like BBVA and Iberdrola have
made this region the wealthiest per-capita in its country. The capital of Alava Province, Vitoria-
Gasteiz is this region's second largest city and unofficial home of its parliament. This region's largest
city is home to a branch of the Guggenheim museum, and in recent years, (*) ETA has ceased violent
operations advocating for this region's independence. For 10 points, name this region in northern Spain, and
is home to cities like Guernica and Bilbao, and where a namesake language isolate is spoken.
ANSWER: Basque Country
Gujuli is a waterfall within this area's Gorbea National Park, which features a namesake mountain
upon which an eighteen-foot cross has been mounted. The Aizkorri massif is in its namesake mountains,
while the Nervion River flows through its largest city. Located east of Burgos and Cantabria, its capital is
Vitoria-Gasteiz, and it encapsulates the provinces of Gipuzkoa, Alava, and Biscay. Souletin is a French
dialect of this area's namesake tongue, which is a language isolate. Its largest city features a Guggenheim
Museum designed by Frank Gehry. For 10 points, name this autonomous community in northern Spain
whose largest city is Bilbao.
ANSWER: Basque Country
The Christkindlesmarkt is a famous market in a city of this region, and a party called the Christian Social
Union operates only in this region. The Anif Declaration ended the monarchy of this region, ed by the
House of Wittelsbach. Zugspitze is the highest mountain in this region and in the country that contains it.
Alfred Jodl was condemned to death in this region home to the anachronistic Neueschwanstein Castle.This
region borders Hesse and Saxony, has a high proportion of Catholics, and held rallies and trials in its city of
Nuremberg. For 10 points, name this southeastern German state with its capital at Munich.
ANSWER: Free State of Bavaria [accept Freistaat Bayern]
Members of this group who cannot claim ancestry in the Yamani or Qaysi kin groups occupy peripheral
jobs as performing artists or blacksmiths. A group that is related to these people raises cattle in the Sudan
and is called the Baqqarah. A ranking of prestige within this group is based on which animal a particular
subgroup cultivates, with the camelworking tribes taking precedence over the sheep- and goatherders. Led
by a hierarchy of sheiks, for 10 points, name this Arab cultural group, consisting of Middle Eastern desert
nomads.
ANSWER: Bedouins
In one dish named for this foodstuff, it is coated with pate and mushroom duxelles and wrapped in puff
pastry. This is the main ingredient in traditional versions of the Korean dish bulgogi, and bresaola is an
Italian preparation of it. This ingredient largely makes up the filling of a traditional Cornish pasty. One
prized variety of this foodstuff must come from the Wagyu breed and is named for a city in Hyogo
Prefecture. This main constituent of carne asada appears in a dish named for Wellington and has an
expensive Kobe variety. The subject of an advertising campaign declaring "it's what's for dinner" is, for 10
points, what meat that comes from cows?
ANSWER: beef
This city is the starting point of the artificial Grand Canal. Rem Koolhaas designed a television
building in this city, where Shichahai Lake runs past an eighteenth-century mansion built for Prince
Gong. This city also features Beihai Park and the Old Summer Palace, whose gardens were ravaged
by British soldiers during the Opium Wars. The Temple of (*) Heaven is found in this city, where, in
1989, "Tank Man" stood up to the army removing protesters from Tiananmen Square. For 10 points, name
this city that the Qing Dynasty established as the capital of China.
ANSWER: Beijing [or Peking]
This city contains a bell inscribed with Buddhist scriptures in the Big Bell Temple and the northwest section
of this city contains the public park Fragrant Hills. This city also contains the Temple of the Moon, Sun,
Earth, and Heaven. Another tourist attraction in this city was initially known as the Garden of Clear Ripples
but this attraction is now known today as the Summer Palace. One building in this city was first constructed
by Zhu Di, the Ming Dynasty Yongle Emperor, and another part of this city saw democratic demonstrations
in 1989. For 10 points, name this home of the Forbidden City and the Tiananmen Square, the capital of
China.
ANSWER: Beijing [or Peking; or Pei-ching]
One location in this city, which is entered via the Meridian Gate, contains the Halls of Supreme, Central,
and Preserving Harmony. Rem Koolhaas designed a government building in this city that looks like a folded
square with an open center and is nicknamed the "big boxer shorts." The Dongcheng and Xicheng Districts
are located in this city, whose namesake district is surrounded by Hebei Province. The CCTV Tower is
found in this city, which contains a mausoleum thought to contain a wax sculpture of a leader who died in
1976. For 10 points, name this city that contains the Forbidden City, Mao's mausoleum, and Tiananmen
Square, the capital of China.
ANSWER: Beijing [accept Peking; prompt on Forbidden City or Zijin Cheng]
This city is home to a sturdy bell tower that lost only a stone animal head during a 1976 earthquake. It
isn't in Europe, but this city contains a beautiful lakeside Summer Palace. A landmark in this city contains
the Gate of Divine Might and Meridian Gate at opposite ends and the Hall of Supreme Harmony inside.
That landmark was not accessible to commoners without the emperor's permission. For 10 points, name this
Asian metropolis, home to the Forbidden City.
ANSWER: Beijing [or Peking]
This city is the location of a complex designed by Steven Holl, in which eight residential towers form a
rough U-shape connected by pedestrian sky bridges, named the Linked Hybrid. This city's Friendship
Store was once the only place to buy Western products here and is located in the Jianguomnwai district.
Rem Koolhaas designed this city's Central Television Building. A central building in this city features a
massive red star on its ceilng surrounded by golden sunflower petals, and this city is the location of a
stadium popularly known as the Bird's Nest. For 10 points, name this city that is the location of the Great
Hall of the People on Tienanmen Square.
ANSWER: Beijing [or Pei-ching; or Peking]
Two large stone formations known collectively as Pigeons- Rock lie off the coast of this city's
Raouche neighborhood. This city is pursuing a restoration project of its bullet-riddled Holiday Inn
and Barakat building, from which militias fired during the Battle of the Hotels. Its namesake Central
District is being developed by Solidere, a private firm that was controversially run by a prime
minister who was assassinated in this city and is buried near the Mohammad al-Amin Mosque. The
Garden of (*) Forgiveness straddles this city's Green Line, a demarcation whose separate sides were
occupied by the PLO and Israeli forces during a civil war. Syrian troops were forced out of this city
following large rallies organized by Hezbollah in this city. For 10 points, name this focal point for the
Cedar Revolution, the capital city of Lebanon.
ANSWER: Beirut
The main building of this country's national library is unique in that it was designed in the shape of a
rhombicuboctahedron. Among its noted sites is the residence of the Radziwill family called Nesvizh Castle.
Most of the early course of the Pripyat River flows through this nation, passing through cities such as Brest,
once known as Brest-Litovsk. It was estimated that about 70% of the radiation from Chernobyl was blown
into this country. Foreign observers have accused its president of running the last dictatorship in Europe.
For 10 points, name this Eastern European nation, led by Alexander Lukashenko, whose name roughly
translates as "White Russia."
ANSWER: Republic of Belarus
This nation contains a former residence of the Radzivil Family called Mir Castle, and this nation was
the home to the Bielski Brothers. This nation's south contains marshes created by the Pripet River
and is the source of the Neman River. This nation contains the Bug River and a fortress on that river
was the site of the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Containing the city of Mahilyow on the Dneiper
River and receiving heavy fallout from the Chernobyl disaster, this nation has been led since 1994 by
Alexander Lukashenko. For 10 points, name this former Soviet Republic north of Ukraine sometimes
referred to as "White Russia" which has its capital at Minsk.
ANSWER: Belarus
The 2001 Lambermont and Lombard Accords sanctioned devolution in this country, where in 1989 the third
state reform had separated the capital city from the regions created in 1980's second state reform. Today,
this country's former prime minister, Herman Van Rompuy, is the president of the European Council, and
its new prime minister is Yves Leterme. Namur is the capital and Liege is the most populous city in this
country's southern region, which is centered on the Meuse Valley, while the Scheldt River flows through a
region that includes Bruges. Antwerp is the largest port in, for 10 points, which country divided between the
Flemish and the Waloons?
ANSWER: Belgium
The largest city in this country contains a monument with 9 interconnected metal spheres
representing an iron crystal called the Atomium, built for this country's 1958 world fair. The
longtime industrial belt in this country's center is home to the city of Liege. The southern part of this
country is called the Walloon region. A major port in this country was the ultimate German goal during the
Battle of the Bulge; another city in this country saw the signing of a treaty ending the War of 1812. Those
two cities are Ghent and Antwerp. For 10 points, name this nation that is part of the Low Countries with
capital at Brussels.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Belgium
This country's namesake river is also known as the Old River. Its highest point has recently been confirmed
to be Doyle's Delight, not Victoria Peak. The courses of the Hondo and Sarstoon Rivers define much of this
country's northern and southern borders. It shares the Yalbac Hills and Vaca Plateau with Guatemala.
Along the coast are the cities of Monkey River, Placentia and Dangriga, and off the coast of Gale's Point is
the second-longest barrier reef in the world. It shares a border with the Mexican state of Quintana Roo, and
is the only English-speaking country in Latin America. Formerly known as British Honduras, for 10 points,
name this country with capital at Belmopan.
ANSWER: Belize
This modern-day nation was the site of the ancient city of Caracol. This country's capital was
located at its namesake port city until Hurricane Hattie struck in 1961. The Maya Mountains are a
large intrusive block of granite in this country, which is a scuba-diving haven because its namesake
reef is the second-longest (*) barrier reef in the world. For 10 points, name this only English-speaking
Central American country, a former British colony with capital at Belmopan.
ANSWER: Belize
A holiday in this country, "Garifuna Settlement Day," is popular in the district capital of Dangriga. It is
home to the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary, the first sanctuary created for jaguars. Off this country's
coast is a famous scuba diving site popularized by Jacques Cousteau called the Great Blue Hole. This
country's name may come from the Mayan word for "muddy-watered." This is the only Central American
country where English is the official language. For 10 points, name this country bordered to the west by
Guatemala and to the east by the Caribbean Sea.
ANSWER: Belize
This nation's highest point, Doyle's Delight, lies in its Maya Mountains. It's not The Bahamas, but
Half-Moon and Man-o--War Cayes lie in a namesake UNESCO World Heritage site Barrier Reef
Reserve System which contains the submarine sinkhole the Great Blue Hole. This nation's towns
include Orange Walk, and languages include Kriol and the Arawakan-based Garifuna. It's not Turks and
Caicos, but one tourist attraction is its island of Ambergris Caye. With "I Flourish in the Shade" in Latin on
its flag, it gained independence from Britain in 1981. For ten points, name this Central American nation
whose largest and namesake city lost the status of its capital to Belmopan.
ANSWER: Belize [Do NOT Accept or Prompt on British Honduras]
This country's coastline has the longest barrier reef in the northern hemisphere and the third longest in
the world. This country achieved independence partly thanks to an ethnically Palestinian future leader of
the PUP, Said Musa. This birthplace of chewing gum has important population centers at San Ignacio,
Punta Gorda, and Orange Walk. Arlen and Diane Chase uncovered an ancient Mayan city in this country
with a Spanish name meaning "snail." This home of the archaeological site of Caracol has a sizable
Anglican population. For ten points, name this Central American country directly east of Guatemala whose
head of state is Queen Elizabeth II.
ANSWER: Belize
This modern day country is home to Altun Ha and La Milpa ruins and off its coast is a namesake
barrier reef that is the second largest in the world. Its modern name may derive from Peter Wallace,
who established the first settlement here on its namesake river, and Victoria Peak rises from the
Cockscomb Range to be its highest point. The least populous nation besides French Guiana in the
Western Hemisphere, it was formerly known as British Honduras. For 10 points, name this Central
American country with capital at Belmopan.
ANSWER: Belize (or Belice; prompt on "British Honduras")
This country's city of Spanish Lookout is home to its only commercially viable oilfields. The tallest peak
in this nation is named after Arthur Conan Doyle. Its borders are partially defined by the Sarstoon and
Hondo rivers. This country's capital used to be a coastal city named for the country, but the devastating
1961
Hurricane Hattie forced a new planned capital to be built inland. For 10 points, name this country, that was
once called British Honduras, a Caribbean scuba-diving haven with capital at Belmopan.
ANSWER: Belize
This country shares Chetumal Bay with its northern neighbor, and that bay is partially defined by its
island of Ambergris Caye. The Sibun and New Rivers flow through this country, whose largest peak, in the
Cockscomb Range, was named after Arthur Conan Doyle. The Hondo and Sarstoon Rivers define the
northern and southern borders of this country, which, unusually for its region, was for many years a British
colony. Found south of Mexico and north of Guatemala, for 10 points, name this small, Central American
country with capital Belmopan.
ANSWER: Belize
A state that was part of this historical region has been ruled by the CPI-M led Left Front for thirty years,
making that party the longest-ruling democratically elected communist party anywhere ever. That
government was unable to resolve concerns about land use disputes with Tata Motors, meaning that the
factory for the Tata Nano ended up not being built in that state. That state is also home to a long-running
Maoist insurgency, the Naxalites. The Kingdom ofMagada in this region was the seat of the Gupta Empire,
and the first king of an independent form of this polity was Shashanka. This region suffers from frequent
flooding, and is home to the mangrove swamps known as the Sundarbans. This is thanks to its location,
which led to it being a desirable territorial possession for the the British East India company, which gained
control of it after the battle of Plassey. Home to the author of the Indian national anthem and Gitanjali,
Rabindranath Tagore, for ten points, name this region, home to the Ganges delta, the large cities of Kolkota
and Dhaka, and Bangladesh and a namesake Indian state, situated on a namesake Bay.
ANSWER: Bengal [Prompt on West Bengal or Bangladesh]
The Shore Temple sits on this question of water and is the only extant member of the legendary Seven
Pagodas. Frederic Tudor, the "ice king," built the Vivekanandar Illam ice market on this question of water.
Cox's Bazar, on this question, contains the longest natural sandy sea shore beaches in the world. The
Andaman and Nicobar Islands lie on its eastern border, and the Irrawaddy and the Brahmaputra flow into it.
For 10 points, name this largest bay on the world, which borders Bangladesh to the north and Calcutta,
India, to the west.
ANSWER: Bay of Bengal
Cox's Bazar is found on the shores of this question of water home to Ritchie's Archipelago. The
Sundarbuns form at the mouth of the largest river that flows into this question of water, which is
connected by the Palk Strait to the Gulf of Mannar. Forming the eastern boundaries of the (*) Chola
Empire, this question of water is fed by the Meghna, Kaveri, and Irrawaddy Rivers, the latter of which empties
near Rangoon. Site of the Nicobar and Andaman Islands, this question of water has major seaports at
Chittagong, Kolkata, and Madras. For 10 points, identify this bay that receives the Ganges River and
borders the eastern part of India.
ANSWER: Bay of Bengal
This question of water contains the beginning of the Ninetyeast Ridge. The Coromandel Coast runs along it,
and Sagar Island is found just off the coast of its namesake land region. The only notable island chains are
found in its east, where the Nicobar Islands are joined in a union territory with the islands naming the sea to
its east, the Andaman Islands. Connected to the Gulf of Mannar by the Palk Strait, its major ports include
Trincomalee, Chittagong, and Chennai, and it receives the waters of the Cooum, Kavari, and Brahmaputra.
For 10 points, name this question of water stretching south to the Indian Ocean between Sri Lanka and
Sumatra, which lies east of India.
ANSWER: Bay of Bengal
The large delta of the Karnaphuli River marks the northern end of this question of water and is the site of one
of its busiest ports, Chittagong. The cities of Tuticorin and Pondicherry sit on this question of water's western
shore, and the Mergui and Nicobar island groups lie in it. Rivers feeding into it include the Irrawaddy and
Brahmaputra. Calcutta lies on its northwest shore. FTP what is this large indention of the Indian Ocean
bordering Myanmar and India?
ANSWER: Bay of Bengal
A subgroup of this ethnicity uses the distinctive "tifinagh" alphabet, and these people speak Kabyle and
other Amazigh languages. This ethnicity engages in a kind of political meeting called a "jama'ah."
Subgroups of these people include the Shawia, the Rif, and the Tuareg. These people, descended from the
classical Numidians, live in the Maghreb region, and they comprised the major part of the "Moor" identity
that controlled Islamic Europe in the Middle Ages. For 10 points, identify this ethnicity which is prevalent
in Morocco and Algeria and found throughout North Africa.
ANSWER: Berbers [or Amazigh until it is read; or Imazighen until "Amazigh" is read; or Tuareg until "Kabyle" is read; prompt on Moors until it is read; do not accept or prompt on "Arabs"]
Two styles of folk music among these people are the ahwash, performed by two choruses, and the
rwais. Their cuisine includes, a type of pie made from fledgling pigeons called the pastilla, as well as
the tajine. They speak a collection of related languages called Amazigh, and one nomadic subgroup of
them is called the Tuareg. Most of them converted to Islam in the wake of Arab invasions of the
Maghreb, and they later helped found empires to the north such as the Almoravid dynasty in Spain. For 10
points, identify this ethnic group which includes such people as St. Augustine and Zinedine Zidane, the
indigenous people of northwestern Africa.
ANSWER: Berbers
This group uses the tifinagh system of writing and was once called the Maxyes. The Kabyle and Chleuh
belong to this group. A southern subgroup of this people is often called the "blue men of the desert" for
their face-covering veils. Shluh, Zenaga, and Numidian are among the languages in their namesake branch
of the Afro-Asiatic family. Also including the Tuaregs, this group uses the ja'amah as its basic unit of
governance, and is found in Tunisia, Libya, Morocco, and Algeria. For 10 points, name this North African
ethnic group that gives its name to the Barbary Coast.
ANSWER: Berbers [or Imazighen]
The city had 3 functioning airports up to 2007, but the closure of Tempelhof has temporarily left it with
only 2. Even then Tegel in the north is scheduled for closure in 2011, leaving only Schonefeld. Visitors can
take the S Bahn train to the neighbouring city of Potsdam, while another S Bahn train leads to the former
Nazi concentration camp of Sachenhausen. The Neue Synagoge in this city was built in the 1880s and
features unique Moorish domes, while in the 2005, a new Memorial to the Holocaust was opened, just
adjacent to Brandenburg Gate. FTP, name this city, divided into East and West by an infamous namesake
wall between 1961 and 1989, the capital of Germany.
ANSWER: Berlin
A reconstruction of the Ishtar Gate can be found on this city's Museum Island. Many ghost
stations exist in this city's two train systems, which are denoted "S" and "U." This city's Mitte
district includes a boulevard lined with linden trees, as well as a monument topped by a four-horse
chariot. Norman Foster designed a glass (*) dome for a building that burned down here in 1933. The
Spree river passes through this city. For 10 points, name this home to the Brandenburg Gate and the
Reichstag in Germany.
ANSWER: Berlin
A complex of exhibits is found on this city's Museum Island; the most famous of those museums
houses a reconstruction of the Pergamum Altar. A television tower with a stainless steel dome, known
as the Fernsehturm, stands near a public square in this city known as (*) Alexanderplatz. The river
Spree flows through this city, home to a quadriga chariot that sits atop a massive triumphal arch. For 10
points, name this European capital, home to the Brandenburg Gate.
ANSWER: Berlin
The outskirts of this city are home to Devil's Mountain, constructed out of rubble, while a square in this city
named for Alexander I is home to a notable television tower. A monument to a 1933 book burning
accompanied by Heine's quote, "where they burned books, they will burn people," is located in this one of
this city's main plazas, which lies on the south side of a famous street in this city. That street terminates in a
notable "gate" topped by a quadriga, borders the Bebelplatz, and is called the Unter den Linden, while the
gate itself was the first part of Karl Schinckel's plan to transform this city into "Athens on the Spree." Once
home to a notable guard outpost on Friedrichstrasse, for ten points, identify this city that is also home to a
Holocaust memorial on Behrenstrasse as well as the Norman Foster-designed Reichstag building, and
serves as the capital of Germany.
ANSWER: Berlin
An airport in this city that was decommissioned in 2008 and notable for being built from limestone will now
be the home of the Bread and Butter fashion show for the next decade. One of its main public areas is
named for a Russian Tsar who visited in 1805 and is the home to a massive TV tower that is the largest
freestanding structure in western Europe. Other major public places include Gendarmenmarkt, home of the
concert hall and the so called "French" and "German" cathedrals, and Postdamer Platz, which lies just south
of Unter den Linden, the Brandenburg Gate, and the Reichstag. For 10 points, name this capital of
Germany.
ANSWER: Berlin
A museum in this city houses a reproduction of the Pergamon Altar. That building is located on
this city's Museum Island, located in the former location of the city of Colln. Just before joining the
Havel River in Spandau, the Spree River flows through this city. Its borough of Pankow includes
Schonhausen Palace, and this city also includes the public square Alexanderplatz and Charlottenburg
Palace. This city's airport contains a memorial to the airlift that supplied this city after World War
II, and this city also houses the Reichstag. Name this home of the Brandenburg Gate, the capital of
Germany.
ANSWER: Berlin, Germany
A Westminster College installation featuring this object was planned by Edwina Sandys and
features many instances of the word "unwahr", or "untrue". An installation featuring it in Seoul,
South Korea can be found near a bear sculpture depicting a landmark found on the boulevard (+)
Unter den Linden. The largest section of it outside of its native country is located at the Newseum in
Washington, D.C., and includes eight four-meter tall sections as well as a guard tower from (*)
Checkpoint Charlie. The aforementioned exhibits contain, for 10 points, fragments of what former
boundary separating a European capital city that fell on November 9, 1989?
ANSWER: pieces of the Berlin Wall [or der Berliner Mauer; prompt on partial answers; prompt on things like "brick" or "cement"]
This region was the subject of a 1962 Allan W. Eckert article which quoted a pilot as describing "white"
and "green water." The largest non-combat loss of life in U.S. Naval history occurred here in 1918 when
the USS Cyclops went down here. Contrary to popular belief, Lloyd's of London does not charge higher
insurance rates to ships traveling through this region. Its infamy originated with an article about the
disappearance of Flight 19 here, which conspiracy theorists have blamed on UFO abductions. For ten points,
name this region in the western Atlantic Ocean where aircraft and ships supposedly mysteriously disappear.
ANSWER: Bermuda Triangle [or Devil's Triangle]
Features of this city include Zytglogge [ZYT-glog-ge] clock tower, as well as the Munster [moon-STER]
Cathedral, which contains a sculpture collection of the Last Judgment. It lends its name to a topographical
distinction between the mountainous Oberland and the Mittelland, which includes valleys known for cheese
production like Emmental. Located on the River Aare [ARE], this city has two official languages, though
German is by far the most widely-spoken. To its south is a namesake branch of the Alps, parts of which is
also located in the canton of Valais. Home to a famous bear enclosure which is featured on its flag, name,
FTP, this fifth-most populous city of Switzerland and its de facto capital.
ANSWER: Bern
The Chele La is this country's highest major mountain pass, and its small southern areas of deciduous
lowland contain the Shiwalik Hills and its former capital, Punakha. Its second largest city is Paro, and this
country contains Gangkhar Puensum, which at 24,836 feet is the world's largest unclimbed mountain,
although the slightly higher Kula Kangri is disputed with China. The states of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh,
and Sikkim all border this country, and its rivers, which include the Drangme Chhu, lie in the Brahmaputra
watershed. For 10 points, name this kingdom in the eastern Himalayas with capital at Thimphu.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Bhutan
This nation, which includes the towns of Louri and Samtse, is heavily forested in its central region featuring
the Black Mountains, which act as a watershed between the Mo and Drangme Rivers. The far south is home
to the fertile and subtropical Duars Plain and in the east is the town of Paro, home to its only airport and the
Tiger's Nest monastery. The flag of this nation has a diagonal yellow and orange pattern with the middle
prominently featuring the Druk, a white Thunder Dragon. To its west is the state of Sikkim, near this
country's capital Thimpu, and that state separates it from Nepal. FTP, name this Himalayan nation
sandwiched between China and India.
ANSWER: Bhutan
China claims part of the Gasa district of this country. The Tiger's Nest Monastery is located in
its city of Paro. Its eastern provinces are the home of Tibetan Sharchops. Dzongkha is its national
language, but native speakers are only concentrated in the western part of this country. This country's
Gangkhar Puensum is believed to be the highest unclimbed mountain in the world. This nation has
a Gross National Happiness Commission. Its flag features Druk the Thunder Dragon. This country
is separated by the Indian states of Assam and West Bengal from Bangladesh, and by the state of
Sikkim from Nepal. Name this country whose capital is Thimphu.
ANSWER: (Kingdom of) Bhutan [boo-TAHN] [or Druk Yul or Druk Gyalkhap]
In this country, phallic symbols can be seen depicted on houses in the honor of Drukpa Kunly, who
introduced this country to Buddhism. This country passed 2004 and 2010 laws that made it the first
to completely ban the use of (+) tobacco. This country fought the Duar War with the British in the
1860s, and this country's languages include Dzongkha. This country's monarchs are given the title (*)
"Dragon King" and come from the House of Wangchuck. This country uniquely measures "gross national
happiness." For 10 points, name this Himalayan kingdom ruled from Thimphu.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Bhutan
Major rivers of this country include the Torsa, Raidak, Sankosh, and Manas. The Black Mountains in the
central part of this country rise to almost 9,000 feet above sea level. Further north is Gangkhar Puensum,
the highest mountain in this country, and one of the highest unclimbed mountains in the world. Internet and
television were introduced in this country only in 1999. The former king of this country, Jigme Singye
Wangchuck, coined the term "gross national happiness" in 1972, suggesting the country embark on
modernization that is based on this country's Buddhist culture. FTP, name this landlocked Himalayan
nation with a capital at Thimphu.
ANSWER: Bhutan
This country is divided in four administrative zones called dzongdey, which are in turn divided into twenty
distinct districts known as dzongkhag, the largest ones being Gasa and Wangdue Phodrang. Jakar is seen as
the point where Buddhism was first introduced to this country. This country includes the city of Punakha,
this nation's capital until 1955, and the Taktshang Monastery, also known as the Tiger's Nest. In 2008
Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck was crowned this country's Fifth Dragon King, making him at the age
of 28 the youngest world monarch. This country is located at the east end of the Himalayas and
indigenously called Druk Yul. For ten poins, identify this landlocked South Asian country whose capital and
largest city is Thimphu.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Bhutan
This region was threatened last July by the Basin Complex Fire near its Los Padres National Forest. It
stretches north from San Carpoforo Creek in the shadow of the San Lucia Mountains along US Highway 1,
which runs past its namesake hot springs where Hunter Thompson was once employed. Also home to
Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Henry Miller, its northern boundary is Carmel River, which reaches the Pacific
just south of Monterey. FTP, identify this coastal region of rugged, picturesque topography in central
California, namesake of a novel by Jack Kerouac.
ANSWER: Big Sur
Settlements along this region include Lucia and Gorda. A popular tourist attraction in this region is
located in Julia Pfeiffer Burns State Park and is a waterfall that directly empties into the ocean. Jack
Kerouac's experience in Bixby Canyon led him to write an autobiographical novel titled after this region,
whose attractions include McWay Falls. Bixby Creek Bridge is located in its northern portion, while its
southern portion's terminus is sometimes defined at San Simeon. It can be traversed by taking California
State Route 1. For 10 points, name this coastal region in central California, named for its position south of
Monterey Bay.
ANSWER: Big Sur
Several massive public elevators are located in this city's Seven Streets area, which comprise its Old
City, and it earned the unfortunate nickname of "the hole" due to its position between Pagasarri and
Artxanda Peaks. Home to the Rekalde and Abando districts, this city's Erandio and Sestao districts
sit on its namesake estuary that also houses the Joaquin Rucoba-designed city hall. It is home to the
Teatro Arriaga and the Moyua Square, which itself contains Chevarri Palace and Duesta University.
Santiago Cathedral and the Basilica of (*) Begona are found in this city, whose Zubizuri bridge spans the
Nervion River. A gigantic dog made of flowers guards the best-known structure in this city, located on the
Bay of Biscay. FTP, identify this Spanish city, the largest in Basque country and home to a Frank Gehry-
designed, very fish-like branch of the Guggenheim.
ANSWER: Bilbao
It's not Atlanta, but this city's entertainment district is known as Five Points South. This city's Red
Mountain houses the world's largest cast iron statue, depicting Vulcan at his forge. One important figure in
this city's Civil Rights movement was its commissioner of public safety, Bull Connor. George Wallace
called out the state's National Guard to prevent the integration of this city's schools. Thomas Blanton and
Bobby Frank Cherry were convicted in 2002 of the 1964 bombings of this city's 16th Street Baptist Church.
For 10 points, name this city from whose city jail Martin Luther King wrote a famous letter, and which is
the largest city in Alabama.
ANSWER: Birmingham
Originally established by the khanate of Kokand, this city is situated along the Alaarcha and Alamedin
rivers, and Erkindik Boulevard is one its main avenues. North of this city is the Chu River, which forms part
of its country's border with a northern neighbor, and the Kant air base, owned by Russia, is located 20 miles
east of it. From 1926 until 1991, this city was named after Mikhail Frunze [pron: froon-zeh], an equestrian
statue of whom can still be found in this city's Ala-Too Square. Today it is served by the Manas
International Airport and is the seat of a government headed by Kurmanbek Bakiyev. The capital of a
country that is home to Lake Isyk-Kul and the Tienshan range, FTP, identify this capital of Kyrgyzstan.
ANSWER: Bishkek
The closed Homestake Mine is located in this region's city of Lead. The 1868 Fort Laramie Treaty
exempted this area from settlement by United States citizens. This region hosts the Sturgis Motorcycle
Rally in August of every year. The Ellsworth Air Force Base is in this region's largest city. A town in this
region where Calamity Jane and "Wild Bill" Hickock died was Deadwood. This region, which is home to
Rapid City, is where Korczak Ziolkowski is commissioned to build a memorial to Crazy Horse. For the
point, name this mountain range of western South Dakota and Wyoming where Mount Rushmore is
located.
ANSWER: Black Hills
Over 90% of its volume lacks oxygen, because the upper and lower layers do not intermix, making it
the largest meromictic basin in the world. It is divided into two sub-basins, the northern one with a
large shelf of over 190 kilometers wide. The southern shelf is narrow and borders upon the cities of
Samsun and Sinop, to the west emptying through the Sea of (*) Marmara. It is separated from the Sea
of Azov by the Cimmerian Bosporus, and northern cities include Odessa and Rostov. FTP, name this inland
sea separating Asia from Europe.
ANSWER: Black Sea
This question of water is next to the site of the 2014 Winter Olympics, Sochi. This question of water is connected
by the Strait of Kerch to the Sea of Azov and to the Sea of Marmara by the Bosporus Strait. Important cities
on this question of water include Sevastopol, Yalta, Odessa, and Istanbul. Located west of Russia, south of
Ukraine and north of Turkey, name, for 10 points, this colorful inland sea.
ANSWER: Black Sea
The idea that this question of water underwent a catastrophic rise in 5600 BCE is the subject of William Ryan
and Walter Pitman's "deluge hypothesis." This question of water, the world's largest not to contain intermixing
layers, is often called the Euxine Sea in historical texts. The resort town of Varna is located on this question of
water, whose northern coast is indented by a peninsula containing the city of Yalta. The Strait of Kerch
separates the Sea of Azov from this question, which is separated from the Sea of Marmara by the Bosporus. For
10 points, name this sea that surrounds the Crimean Peninsula and borders Romania, Bulgaria, Ukraine,
Russia, and Turkey.
ANSWER: Black Sea
The eastern coast of this question of water is home to the city of Batumi, capital of the Adjara Autonomous
Republic and the largest port for the country of which Adjara is nominally part. On its southeastern coast is
Trabzon, which was one northern terminus of the Silk Road when known as Trebizond. It is connected on
its north through the Strait of Kerch to another sea, which partly creates a peninsula at the southern tip of
which is Yalta. The Sea of Azov connects to, FTP, what sea which meets the Bosporus at Istanbul?
ANSWER: Black Sea
The western shore of this large question of water contains the resorts of Burgas and Varna. The river
upon which the Iron Gate lies empties into this question of water into which the Dniester and Dnieper
Rivers flow. Abkhazia, a territory at the center of the 2008 South Ossetia War, is located on the
eastern boundary of this sea. Cesium-137 radionuclides from the Pripyat River eventually find their
way in this massive (*) sea. The home of the 2014 Winter Olympics, Sochi, is on this sea which is
connected to the Mediterranean via the Bosphorus and Dardanelles. For 10 points, name this large sea
located north of Turkey into which the Danube flows.
ANSWER: Black Sea
The Ai-Todor Cape into this question of water has the Roman ruins of Charax and a neo-Gothic castle called
the Swallow's Nest, while the southern part of this question has the Cape Ince featuring the city Sinop. One
inlet of it is the Gulf of Karkinitsk, which lies alongside the Isthmus of Perekop, the site of a fortress
significant for defense in the 18th century. The Kerch Strait connects this question of water to a smaller question
while the Sea of Marmara is connected to it by a famous strait. Respectively, these are the Sea of Azov and
the Bosporus strait, which flows through Istanbul on the southwest corner of this question of water. For ten
points, identify this inland sea surrounding the Crimean peninsula, lying to the north of Turkey.
ANSWER: Black Sea
Chushka Spit extends into this question of water from Taman Peninsula, where one can reach Port Krym by
ferrying across the Strait of Kerch. That strait connects this question of water to its neighbor, a sea which is the
outlet of the Kuban and Don Rivers as well as the shallowest sea in the world. In addition to being
connected to the Sea of Azov, this sea is connected to the Sea of Marmara via the Bosphorus strait. It is
bordered by Georgia, Bulgaria, and the Crimean Peninsula. For 10 points, name this inland European sea,
located directly south of Ukraine and directly north of Turkey.
ANSWER: Black Sea [accept Sea of Azov or Strait of Kerch before respective mentions]
Evidence against one hypothesis of this feature's formation stems from Abrajano's discovery of
sapropel mud in a nearby question of water. Once the region around this question was colonized by the
Milesians, Greek tradition referred to it as "Hospitable." One seaport on this question is near the
estuary that it forms with the Dniester River. It connects to the Sea of Azov through the Strait of
Kerch, while the Bosporus connects it to Marmara and through Marmara to the Aegean Sea. Notable cities
on this question of water include Yalta, Odessa, and Sevastopol. For 10 points, identify this sea bordeed by the
Ukraine and Russia to the north and Turkey to the south.
ANSWER: Black Sea
Cities on this question of water include Varna and the future Winter Olympics site Sochi. The South Stream
natural gas pipeline will be constructed across this question of water, which receives the Dneiper River. The
Kerch Strait connects this sea with the Sea of Azov. The Crimean Peninsula lies in this sea, which is
separated from the Sea of Marmara by the Bosporous near Istanbul. It borders significant parts of Turkey,
Ukraine, and Russia. For 10 points, identify this colorfully named inland sea.
ANSWER: Black Sea
The shore of this question of water holds Tekkekoy Caves dating from the Stone Age in what is now
Samsun Province. This question of water's east coast was the home of the Kingdom of Colchis [KOL-kis].
On its west coast, this connects to Lake Beloslav through Lake Varna. This question's northwestern
ports are Illichivsk and Odessa, and in the northeast this is connected by the Kerch Strait to the Sea
of Azov. Its north coast includes Yalta and Sevastapol on the Crimean Peninsula. To its southwest,
the Bosphorus connects this question of water to the Sea of Marmara. Name this sea surrounded by
Ukraine, Russia, Georgia, Bulgaria, Romania, and Turkey.
ANSWER: Black Sea
A merchant ship found buried in this question of water is named for one of its coastal cities, Sinop.
One explanation of its name is that 90% of this question of water lacks oxygen and contains the most
abundant levels of hydrogen sulfide in the world. The Strait of Kerch connects this question of water to
the Sea of (*) Azov, while it is connected to the Sea of Marmara by the Bosporus Strait. Sochi, the site of
the 2014 Winter Olympics, lies on this question of water, as do the cities of Sevastopol, Yalta, and Odessa. For
10 points, name this large sea of Eastern Europe that lies north of Turkey.
ANSWER: Black Sea
Entrance of military vessels into this question of water was restricted by the Montreux Convention of
1936. The Bug, Don, and Dneiper rivers drain into this question of water, which the Kerch Strait
connects to the Sea of (*) Azov. The Crimean Peninsula has coastline on the Sea of Azov and this question of
water. This sea is connected by the Bosporus, the Sea of Marmara, and the Dardenelles, which together
compromise the Turkish Straits, to the Aegean Sea. For 10 points, identify this sea which receives the
Danube and is bordered by countries including Ukraine, Russia, Romania, and Georgia.
ANSWER: Black Sea
The Rim Current is a phenomenon in this question of water, which includes Cape Jason and the Strait of
Kerch. This sea is north of the Pontic Mountains and is connected to the Sea of Marmara via the Bosporus
Strait. Cities on this sea include Varna, Odessa, and Sevastopol. The Crimean Peninsula juts into this question
of water, which lies south of the Sea of Azov. For 10 points, name this large sea that borders Turkey,
Russia, and Ukraine.
ANSWER: Black Sea
Resort towns on this question of water include Dyuni, Albena, Burgas, and Varna along a so-called Riviera on
its western shore, while the Pontic Mountains stretch along its southern shore. One landmark on its coast is
Livadia Palace, site of a February 1945 conference, and the 2014 Winter Olympics will be held at Sochi, a
city on its coast, but tourists should avoid Sokhumi, the capital of Abkhazia, which lies on its shore and
seeks to break away from Georgia. FTP, identify this sea whose outlet is the Bosporus and which also
borders Bulgaria, Turkey, and Ukraine.
ANSWER: Black Sea
A study released November 6 of this year noted that this mountain is 18 inches shorter this year than last
due to melting snow, now standing at 15,782 feet, still the highest in its range. It also moved 85 feet more
into the eastern of the two countries it straddles, which are linked by a namesake tunnel beneath it. Its
Aiguille summit is the terminus for a cable car which leaves from Chamonix, and it was the subject of an
ode by Percy Shelley. FTP what is this highest mountain in Western Europe and the alps, shared by Italy
and France?
ANSWER: Mont Blanc or Monte Bianco
This building was commissioned to celebrate the end of the Fifteen Years War and the Bocksay
uprising at the Peace of Zsitvatorok. This building's courtyard was closed to the horses of all but one man,
who had to bow below a suspended iron chain to enter. Twenty-thousand tiles within this building depict
fifty tulips, and it hosts calligraphic inscriptions by Seyyid Kasim Gubari. This building was designed by a
disciple of Sinan named Mehmed Aga, who gave it a distinctive six minarets. It was completed in 1616
under the patronage of its official namesake, Sultan Ahmed I. For ten points, identify this Istanbul house of
worship named for the tiles' color.
ANSWER: Blue Mosque [or Sultan Ahmed Mosque until it is read; or Sultan Ahmet Camii until it is read]
These are the southeasternmost result of the Grenville orogeny. This landform contains two national parks
officially created during Franklin Roosevelt's term which are connected by a same-named parkway that
originates at Rockfish Gap. Three rivers, the Roanoke, James, and Potomac, cut gaps through it, all in
Virginia. It also contains the highest peaks of Georgia, South Carolina, Virginia, and North Carolina. For 10
points, what is this mountain range, whose highest peak is North Carolina's Mount Mitchell and contains
Shenandoah and the Great Smoky Mountains National Parks, which forms a part of the larger Appalachian
Mountains?
ANSWER: Blue Ridge Mountains [prompt on Appalachian Mountains until "parkway"]
The cree word muskeg is refers to this type of land in Alaska and Western Canada. Members of the
genera Darlingtonia, Heliamphora, and Sarracenia are characteristic flora; carnivory in those pitcher
plants is an adaptation to low nitrogen levels. Sphagnum, a tannin-releasing bryophyte, is responsible
for the characteristic acidity of these regions, which are also defined by anoxic environment and (*)
cold tempretures. High potential for evapotranspiration is characteristic of the the "Blanket" type of the
regions. One of them actually started moving in 2008, devastating County Kerry in Ireland, where the Bord
na Mona handles harvesting of a locally important fuel from these regions. The traditional site for cranberry
harvesting, important anthropological finds in these entities are named after Grauballe and Tollund. Not to
be confused with minerotrophic fens, FTP, identify these ombrotrophic wetlands known for preserving
human and as the source of peat.
ANSWER: bogs [accept heaths; accept particular types of bogs such as pocosins; prompt on wetlands; accept poor fens before "acidic," but don't accept other kind of fen]
The largest collection of pre-Columbian gold in the world is located in this city's Gold Museum. A
central thoroughfare here is named for Jimenez de Quesada, the Spanish explorer who founded this city. A
bus route called TransMilenio and the largest network of bike paths in Latin America are used to get
around here. This city lent its name to some rioting that occurred during La Violencia. The mountain
Monserrate overlooks this city's central district of Candelaria, which is home to the Plaza de Bolivar and
the Centro Cultural Garcia Marquez. For 10 points, name this largest city of Colombia.
ANSWER: Bogota
This city shares its name with a river which originates in the Villapinzon region, and that river forms the
Tequendama Falls to the southwest of this city. The Banco de La Republica Museum of pre-hispanic
goldwork is located in this city's historical district of La Candelaria. The Monserrate hill located near this
city is a destination for pilgrims, and it is located on a high plateau which is called its namesake
"Savannah." The Ibero-American Theatre Festival is an annual event in this city. It was founded by Gonzalo
Jimenez de Quesada, and this city saw massive rioting in 1948 after the murder of the presidential candidate
Jorge Gaitan during "La Violencia." The largest city in its country after Medellin, for 10 points, identify this
capital of Colombia.
ANSWER: Bogota
The Abuna River forms the northern border of this country, while the Itenez River forms its northeast. The
northern Pando department experiences frequent flooding, while the country's southeast receives virtually
no rain. Yungas Road, known as the most dangerous road in the world, connects the country's capital to the
city of Chulumani by crossing the Cordillera Real Mountains. This country's highest point is Nevado
Sajama, which is part of a plateau that dominates this country. El Alto and Oruro are cities in the Altiplano,
whereas Cochabamba is in the plains and Santa Cruz is in the lowlands. For 10 points, name the country
that is home to the world's highest navigable lake and has two capitals.
ANSWER: Bolivia
This country is home to the original town of Copacabana, which is named for its patron saint. Its
highest peak is the Nevado Sajama (suh-HA-muh), and it is the site of the ancient silver mining center of
Potosi. Its largest city Santa Cruz sits on the banks of the Pirai river, which is near the ruins at Tiwanaku.
This country shares Lake Titicaca with its neighbor Peru. It is bordered to the north by Brazil, and to the
south by Chile, Paraguay, and Argentina. For 10 points, name this country with two capitals, at Sucre and
La Paz.
ANSWER: Bolivia
This country's Beni River flows through its Bala Gorge. This country has a large iron ore deposit
called El Mutun. A river in this country is named after Spain's Guadalquivir River, and flows past
the city of Tarija. Its World Heritage Sites include the pre-Columbian site of Tiwanaku and the
Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos. This country is home to the extremely dangerous Yungas Road. Its
largest city is Santa Cruz, though the cities of Oruro and Cochabamba may be more well known. This
country's region of the Altiplano contains Lake Poopo, which receives water from the Desaguadero River
flowing from the lake it shares with Peru, Lake Titicaca. For 10 points, name this South American country
with two capitals, Sucre and La Paz.
ANSWER: Plurinational State of Bolivia
This country's capital is home to a Witches Market where one can notably purchase soapstone
figurines and dried llama fetuses for Aymara rituals. The town of Coroico in this nation is home to
the steep, high altitude Yungus Road and is colloquially known as "death road" by bikers. A train
cemetery and the giant cactus-filled Incahuasi "Island" are found in this nation's Salar de (*) Uyuni,
the world's largest salt flats. The north of this nation is home to a question of water that contains artificial
islands called uros made from floating reeds and that lake is the highest navigable question of water on Earth.
Home to the hilariously named Lakes Poopo and Titicaca, FTP, identify this South American country with
capitals as La Paz and Sucre.
ANSWER: Bolivia
The Arbol de Piedro is a tree-shaped stone formation in this nation's Eduardo Avaroa Fauna National
Reserve. A proposed highway in this nation has been protested by the indigenous people of Isiboro Secure
National Park. The Salar de Uyuni in this nation contains most of the world's reserves of lithium. Most of
the Spanish empire's silver came from this nation's mine at Potosi. This nation shares Lake Titicaca with
Peru. For 10 points, name this South American nation whose largest city is Santa Cruz de la Sierra and
whose seat of government is La Paz.
ANSWER: Plurinational State of Bolivia [or Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia]
This country's "flying men" deliver packages by zip line in a region where a deadly hillside road to its
town of Coroico claims over 200 lives a year. This home of the eastern Yungas valley is home to the Oruro
carnival. Towns like Huanuni in this country declined along with its still-existent tin industry in the 80s, and
a quarter of its population is of the Aymara ethnicity. The Salar de Uyuni, the world's largest salt flat, is
north of Lake Poopo within this country's share of the altiplano. This country's government encourages
coca cultivation. For 10 points, name this landlocked South American nation with two capital cities, La Paz
and Sucre.
ANSWER: Plurinational State of Bolivia [or Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia; or Bulivya Mamallaqta; o Wuliwya Suyu]
Clemens August donated the Heilige Stiege to this city in 1746, which were created by Balthasar
Neumann. In addition to having the Kreuzberg Church, this city is the home of a botanical garden around
its Poppelsdorf Palace. The media company Deutsche Welle is based out of this city. Every fall, this city
holds a month-long music festival in honor of it being the birthplace of Ludwig van Beethoven. This city is
the only one in Germany to have the title of Bundesstadt, in recognition of the role it held from 1949 until
1999. For ten points, name this city in North Rhine-Westphalia that was the initial seat of government
post-reunification and the de facto capital of West Germany.
ANSWER: Bonn
This island's Gunung Mulu National Park contains distinct karst formations and the largest underground
chamber in the world. This area was used as a source of dragon's blood or mercury by Chinese merchants. It
is home to Kinabalu National Park, which is located in its Crocker Range. Bordering the Sulu Sea to the
northeast and the Java Sea to the South, it is separated by the Makassar Strait from the island of Sulawesi.
This island is divided into seven ecoregions, and the burning of the peat swamp forests here has made
Indonesia the third-largest CO2 emitter in the world. For 10 points, name this third-largest island in the
world that contains Brunei and part of Malaysia.
ANSWER: Borneo
The Murut and Penan people are sub-ethnic groups of the Dayak people indigenous to this island,
home to the Mahakam and Kapuas Rivers. It highest point is Mount Kinabalu and major cities
include Banjarmasin and Kuching. Separated from its eastern neighbor by the Makassar Strait, this
island is home to the city of (*) Bandar Seri Begawan as well as the states of Sabah and Sarawak, both of
which lie north of Kalimantan. Found west of Celebes and north of Java at the southern end of the South
China Sea, for 10 points, identify this island, the world's third largest, which is shared between Malaysia,
Indonesia, and Brunei.
ANSWER: Borneo
This region's Kapuas River is the longest river in its country, and this region also contains Mount Kinabalu,
which is this region's highest point. This location is home to Clearwater Cave, as well as the incredibly
biodiverse Deer Cave, which was once believed to be the largest cave system in the world. It is separated
from the island of Sulawesi by the Makassar Strait, and one country administers the territory of Labuan, as
well as the states of Sabah and Sarawak, on this island. For 10 points, name this third-largest island in the
world, shared between Brunei, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
ANSWER: Borneo
Cities on this island include Balikpapan and Banjarmasin, and this island home to the Muller Mountains is
directly south of a group called the Spratley Islands. One part of this island is ruled by the Sultan Hassanal
Bolkiah, and this island is home to Mt. Kinabalu. Two regions on this island are Sabah and Sarawak, and its
largest portion is known as Kalimantan. Separated by the Makassar Strait from Sulawesi, it is located north
of the Java Sea and follows New Guinea as the largest island in its archipelago. For 10 points, name this
island shared between Brunei, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
ANSWER: Borneo
Stone pillars found on this island were found at Kutai and bear Pallava Script. Hassanal Bolkiah rules a
sultanate in the northeast of this island. The Kapuas river is the longest on this island, and the Sulu Sea lies
to the north of this island. The Makassar Strait separates it from Sulawesi. It lies north of the Java Sea and
includes the region of Sarawak. For 10 points, name this island shared by Brunei, Malaysia and Indonesia,
the third largest in the world.
ANSWER: Borneo
This island includes the protected Danum Valley, as well as a particular type of tropical lowland peat
swamp drained and burned by the region's government. The northern part of this island was once leased to
Britain by the local sultan, and its two largest cities are Kuching and Banjarmasin, the latter of which was
the seat of government for the Dutch. Many of the indigenous people belong to the Dayak tribes. To its
northeast are Palawan and the Sulu Sea, while the Makassar Strait separates it from Sulawesi. One portion
of it is known as Kalimantan, and its northern section includes the regions of Sarawak and Sabah. For 10
points, name this extremely large island shared between Brunei, Indonesia, and Malaysia.
ANSWER: Borneo
In 2001, this island was the site of the Sampit Conflict, in which ethnic Madurese were attacked by natives.
Logging on this island has devastated the Penan nomads, who set up barricades to prevent logging in the
1990s, while the Dayak people, including the longhouse-dwelling Iban, have led the opposition to
immigration to this island. One native political party on this island is the Sarawak National Party, named for
a state usually paired with Sabah. Most of this island is covered by the state of Kalimantan, which is
bordered to the east by the Makassar Strait. For 10 points, name this third largest island in the world, shared
by Brunei, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
ANSWER: Borneo
The coal-mining island of Bunyu lies off the northeastern coast of this larger island, and major rivers
on this island include the Barito, Mahakam, and Kapuas. This island's native Dayak people mostly
live in its south, while the Crocker Range contains its highest point, Mount Kinabalu. Provinces on
this island include West (*) Kalimatan, East Kalimatan, Sabah, and Sarawak. The Makassar Strait
separates this island from Sulawesi, and it borders both the Sulu Sea and the South China Sea to its north.
The principality of Brunei is located on this island. For ten points, name this landmass mostly occupied by
Malaysia and Indonesia, the world's third largest island.
ANSWER: Borneo
This island's Danum Valley Conservation Area is the only known home of the spectacled flowerpecker.
Anthony Brooke was the heir apparent to the White Rajahs, a dynasty of Englishmen who controlled a
kingdom on this island from 1841 to 1946. The Mahakam River flows past the city of Samarinda before
emptying into the Makassar Strait, which separates Sulawesi from this island. The southern portion of this
island is known as Kalimantan, and its northern portion contains the states of Sabah and Sarawak and an
independent kingdom ruled by a sultan. For 10 points, name this Southeast Asian island divided between
Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei.
ANSWER: Borneo
This island, which is inhabited by the Dayak people, has its highest point in the Crocker Range at Mount
Kinabalu. This island is separated by the Makassar Strait from Sulawesi to the east, and by the Sulu Sea
from the Philippines to the northeast. This island's largest city, Kuching, is the capital of Sarawak, while it
also contains the national capital Bandar Seri Begawan. For 10 points, name this large Pacific island shared
by Indonesia, Malaysia, and Brunei.
ANSWER: Borneo
This island's Busang mine was found to be worthless in a scandal that caused the demise of
Canadian company Bre-X. This island hosts the world's greatest diversity of dipterocarps, including
many in its Danum Valley. Kerangas are a type of moist heath forest found on this island, whose
largest city is Kuching. The Mega Rice project attempted to convert this island's peat swamp forests
to rice paddies. This home of the Dayak people lies just west of the (*) Makassar Strait and Wallace's
Line, across from Sulawesi. Its northern portion includes the states of Sabah and Sarawak. For 10 points,
name this third largest island in the world, which is shared by Brunei, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
ANSWER: Borneo [or Kalimantan]
Its constituent republics each appoint members of the 15-person Dom Naroda and its 26 kilometers of
coastline are centered near the city of Neum. The Miljacka river flows through this country's capital, while
the Sava forms part of its northern border. Valentin Inzko holds the office of High Representative in this
country, while Zeljko Komsic is the current chairman of its three-person presidency. Banjaluka is one major
city in this country, which is the origin of the Drina River. The Dayton Accords ended a 1990s conflict
between this country and its parent state. For ten points, name this splinter state of Yugoslavia with capital
at Sarajevo.
ANSWER: Bosnia and Herzegovina (do not prompt on partial answer)
Its name originating from the Greek words for "oxen passage", this question of water is believed to have been
formed around 5600 B.C by a deglacial flood. The Maiden's Tower is is located on an island in this question of
water. Two bridges span it, one of which is the Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge, while its southern end runs
past the Golden Horn of a certain city. A tunnel known as the Marmaray is currently being constructed
under this strait, and is expected to be completed in 2012. For 10 points, name this narrowest strait in the
world, also known as the Istanbul Strait, which separates the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea.
ANSWER: Bosporus [or Bosphorus]
One explanation for this feature's origin involves the disconnection of two neighboring seas thousands of
years ago, resulting in the formation of the New Euxine Lake at one end of this waterway. Two bridges
cross this waterway, including the Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge, named for the man who conquered a city on
the shores of this waterway in 1453. That city was known then as Constantinople but is now the most
populous city in Turkey, Istanbul. Name this waterway, separating the Black Sea from the Sea of Marmara,
a companion to the Dardanelles.
ANSWER: Bosporus Strait (or Bosphorus Strait; accept Istanbul Strait until "Istanbul" is read)
This city is home to a giant statue of General Thomas Hooker, and major streets in its center
include Tremont Street. A dam on the river that runs through this city is home to its Science Center
museum, and major subway stations include Downtown Crossing(*) and Park Street. This city contains
a state capitol building on top of its richest neighborhood, Beacon Hill, its subway system is called the "T".
Containing a large public park called this city's "common", for 10 points name this home of Fenway Park,
the largest city in Massachusetts.
ANSWER: Boston
Historians debate whether or not hundreds of years ago this city had an African American community called
New Guinea located near Copp's Hill. Copp's Hill has this city's second oldest cemetery, with the oldest at
King's Chapel Burying Ground. This city has historical reenactments at its Old South Meeting House, and it
contains a grasshopper weather vane on top of a building funded by Peter Faneuil (FAAN-yul). The oldest
public park in the United States is this city's Common, which is also the beginning of its Freedom Trail.
One neighborhood in this city, Charlestown, contains Breed's Hill and Bunker Hill. Name this capital of
Massachusetts.
ANSWER: Boston, Massachusetts
This city's Museum of Fine Arts features Turner's painting The Slave Ship and Gauguin's painting
Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?. This city's other attractions include
Quincy Market and the neighborhoods of Back Bay and Beacon Hill, which can be accessed by this city's
public transportation system, the T. The Charles River flows into the Atlantic Ocean at this port city, which
is also the site of the Freedom Trail and Fenway Park. For 10 points, name this largest city in
Massachusetts.
ANSWER: Boston
This city's West End was demolished to create Government Center in a disastrous 1950s urban renewal
project. Frederic Law Olmsted designed the Emerald Necklace network of parks for this city, and its light
rail Green Line is the oldest still-operating subway in America. This city's Shawmut Peninsula was more
than doubled in size with land reclamation, adding areas such as the Public Garden and the Back Bay with
land from Beacon Hill. For 10 points, name this home of the Big Dig and largest city in Massachusetts.
ANSWER: Boston
This city's Emerald Necklace includes Olmsted Park and Jamaica Pond. This city's boundaries
are formed in part by the Neponset, Mystic, and Charles Rivers. Buildings in this city include (*)
Faneuil (fuh-NOOL) Hall and Quincy Market, while its skyscrapers include One International Place,
Prudential Tower, and Hancock Place. For 10 points, name this city, the capital of Massachusetts.
ANSWER: Boston, Massachusetts
This system expanded in part because the area inside Route 128 had a moratorium on highway
construction. The northeastern-most segment of this system runs from Bowdoin to Wonderland. In a song
about this system, which mentions Jamaica Plain, a wife delivers sandwiches to it for life since her husband
lacks the nickel needed to escape it; that song inspired the name of its "CharlieCard." This system with a
trifurcated Green Line has a Silver Line commuter rail to Logan International Airport, and its Red Line
connects South Station to the Davis stop near the Tufts campus. For 10 points, name this system connecting
Cambridge landmarks such as Harvard and MIT to many stops in Boston via underground trains.
ANSWER: the Boston T [or the Boston-area public transportation system; or the Boston-area subway system; or the Boston-area MBTA subway system; or the Massachusetts Bay Transporation Authority subway system; accept the former name, Metropolitan Transit Authority; accept MTA]
This country is home to some 4000 speakers of !Xoo ("tsk-Noo[high-pitched]-oo[low-pitched]") and one of
the last populations of painted wolf. The Kalahari Desert is 70% of this country, which also boasts the
world's largest inland delta, the second highest HIV infection rate after Swaziland, and consequently ties
with Swaziland for the world's shortest average lifespan. Following attacks by Rhodesia and South Africa it
formed a defense force which includes army and air force but no navy, as its borders with Zimbabwe,
Namibia, Zambia and South Africa leave it landlocked. For 10 points, name the former British Protectorate
of Bechuanland, with capital at Gaborone.
ANSWER: Republic of Botswana
The Tsodilo Hills are located in the northwest of this country, and the Sowa and Ntwetwe pans make up
part of the Makgadikgadi salt plain in this country. The Moremi game reserve in this country is found in an
eastern portion of an endorheic water basin formed by the Okavango Delta. Watersheds in this country
include the Chobe River, which forms the border with a region outside of it to its north, the Caprivi Strip.
Its eastern part is drained by the Limpopo River. For 10 points, name this southern African country located
between Namibia and Zimbabwe and to the north of South Africa.
ANSWER: Botswana
This country disputed a border on the Chobe River with its western neighbor until a 1999 ruling from the
International Court of Justice favored this country. This country was formed from eight states dominated by
the namesake ethnic group, and their populations received the status of "tribe" from the British. Other
ethnic groups in this country include the Khalagari, Tswapong, Birwa, and Kalanga. In addition to the
Chobe River, it is bordered by the Molopo River to the south and the Limpopo River to the east, and almost
all of this country lies within the Kalahari Desert. Bordered by Namibia to the west and north, Zambia and
Zimbabwe to the north and east, and South Africa to the south is, for 10 points, this southern African
country, formerly known as Bechuanaland, with capital at Gaborone.
ANSWER: Republic of Botswana
A series of 24,000-year-old cave paintings can be found in the Tsodilo Hills in the northwestern area
of this country. A history subtitled "Village of the Rain Wind" told the history of this country's town
of Serowe and was written in 1974 by its most famous inhabitant, the author Bessie Head. While
under the control of Great Britain, this country was known as (*) Bechuanaland. This country, which is
almost entirely covered by the Kalahari Desert, is bordered by Zimbabwe to the east, Namibia to the west,
and South Africa to the south. For 10 points, name this African country with capital at Gaborone.
ANSWER: Botswana
Concerns regarding this nation's Okavango Delta resulted in its neighbor's scuttling of plans to build a
hydroelectric dam at Popavalle, and its border along the main channel of the Chobe River is in dispute.
Although this country was the first African nation to experience a falling birthrate due to increased life
expectancy, it suffers from a high AIDS rate, and it is bounded to the west and north by Namibia; Zambia
and Zimbabwe to the northeast; and South Africa to the south. Formerly known as Bechuanaland and named
for its predominant Setswana ethnic group, for 10 points, name this Southern African nation with capital at
Gaborone.
ANSWER: Botswana
The Manas flows into it, and Pandu and Neamati are cities on its banks. Its tributary the Dihang flows from
Tibet into it, and Sadiyah is a city where this river turns. It flows through Assam before entering another
country after Dhubri. It overlaps with the tropic of Cancer near Tejgaon. It originates north of the
Himalayas and flows East until it turns south to enter India. It ultimately meets with the Padma and another
river to form a massive delta on the Indian Ocean. FTP, name this river that combines with the Ganges after
flowing through Bangladesh, with a name meaning the son of a creator god.
ANSWER: Brahmaputra river
This river originates near Mount Kailash as the Yarlung Tsangpo River, before flowing east towards Mount
Namcha Barwa. This river is called the Siang when it enters Arunachal Pradesh before being joined by the
Lohit and Dibang rivers. This river flows past notable locales, such as the Kaziranga National Park in the
state of Assam, before entering its final leg, where this river splits into a lower branch and the Jamuna
branch which flows into the Padma. Beginning in southeastern China before flowing past India into
Bangladesh, for 10 points, name this Asian river that empties into the Bay of Bengal after merging with the
Ganges.
ANSWER: Brahmaputra River
This city includes a Highway Axis and a Monumental Axis, which is lined with its governmental
buildings. The center of this city consists of the Square of the Three Powers, and its inner city residential
zones are organized as superblocks. This city's cathedral includes sixteen concrete columns, and its Palace
of the Dawn is the presidential residence. It is located between the headwaters of the Parana, Sao Francisco,
and Tocantins rivers. Lucio Costa was responsible for the master plan for this city, which resembles the
shape of an airplane. For ten points, name this city that was designed in part by Oscar Niemeyer and is the
capital of Brazil.
ANSWER: Brasilia
One bridge in this city was designed by Alexandre Chan to have its arches cross from one side of the
bridge to the other. That structure, the JK Bridge, crosses from this city over Lake Paranoa. This
city is divided through its center by the Eixo Monumental (EH-shew moan-oh-men-tall). This city
was (*) designed by Lucio Costa to have the shape of an airplane. For 10 points, name this South American
city whose government buildings were designed by Oscar Niemeyer, and which replaced Rio de Janeiro as
capital of Brazil.
ANSWER: Brasilia
The palace in this city, which has a Noble Room featuring Victor Brecheret sculptures, is located on
Paranoa Lake. That lake features a bridge crossed by three arcs. Sculptures by Dante Croce stand just
outside this city's cathedral, which is made of sixteen columns in a circle bent to form a hyperboloid.
This city also houses a parliament building which has two semi-spheres on its roof, designed by Oscar
Niemeyer. This city was planned in an airplane shape by a disciple of Le Corbusier [kor-buss-yay],
Lucio Costa, during the late 1950s. Name this South American city that was built to become a
national capital.
ANSWER: Brasilia, Brazil
This city's Forest Park is home to the Little Iron Well, Koliba, and the Kamzik TV Tower. The
Maximilian Fountain is found in this city's Old Town Hall. Along with the Trnava and Trencin regions, the
Zahorie is part of this city. This city's City Center includes a large tribute to Ludovit Stur. Both the Morava
and Malina rivers flow through this city, whose architectural landmarks include St. Michael's Gate. This
city's New Bridge was built across the Danube River. This city is the only national capital to border two
other nations. For 10 points, identify this largest and capital city of Slovakia.
ANSWER: Bratislava
It's not Israel, but this nation recently launched Operation Agatha 5 to combat drug traffickers in its
southern border region. World Heritage sites in this nation include the blackwater ecosystem of Jau
National Park and the diamond mining center of Diamantina. A wetland called the Pantanal in
located in this nation's (*) Mato Grosso region. This nation's current president is of Bulgarian ancestry
and is a member of the Workers' Party originally from Belo Horizonte. This nation was led recently by
Dilma Rousseff and Inacio Lula da Silva, and a species of armadillo called the tatu-bola was selected as the
mascot for the World Cup to be hosted by this country in 2014, which is also the site of the next Summer
Olympic Games. For 10 points, name this country home to the martial art Capoeira as well as the city of Sao
Paulo.
ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil [or Republica Federativa do Brasil]
The fortified lighthouse Farol de Barra can be found near this country's Bay of All Saints, which
indents its city of Salvador. The "Devil's Throat" is among the many cataracts of the Iguazu Falls in
this country, which has a large wetlands called the Pantanal. Its fourth largest city Recife is the
capital of its Pernambuco region. Other attractions in the country include the Copacabana Beach and a
giant statue of Christ the Redeemer. For 10 points, name this South American country with cities called Sao
Paolo and Rio de Janeiro.
ANSWER: Brazil
Celso Furtado was in charge of an agency for developing this country's poor northeast region, SUDENE.
Lampiao was a famous cangaceiro, or bandit, from this country's hinterlands in the 1920s. In the northeast
of this country, the "polygon of drought" is the driest part of its sertao region. "Cidade Maravilhosa" is the
anthem and nickname of this country's second-largest city, which lies near Corcovado, the site of a "Christ
the Redeemer" statue. Shantytowns around cities like Salvator here have been destroyed in preparation for
the 2016 Olympics. For 10 points, name this country, home to Sao Paulo.
ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil
This highest peak in this nation is the Pico da Neblina, while notable mountain ranges in this nation include
the Espinhaco Mountains. Cities in this nation include Manaus, Belo Horizonte, and Salvador. The Parana
River rises in this nation. The only countries on the same continent that do not border this country are
Ecuador and Chile, while the Amazon rain forest is located here. For 10 points, name this Portuguese-speaking
South American nation, whose cities include Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.
ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil
This country contains the Town of Diamantina, and the island of Marajo is located at the mouth of this
country's longest river. This country contains the Mantiqueira Mountains in its southeast, and the longest
river that runs entirely in this country is the Sao Francisco. This country also contains the Iguazu Falls near
Curitiba, and a region full of swamps and marshes is known as the Pantanal. Rocky slopes descend into the
sea at its Guanabara Bay. For 10 points, name this South American country whose cities include Sao Paulo
and Rio di Janeiro.
ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil
In 2011, a large underground river was found in this country and named Hamza after one its geologist
discoverers. The proposed Belo Monte dam would sit on the Xingu [SHING-goo] river in this country.
Cars in this nation run on "gasohol" or ethanol made from its sugar cane cultivation. The first Jews in the
Americas came to the city of Recife, now in this nation, whose planned capital has city limits shaped like an
airplane. Slums called favelas surround a major city of this nation home to the Mato Grosso, where a statue
of Christ the Redeemer also stands with open arms. For 10 points, name this site of rapid deforestation, a
Portuguese-speaking nation in South America.
ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil [or Republica Federativa do Brasil]
This nation contains archipelagos such as Rocas Atoll, Saint Peter and Saint Paul Rocks, and Trindade and
Martim Vaz. This nation is also home to mountain ranges such as the Serra do Mar, while this nation's
highest point is the Pico da Neblina. The Orinoco River flows to this country's north, and well- known
landmarks in this country include Sugarloaf Mountain, Ipanema Beach, and the statue of Christ the
Redeemer. For 10 points, name this South American country which contains the cities of Sao Paulo and Rio
de Janeiro.
ANSWER: Brazil
A leader of this country is shown proclaiming its independence in the painting Independence or
Death. A composer from this country created a musical portrait of pianist Arthur Rubinstein entitled
Rudepoema. Roberto Burle Marx helped design a city in this country which contains the Plaza of the
Three Powers and the Monumental Axis. A style of music from this country was popularized in the
U.S. by the 1964 album (*) Getz/Gilberto, which included the tracks "Corcovado" and "The Girl from
Ipanema". Its airplane-shaped capital city was designed by Lucio Costa and Oscar Niemeyer, while native
pianist Antonio Carlos Jobim (zho-BEEM) pioneered its bossa nova music. For 10 points, name this South
American country, the home of the samba.
ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil [or Republica Federativa do Brasil]
Mountain ranges in this country include the Espinhazo, Serra do Mar and Mantiqueira while it is the
owner of the archipelagos Fernando de Norhonha, Trinidade and Martim Vaz, the Rocas Atoll and
Marajo Island. Rivers in this nation include the Araguaia, a tributary of the Tocantins, and its largest, the
Sao Francisco, while the Iguazu Falls are formed by another. With its highest point at Neblina Peak, this
nation is the source for both the Uruguay and Parana Rivers. For 10 points, name this country whose
largest cities include Salvador, Sao Paolo and Rio de Janeiro.
ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil
In this country, the Kaiabi people currently live in Xingu National Park, which was explored by Percy
Fawcett and is located in the state of Mato Grosso. In 1989, its state of Goias split, with the northern half
becoming Tocantins, which then constructed its capital at Palmas. Its Florianopolis is located partially on
the Island of Santa Catarina. One of its cities contains Corcovado and Sugarloaf Mountains, the former of
which has a giant statue of Christ the Redeemer. This country also contains the most populous city in the
Western Hemisphere in addition to most of its longest river. Name this largest country of South America.
ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil [or Republica Federativa do Brasil]
This nation's flag has 27 white stars, one for each sate and the Federal District, and uses the
Comte-inspired motto "Ordem E Progresso." Since 1968, the exportation of this country's namesake
rosewood has been banned. It highest point is Pico da Neblina, and it is the fifth largest country in the
world. Since 1931, this country's Mount Corcovado has been home to the Christ the Redeemer statue
outside of Rio de Janeiro. For 10 points, name this largest South American country, home of much of the
Amazon.
ANSWER: Brazil
The westernmost of these, Acre, borders the Ucayali Region and was once an independent nation
with its capital at Antimary. Sergipe is the smallest of these, and the northernmost one takes its name
from Mount Roraima, the world's tallest tepui. The Sao Francisco River forms the border between
several of these, and the Bahia one of these contains Salvador, its country's first capital. The
precursors to these sub-national entities were the Captaincies of colonial Portuguese times, and the
largest of these is named after the Amazon rainforest. For 10 points, name these sub-national entities of a
South American country whose cities include Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paolo.
ANSWER: States of Brazil
This city's railway works built the Jenny Lind, a vehicle so popular that it became the first
massproduced
locomotive. William Porden designed Steine House in this city to be the residence of his
king's mistress, Maria Fitzherbert. In the 20th century, Patrick Magee used the pseudonym "Roy
Walsh" for an operation in this city that required a device made from an egg timer and a video
recorder. This city's Mughal-influenced (*) Royal Pavilion was a common retreat for George IV, whose
favor for this city helped it grow from a small town. During a 1984 Conservative Party conference, the IRA
tried to assassinate Margaret Thatcher by bombing a hotel in this city. For 10 points, name this popular
resort town on the south coast of England.
ANSWER: Brighton
A city in this province is the location of the notably narrow Fan Tan Alley as well as the Gates of
Harmonious Interest. This province suffered tension over Asian immigrant labor competition, only
giving the vote to Asians in 1952. From 1952 to 1991, this province's politics were, like those of (+)
Alberta, almost continuously dominated by the Social Credit Party. Its Cariboo Mountains were the
site of an 1858 gold rush, and, at Port Moody, it contains one terminus of the Canadian (*) Pacific
Railway. For 10 points, name this Canadian province in which Victoria and Vancouver are located.
ANSWER: British Columbia
This province's Haida Gwaii was formerly known as the Queen Charlotte Islands and is separated from
the rest of the province by the Hecate Strait. Prince Rupert and Prince George are cities in this province.
The Fraser River runs through this province. This province is bordered by the Yukon Territory to the north
and Alberta to the east. For 10 points, name the westernmost Canadian province, whose cities include
Victoria and Vancouver.
ANSWER: British Columbia
This province's Ruskin Dam is currently being renovated. In February 2012, Mitsubishi
purchased a stake in this province's Cutbank Ridge field to explore shale gas opportunities. First
Nations advocates in this province have denounced an oil pipeline near its city of Kitimat. Wetlands
in its city of Mission are threatened by plans to build a (*) container port to relieve the burden on
existing facilities on the Burrard Inlet of the Strait of Georgia and at the mouth of the Fraser River; those
ports are located in this province at the western terminus of the Canada Pacific Railway. For 10 points,
name this westernmost Canadian province, which contains Victoria and Vancouver.
ANSWER: British Columbia
The Latin motto of this province means Splendour without Diminishment, and it contains the third-largest
and fifteenth-largest metropolitan areas of its country. Home to Glacier National Park and the Pacific Rim
National Park Reserve, its name was aptly chosen by Queen Victoria in 1858. An estimated 10% of the
population here is of Chinese descent, and the Chinese food in its largest city is regarded as superior to that
of Asia's, given the large influx of migrants over the past 20 years. The economy is primarily resource
driven, though tourism at popular ski resorts like Whistler is an important contributor. FTP, name this
westernmost province of Canada, containing the cities of Victoria and Vancouver.
ANSWER: British Columbia
This polity's flag is a setting sun below a union jack with a crown in the center. This polity contains
the most prominent peak in the Rocky Mountains, Mount Robson. Suburbs of its largest city include
Burnaby and Coquitlam and other cities in this province include Kamloops and Kelowna. This
province's capital is home to the Abkhazi Gardens and (*) Butchart Gardens, and its largest city is home
to Stanley Park. This province is home to the largest and most visited ski resort in the world, Whistler-Blackcomb. 
For 10 points, name this province in western Canada, with cities Victoria and Vancouver.
ANSWER: British Columbia
Bodies of water off the coast of this region include the Queen Charlotte Sound and the Hecate Straight, and
this region is home to the wine producing Okanagan Valley. This territory's economic center is home to
Arthur Erickson designed Robson Square. The Fraser River runs entirely through this territory. This
territory also controls the northern portion of the San Juan Islands and was the site of the brief Pig War.
This territory north of the Juan de Fuca straight is home to the resort town of Whistler and borders
Montana, Idaho, and Washington. For 10 points, name this southwestern province of Canada which has
capital at Victoria and contains the city of Vancouver.
ANSWER: British Columbia
This region specializes in a form of mead fermented with the aid of apple juice, known as (shoe-SHEN)
chouchen. The severely endangered native language of this region is the source of the words "dolmens" and
"menhirs," which accurately describe the Carnac stones located in a small village here. Among a colony of
artists who gathered in this region's town of Pont-Aven was Paul Gauguin, who depicted its women in The
Yellow Christ before departing for Tahiti. This region is located north of the Bay of Biscay. For 10 points,
name this region of northwest France located west of Normandy.
ANSWER: Brittany [or Bretagne; or Breizh; or Bertaeyn; or Breton]
This region occupies the Armorican Peninsula, and its Pink Granite Coast is one of only three such areas in
the world. The first duke of this region, Nominoe, is seen as the father of it, and it contains many megaliths
at Carnac. This region's port of Saint-Malo served as the main harbor of Jacques Cartier, and its island of
Ushant is the westernmost point in its nation. The Loire River empties into the ocean in this region, whose
cities include Rennes, Brest and Nantes. Lying between the Bay of Biscay and the English Channel, for 10
points, name this northwestern region of France.
ANSWER: Brittany [or Breizh; or Bretagne]
Originally laid out by the Wickquasgeck people, it is also known as US 9 and runs all the way from the
Atlantic Ocean to the Canadian border. Its previous name designated its original destination - a bucolic
floral valley, though that name is now better associated with a major department store. It passes, among
other things, two squares named after newspapers which have since moved, and a very flat building. Served
by the 1 train, it makes a complete mockery of the Commissioner's Plan. For 10 points, name this avenue,
whose theatres near its best known section have made its name a byword for American theatre, located in
Manhattan.
ANSWER: Broadway
This thoroughfare crosses the Spuyten Duyvil Creek on a namesake bridge. This road is discontinuous at
Union Square. Verdi Square is located between this street and Amsterdam Avenue. A sidewalk on this
street contains more than 200 black pieces of granite with the names of people who were honored on this
street's Canyon of Heroes. This street is actually perfectly-oriented from north to south, which causes it to
be diagonal with respect to every other street. Jerome Myers was the first to call this thoroughfare "The
Great White Way." Columbia University is located off this avenue. For 10 points, name this avenue in
Manhattan home to lots of musical theaters.
ANSWER: Broadway Avenue [accept "Henry Hudson Parkway" until "Union Square"; accept Grea White Way]
In the 1970s, this borough's neighborhoods of Mott Haven, Hunt's Point, and Morrisania suffered
from a large spike in arson caused by insurance scams and an apathetic fire department. This home to the
Grand Concourse, Co-Op City, Fordham University, and the U.S.'s largest metropolitan zoo is the only
borough of New York that is located entirely on the mainland. For 10 points, identify this Swedish-named
home of Yankee Stadium.
ANSWER: the Bronx
This borough was originally home to six towns including Gravesend, Flatlands, and Flatbush, and the
Lenape (leh-NAH-pay) referred to it as "Canarsie." This region is bounded to the north by the Gowanus
Canal, which is crossed by Interstate 278. Frederick Law Olmstead and Calvert Vaux designed its Prospect
Park. It merged with its western neighbor in 1898 to form the largest city in America. For ten points, name
this borough that is connected to Manhattan by a namesake bridge.
ANSWER: Brooklyn [or Kingsborough; or Kings County]
One neighborhood in this area, Prospect Heights, has seen real estate prices soar as a result of the
controversial Atlantic Yard project proposed in this area. Its namesake "Battery Tunnel" crosses the
East River, and the Franklin Avenue Shuttle runs through this borough, which is home to the
MetroTech center and the (*) Park Slope neighborhood. The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge connects it to
Staten Island, and this borough where Coney Island is located was home to the baseball team Jackie
Robinson played for. For 10 points, identify this borough of New York City which borders Queens, once
home to the Dodgers.
ANSWER: Brooklyn [accept "New York City" before "Battery"; prompt on "New York City" afterwards until mentioned]
This urban area includes the Orthodox Jewish communities in Flatbush and Crown Heights, where race
riots occurred in 1991. is accessed on foot using a structure designed by John and Washington Roebling. In
1960, Ebbets Field was demolished here. Its southern end is home to a Ferris wheel, boardwalk, and beach
at Coney Island. For 10 points, name this borough across from Manhattan and west of Queens, a part of
New York City accessed by a namesake bridge.
ANSWER: Brooklyn [or Kings County; prompt on New York City until "borough" is read]
A region of this country's capital, Kampong Ayer, is built entirely on stilts connected by bridges. This
country's official name includes the phrase "Abode of Peace." A bay named for this country separates its
Muara region from Temburong, a practical exclave. Hassanal Bolkiah, who has led this country since 1965,
lives in the Istana Nurul Iman, the largest palace ever built. Just south of this country is the region of
Sarawak. For ten points, name this country, which is located on the northern tip of Borneo and is an
extremely wealthy oil sultanate.
ANSWER: Brunei
William E. Todd of Virginia is the current U.S. Ambassador to this country, part of whose name means
"The Abode of Peace." It regained its independence from the United Kingdom on January 1, 1984. Its
coastline borders the South China Sea. It is surrounded by the Malaysian state of Sarawak, and it also shares
an island with Indonesia. Bandar Seri Begawan is the capital of, for 10 points, what sultanate, located on the
northern coast of the island of Borneo?
ANSWER: Brunei Darussalam
This national park's formation called the "Silent City" contains rocks said to be shaped like
buildings, including a "Temple of Osiris." Its other formations include "Queens Castle" and
"Sinking Ship," the latter of which is found in its north near Fairyland Point. Its name, in Paiute,
translates partially as "red rocks that stand up like men," a reference to the Paiute myth that its
hoodoos were created when Coyote turned a race of disobedient animal-people into stone. Partially
encompassed by Dixie National Forest, its name is actually a misnomer because it is technically a
series of fourteen amphitheatres, and its frequented spots include (*) Sunrise and Sunset points as well
as "Thor's Hammer." Found northwest of the Grand Staircase, it is located in Utah. For 10 points, name
this national park named after a canyon.
ANSWER: Bryce Canyon National Park
Albert Schickedanz designed a monument in this city that depicts the archangel Gabriel on top of a tall
column. This city's Millennium Monument is in its Heroes- Square. One building in this city contains
seven towers representing seven tribes and was named for the men who protected this city, the Fisherman's
Bastion. This city is the home of the (SIG-et) Sziget festival. The right hand of a namesake saint is found in
this city's largest church, St. Stephen's Basilica. For 10 points, name this city on the Danube, which
formed as a merger of two cities to become the capital of Hungary.
ANSWER: Budapest
The Ancient Roman name for this city was Aquincum. A major hill in this city is named for its patron saint,
Gellert. This city's "Hero's Square" has fourteen statues of historical figures such as Gabriel Bethlen and
Colomon the Book-Lover. The Szechenyi [SECH-eny-i] Chain Bridge connects the two parts of this city,
which were unified in 1873. This city's massive Gothic Parliament House lies on the Danube and is now
home to St. Stephen's Crown, once worn by kings such as Matthias Corvinus. Soviet tanks attacked this city
in 1956 after a failed revolution against communism. For ten points, name this capital of Hungary.
ANSWER: Budapest
This city was known as Aquincum in Roman times, a reference to its many hot springs. Many famous
residents of this city are buried at its Kerepesi cemetery. Visitors to this city may stay at its famous Gellert
Hotel, and Jews in this city built the Dohany Street Synagogue. Fourteen statues of historic figures can be
found in this city's Heroes Square. The Chain Bridge across the Danube, completed in 1849, connected the
two separate cities that merged to make this national capital. For 10 points, name this largest city in
Hungary.
ANSWER: Budapest
This city's Roman ruins advertise to tourists that Marcus Aurelius wrote his Meditations here when this city
was a Roman settlement called Aquincum. Saint Gerard was martyred by being thrown off of the Gellert
Hill in this city, which now houses ritzy houses and the citadel. This city's Castle Hill is served by a
funicular railway, which leads up from a famous bridge to the thirteenth-century Royal Palace. This city
subsumes three islands, Obuda, Csepel, and Margaret. Its name is a portmanteau of the names of a flat city
and a hilly city that merged to form this metropolis; its constituent cities are now connected by the
Szechenyi Chain Bridge. For 10 points, name this city on the Danube, the capital of Hungary.
ANSWER: Budapest [prompt on Buda or Pest before "portmanteau"]
The site of this city's first university is on its "Illuminated Block" in the Monserrat neighborhood.
Residents of this city are called portenos. The Pink House is the executive mansion near its central plaza,
which was the site of the "Mothers of the Plaza" demonsrations. That site, Plaza de Mayo, is named for the
1810 May Revolution that started in this city. It borders the estuary of the confluence of the Parana and
Uruguay Rivers, the Rio de la Plata. For 10 points, name this capital of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
One controversy in this city surrounded a tomb built in its exclusive Recoleta Cemetery with trapdoors to
foil bodysnatchers. An obelisk in this city is visible along most of Corrientes Avenue, and the large number
of Italian immigrants to this city in the 19th century created a pidgin known as "cocoliche." This city
contains the Plaza de Mayo, which was bombed by its country's own navy in 1955; that plaza is the location
of the presidential residence, Casa Rosada, and cathedral where Jose de San Martin is buried. Residents of
this city are known as Portenos because of its port on the Rio de la Plata across from Montevideo. For 10
points, name this capital of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
This city's Tres de Febrero Park can be found in its neighborhood of Palermo. This city's Plaza de
Mayo sits near the Casa Rosada, the seat of its country's government. Other distinctive
neighborhoods in this city include San Telmo and La Boca, which sits at the mouth of the Riachuelo
River. The Obelisk lies in the middle of this city's Avenida Nueve de Julio, which is sometimes called
the (*) "widest avenue in the world." The residents of this city are called portenos, and this city sits on the
confluence of the Parana River and the Rio de la Plata. For ten points, name this second largest city in
South America, the capital of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
This city's Art Deco Kavanagh building was the first in the world to have centralized air conditioning. A
large cemetery in this city is located in one of its wealthiest neighborhoods, Recoleta. This city is home
to a stadium called "La Bombonera," which is home to the Boca Juniors futbol club. The Teatro Colon,
this city's opera house, and the enormous Plaza de la Republica, which contains this city's giant obelisk,
are both located along its 14-lane wide 9 de Julio Avenue, which is the widest in the world. Its Plaza de
Mayo is home to a Presidential palace called Casa Rosada, or the Pink House. For 10 points, name this
city on the south end of the Rio de la Plata, the capital of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires [or Autonomous City of Buenos Aires; or Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires]
The San Telmo district is the oldest neighborhood in this city, the site of the first settlement by Pedro de
Mendoza. The Monserrat district houses many government buildings here, including the Pink House, its
country's official executive mansion. The Pink House is located on its Plaza de Mayo, where 1945
demonstrations were held to protest the imprisonment of the Minister of Labor. This city was the capital of
the last Spanish viceroyalty in the New World and the site of the May Revolution, which began the Latin
American wars of independence. That aforementioned viceroyalty shares its name with the river that this
city is at the mouth of, the Rio de la Plata. For 10 points, name this capital of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
This city's broadest street, called the "widest avenue in the world," was modeled by Georges-Eugene
Haussmann after the Champs-Elysees in Paris. This and other broad avenues unofficially divide the city into
several distinctive neighborhoods, the one of which is La Boca, now an artists- colony. As of 2007, this
city's disproportionate size led poet and philosopher Ezequiel Martinez Estrada to liken it to "The Head of
Goliath." This city is located near the confluence of the Parana River and the Rio de la Plata, and the larger
province that shares its name is characterized by flat, grass-covered plains known as the Pampas. FTP,
name this capital of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires, Argentina
This city's Federal District is bounded by the Riachuelo River and Avenida General Paz. This
city's Pyramid of May is located in the Plaza de Mayo. The Avenida Corrientes and Calle Lavalle are
home to a large theater district in this city. This city is also the location of the Casa Rosada, from
which this nation's leaders have (*) addressed mass audiences. For 10 points, name this city, which is
located at the point where the Parana River delta widens to form the Rio de la Plata, and serves the capital
of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
The "Bridge of the Woman" can be found in a district of this city, home to garish houses on Caminito
Street and the Monserrat District. The suburb of Quilmes lies south of the Riachuelo River from this
city, which was joined in independence by other cities in its country by the Congress of Tucuman (*)
after its May Revolution in 1808. Also home to La Boca, the Plaza de Mayo, and a military coup by Jorge
Rafael Videla, for 10 points, name this capital city on the Rio de la Plata, home to portenos.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
One old section of this city is San Telmo, and another section of this city contains Caminito Street and is a
Europeanized borough called La Boca. This city is bounded on the west by the Riachuelo River and a
popular beach town close to this city is Mar del Plata. Landmarks in this city include the world's widest
street, the Avenida Nueve de Julio, which contains a large obelisk in the middle. This capital's executive
branch governs from the Casa Rosada. Located across the Rio de la Plata from Montevideo, for 10 points,
identify this capital and largest city of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
In 1880, this city expanded to swallow the former towns of Flores and Belgrano. Located on the southern
shore of Rio de la Plata, it is the second largest metropolitan area in South America. After economic
collapse in 2001, it is currently enjoying a revival of sorts in its tourist industry thanks to low-cost pesos.
"Evita Vive", translated "Evita Lives", is still commonly seen in graffiti in the streets of this city. For 10
points, what is this city, whose name means "good wind" or "good air", that is the capital of Argentina?
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
Mauricio Macri is its current mayor, and it is served by the Pistarini International Airport. Important sites in
this city include the teatro Colon opera house and the Cabildo, a colonial-era government building.
Neighborhoods in this city include Palermo, Puerto Madero, and La Boca, and the Riachuelo forms its
southern border. The Plaza de Mayo is home to the Casa Rosada or presidential palace, and the Plaza San
Martin is named after the South-American liberator who is buried in this city. Other famous inhabitants
include Julio Cortazar, Diego Maradona and Eva Peron. Located on the Rio de la Plata, FTP, what is this
Argentinian city, its capital?
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
This city's Balvanera neighborhood was the site of a 1994 bombing on a Jewish community center.
The Riachuelo flows along this city, which features El Obelisco at the intersection of the Corrientes
and Ninth of July Avenues. It contains the Southern Hemisphere's oldest subway system, and its
citizens are called (*) "portenos." This city across a river from Montevideo is built around numerous
plazas such as the Mayo. For 10 points, name this city on the Rio de la Plata, the capital of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
This city's downtown square was historically the site of marches of the mothers of "los desaparecidos;" that
square is the Plaza de Mayo. The Teatro Colon and Casa Rosada are found in this city whose residents are
called portenos. This city is the capital of a country that claims ownership of the British-controlled Falkland
Islands. For 10 points, name this South American city located across the Rio de la Plata from Uruguay, the
capital of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
Tourists in this city can enjoy a visit to the Estadio Alberto J. Armando stadium in the La Boca district. The
Chacon, Canuelas, and Morales tributaries form this city's Riachuelo River. The main square of this city's
downtown area is called the Plaza de Mayo. Tourists usually arrive in this city by flying to the Ministro
Pistarini International Airport. The official seat of the government is located in this city's Casa Rosada.
Leaders like Bernardino Rivadavia and Juan Manuel de Rosas in addition to Nestor and Cristina Fernandez
de Kirchner have lived in this city. Isabel and Eva each lived with Juan Peron, for 10 points, in this capital
city of Argentina.
ANSWER: Buenos Aires
A statue of Giuseppe Garibaldi and a column donated from the Roman Forum stand in one of these
spaces known as "the Italian." An enormous Ombu tree and a rearing equestrian monument overlook the
one named for Jose de San Martin. The Diagonal Norte meets the Ninth of July and Corrientes Avenues at
the one "of the republic." Another one of these was where a 1945 demonstration forced Juan Peron's release
from prison and where a group protested the children "disappeared" during the Dirty War. For 10 points,
name these spaces, including the "Mayo" one, where political demonstrations often occur in Argentina.
ANSWER: plazas in Buenos Aires
This polity contains the Pirin and most of the Rhodope Mountains, while the Rila range, found in its
southwest, contains its highest peak, Mount Musala. A bunch of Eneolithic golden artifacts were
found in this country's Varna Necropolis archeological site, while the Golden or Round Basilica in
Preslav was built during the reign of its first tsar, Simeon I. The Maritsa River flows through Upper
Thrace's largest and this country's second largest city, Plovdiv. The Danube forms most of its northern
border with Romania, and its eastern coast is on the Black Sea. For 10 points, identify this southeastern
European country with capital at Sofia.
ANSWER: Republic of Bulgaria [accept Republika Balgariya]
An important economic region of this country is the Valley of the Roses. The southwestern part of this
country includes the Rila mountains, while the south central region is covered by the Rhodope mountains.
The largest river in this country is the Iskar, which crosses this country's most prominent mountain range.
That range, which stretches from the Serbian border to the Black Sea, is the Balkan range. The Danube
forms this country's border with Romania. For ten points, name this southeastern European country with
capital at Sofia.
ANSWER: Bulgaria
One city in this country is the site of a Friendship Bridge connecting that city with this country's
neighbor's city of Giurgiu. That city is sometimes known as Little Vienna, and is called Ruse.
Components of its only nuclear power plant at Kozloduy were required to be put out of commission
upon this country's entry into the European Union in 2007. Another city in this country lies to the
north of the (*) Vitosha massif and lies near the largest river entirely in this country, the Iskar River. That
city contains the large Amphitheatre of Serdica. The Maritsa river flows past this country's second largest
city at Plovdiv and empties into the Aegean Sea after acting as the border between Greece and Turkey. For
10 points, name this Balkan country on the Black Sea with capital at Sofia.
ANSWER: Bulgaria [accept Republic of Bulgaria]
These animals are central to "course Landaise", a prominent cultural activity in Gascony, as well as
events dubbed recortes. Arturo di Modica's sculpture of one of these animals sits outside Amsterdam's
central commodities exchange site. A passage through the Estafeta challenges participants of one event
involving these animals, which begins with prayers to Saint Fermin for protection and ends with the use of
an estoque. That event concludes with the killing of some of these animals in the Plaza de Toros. For 10
points, name these animals that take part in a namesake "running" in Pamplona.
ANSWER: bulls or cows
This country's economy relies on cotton which accounts for a high percentage of the country's export
income but recurring droughts and shallow rivers make it difficult to sustain the economy. The Oti river
flows through this country and is a tributary of the Volta. It is bordered to the north and west by Mali, and
to the south by Cote d-Ivoire. Known as Upper Volta until 1960, for 10 points, name this country in
Western Africa with capital Ouagadougou.
ANSWER: Burkina Faso (accept Upper Volta until mentioned)
This nation's western coast is home to the Arakan Mountains, which extend northward into its state of Chin.
This nation's southernmost reaches are the site of the Mergui archipelago, and its eastern region is
dominated by the Shan Plateau. This nation is the home to most of the Mon people, whose historical capital
of Thaton lies near the mouth of the Salween River. This nation's other major river joins the Chindwin near
the city of Mandalay and eventually forms a massive delta at the Andaman Sea. The Irrawaddy River is
found in, for 10 points, what Southeast Asian nation, whose capital was officially moved to Naypyidaw
from Yangon in 2005.
ANSWER: Burma [or Myanmar]
One island belonging to this nation is Cheduba which is known for peculiar mud-shaped cones which
emit sulfurous fumes or steam. A massive gold-covered stupa is found in this nation's capital while
the central region of this nation is home to thousands of temples built by the (*) Bagan Dynasty. To the
north lies the state of Kachin which is home to Lake Indawygi and this nation's highest peak, Hkakabo Razi,
while the Mon state lies to the nation's south. Major rivers found within this country include the Salween
which flows southerly along the east side of the nation into the Andaman Sea and the Chindwin which forms
a major tributary with the nation's largest river, the Irrawaddy. Bordering China and Thailand to the east
and India and Bangladesh to the west, FTP, identify this Southeast Asian nation, home to the city of
Mandalay and its capital, Yangon.
ANSWER: Burma (or Myanmar)
The Coco Islands is an archipelago controlled by this country, whose main river names an
endangered species of dolphin known for cooperating with human fishers. This country's
government recently moved its capital to the planned city of Naypyidaw. (*) U Thant, a diplomat from
this country, served as UN Secretary-General during most of the 1960s. Mandalay was a former capital of
this country that lies on its chief Irrawaddy River. Until 2006, its capital was Yangon, also known as
Rangoon. For 10 points, name this Southeast Asian nation also known as Burma.
ANSWER: Myanmar [or Burma before it is read]
The largest minority group in this country are the Shan people. One of its major rivers, the
Salween, empties into the Gulf of Martaban. This country is home to the Shwe Dagon Pagoda, and
(*) Mandalay is a major transportation hub of this nation. The Naga Hills lie on this nation's border with
India, and the major river of this nation is the Irrawaddy. For 10 points, name this Southeast Asian nation, a
former British colony where a military junta suppressed protests by monks in 2007.
ANSWER: Burma [or Myanmar]
This nation's history began with several small states including Ava, Bago, and the Rhakines, though
eventually power was consolidated by the Taungoo and Konbaung dynasties. Today it controls the Mergui
Archipelago off the coast of its possessions on the Isthmus of Kra. With highest point at Hkakabo Razi,
Than Shwe serves as its leader, though his power is being challenged by Aung San Suu Kyi. The Andaman
Sea takes in the waters of the Irrawaddy, the main river of, FTP, what country in which the Shwedagon
Pagoda dominates the skyline of the capital Yangon?
ANSWER: Union of Myanmar (or Burma)
This country's 8888 revolution led to brutal police actions in the areas around Kandawgyi and Inya lakes.
Its Kachin ethnic group is the namesake of its northernmost state, a source of jade and home to the peak
Hkakabo Razi. The Staff of Kakusandha is housed in this country's Shwedagon Pagoda, which overlooks a
river system connected by the Twante Canal which flows into the Gulf of Martaban, and includes the Pegu,
Sittang, and Salween rivers. It also owns the Coco Islands, part of the Andamans. For 10 points, name this
nation dominated by the Irrawaddy River, whose military dictatorship currently detains Aung San Suu Kyi,
with capital at Yangon.
ANSWER: Union of Myanmar [or Burma]
Roy Sesana is an activist for these people, many of whom were relocated to New Xade (cha-DAY) in
1997. These people consume a plant called hoodia that allows them to go days without eating. These
people, who branched off culturally from the Khoikhoi, call themselves the San. These people were forced
out of Gope after the discovery of kimberlites and diamonds. They use a poison derived from beetles to kill
elands and buffalo, though a government program in the 1990s forced some of them into farming. For the
point, name these natives of the Kalahari Desert.
ANSWER: Bushmen [or San until it is read]
In this city, poor residents who live near Mokattam Hill collect and recycle trash for a living in Garbage
City, or live within mausoleums in the City of the Dead. This city's "old" section contains remnants of its
predecessor, Fustat, as well as The Hanging Church, which is the seat of the Coptic Pope. This "city of a
thousand minarets" also contains Tahrir Square and has a metropolitan area which includes the location of
the Great Sphinx and the Great Pyramids. Located north of Giza and just south of the Nile Delta, for 10
points, name this largest city in Africa and capital of Egypt.
ANSWER: Cairo [or al-Qahira]
A 1952 fire in this city was known as Black Saturday and destroyed the Omar Effendi department store.
It is the site of the Ben Ezra Synagogue, whose storeroom was found to contain numerous abandoned
Hebrew manuscripts, a collection known as this city's namesake geniza. It was once home to the Khedival
Opera House, built on orders of Ismail Pasha. The older portion of this city contains the remnants of Fustat,
the original Muslim capital. A major public square in its downtown is named Liberation, or Tahrir Square,
and was a major focal point of a 2011 revolution. On its outskirts are the Giza Pyramids. For 10 points,
name this largest city in Egypt.
ANSWER: Cairo [or Masr]
The ancient academic center of Heliopolis has been completely subsumed by this city, which continues
to provide religious training at the prestigious Al-Azhar University. This city was given a new name
meaning "The Victorious" by the Fatimids after the conquering of the former Fustat. The Arab League's
headquarters overlooks a plaza in this city named for "liberation," Tahrir Square, where 2011 protests were
focused. For 10 points, name this largest city in Africa, the Arab world, and Egypt.
ANSWER: Cairo [or Al-Qahirah; or Masr]
In medieval times, this city was the site of al-Azhar University, and it was refounded in the tenth
century by the Fatimid Dynasty under the Arabic name "the victorious." This city's landmarks
include the Mosque and Madrasa of Sultan Hassan and a cemetery home to millions known as the
City of the Dead. Nicknamed "The City of a Thousand Minarets," this most (*) populous city in
Africa is located on the delta of the Nile. For 10 points, name this location found near the Sphinx and the
Great Pyramids of Giza, the capital of Egypt.
ANSWER: Cairo [or al-Qahira]
This city has a building nicknamed "the Hanging Church" located near buildings nicknamed the
Alabaster Mosque and the Saladin Citadel. This city is the location of Al-Manyal Palace, which is
located on Rhoda Island. This city also includes the Zamalek neighborhood on Gezira Island, which
is crossed by the 6th October Bridge. Its most famous museum contains a Royal Mummy Room
and is located on Tahrir Square. This city is across a river from the Great Sphinx and the Great
Pyramids of Giza. Name this city on the Nile River which serves as the capital of Egypt.
ANSWER: Cairo, Egypt
The host of the International Festival of Animated Objects, this city located east of Banff National Park
benefits during the winter from the warming effect of the Chinook winds. A recent issue in this city is the
delay of highway construction due to concerns about the Tsuu T'ina. An oil boom peaking in the late 1980s
led to the development of a downtown area that features the Plus 15 Skyway network and the Stephen
Avenue pedestrian mall. Home to a Chinese Cultural Center that is the largest of its kind in North America
as well as the Eau Claire Market, this city also runs a namesake Stampede that is the largest outdoor rodeo
show in the world. The third largest city in Canada and home to the National Hockey League's Flames, for
10 points, name this host of the 1988 Winter Olympic Games located south of Edmonton in Alberta
Province.
ANSWER: Calgary
The Siskiyou Wilderness is a section of the Klamath Mountains located in the northern part of this state.
The largest amount of dust pollution in the US comes from a dry lake in this state where borax is mined.
After a 1905 flood, this state's largest lake was formed near the Coachella Valley. This state is home to
Mono and Owens Lakes. A bristlecone pine tree called Methuselah, located here, is the oldest single living
organism on the planet. This home of the Salton Sea is also the location of the largest mountain outside
Alaska in the US. The San Joaquin river flows from the Sierra Nevada in this state. For 10 points, name this
home of Yosemite National Park.
ANSWER: California
Mount San Antonio is the tallest mountain in this state's San Gabriel Mountains. The highest point in this
state, Mt. Whitney, is also the highest point in the contiguous United States. It contains the western shore of
the largest alpine lake in North America. 5 hours to the south of Mt. Whitney lies the lowest point in North
America. This third largest state in the U.S. contains Lake Tahoe and Death Valley. Its San Fernando
Valley holds the majority of this state's most populous city, Los Angeles. For ten points, name this state
with capital at Sacramento.
ANSWER: California
One location in this state is said to be where the "Spirit of the Above-World," Skell, resides, according
to the stories of the Klamath Tribes. One figure in this state opposed the damming of the Tuolumne River
and Hetch Hetchy Valley. That man worked here as an environmental activist and was named John Muir.
This state is home to Mount Shasta and the largest tree on Earth, the General Sherman. For 10 points, name
this western state whose tallest point is Mount Whitney, a peak in the Sequoia National Park.
ANSWER: California
Islands in this question of water include Archangel island, which serves as a biological reserve known for
lizards. The northern part of this question of water could flood locations such as the Imperial Valley except for
the presence of a massive delta formed by the Colorado river, which ultimately runs into this question of water.
While visiting places such as Concepcion Bay and Tiburon Island, once home to the Seri tribe, John
Steinbeck wrote his The Log from this question of water and one of the names for this question of water came in
1540 when Francisco de Ulloa named it after his leader. For 10 points, name this sea that lies between
mainland Mexico and the Baja peninsula.
ANSWER: Gulf of California or Sea of Cortez
The Consag and Wagner Basins are located in the northern part of this question of water, which is
home to the Ballenas Fault. The Yaqui River passes through the Plutarco Calles Reservoir before
emptying into this question of water, which was once known as the "Vermillion Sea" due to its extensive
red plankton. The totoaba and the endangered mini-porpoise known as the (*) vaquita are endemic to
this question of water, which Jacques Cousteau called "the world's aquarium." Mazatlan is located on the far
southeastern part of this question of water in the state of Sinaloa, and the Colorado River empties into this
question of water in the state of Sonora. For 10 points, name this question of water located between mainland
Mexico and a namesake "Baja" peninsula.
ANSWER: Gulf of California [or Sea of Cortez; or Golfo de California; or Mar de Cortes]
The Kirirom National Park is found in the Elephant Mountains which lie in this country's southwest region.
One can visit the Rorka Kondal pagoda in the Kratie province, while the Baset and the Banom temples can
be found in the city of Battambang. During the monsoon season, the most notable question of water in this
country vastly increases in size due to the change in the flow of its namesake river, the Tonle Sap. Its capital
sits at the confluence of the Tonle Sap and Mekong rivers. For 10 points, identify this Southeast Asian
nation bordered by Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand, which has its capital at Phnomh Penh.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Cambodia
This country's largest lake is a center of carp fishing which, in the monsoon season, hosts several
"floating fishing villages." Its city of Siemreab is on a tributary of that major lake, the Tonle Sap.
The lake is connected by the Sab River to another waterway, which enters this country at Khone
Falls before exiting into (*) Vietnam. This host of 315 miles of the Mekong River is also home to the Tuol
Sleng Genocide Museum in its capital. For 10 points, name this homeland of the Khmer people in
Southeast Asia.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Cambodia [or Preahreacheanachakr Kampuchea]
The Dangrek or "Carrying-Pole Mountains" run along the northwest border of this country, whose
southwestern region contains the Elephant Mountains, a subrange of the Cardamom Mountains. This
country's only deepwater port was founded in 1964 and named after the then-king, who abdicated in 2004.
That city, Sihanoukville, has seen a surge in tourism, but the most popular destinations remain Siem Reap,
at the northern end of the Tonle Sap, and its largest city, at the confluence of the Tonle Sap River and the
Mekong. The aforementioned Siem Reap serves as a gateway to this country's temples of Angkor. For 10
points, name this Southeast Asian country where the Khmer Rouge ordered forced evacuations of the
capital, Phnom Penh.
ANSWER: Cambodia
The southwest portion of this country contains the Damrei Mountains, and its northwest portion contains the
Dangrek Mountains. This country's largest lake, Tonle Sap, is located to the south of the city of Siem Reap.
In this country, a city formerly known as Kampong Som is located on the Gulf of Thailand. The communist
regime Democratic Kampuchea existed in the 1970s in this country, whose official language is Khmer. For
10 points, name this southeast Asian country that is home to Angkor Wat, and has its capital at Phnom Penh
[NOM PEN].
ANSWER: Cambodia
This country was traditionally organized into very small villages known as "phum" (POOM), which each
affiliated with a larger "khum" (KOOM) under the supervision of a Buddhist temple. As a result, secondary
cities here such as Batdambang (BOT-dom-bong) and Kampong Cham have not reached the population
level of its only large urban center, found where the Sab and Bassac Rivers meet the Mekong. For 10
points, name this country, the location of Angkor Wat and Phnom Penh.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Cambodia [or Preahreacheanachakr Kampuchea]
The only confirmed specimen of the false potto was found in this country. This country contains the Dja
Faunal Reserve and Waza National Park. The Bamileke are one of the largest ethnic groups in the nation.
Lake Lagdo here was created by the damming of one its rivers. Mount Etinde is a subpeak of this country's
namesake volcano. Garoua is the The Benue River arises in this country. Douala is the major port of this
country, whose Lake Nyos experience a major limnic eruption that led to significant local animal kills.
Equatorial Guinea borders this country to the south and Nigeria is to its west. For 10 points, name this
African nation with capital at Yaounde.
ANSWER: Republic of Cameroon
In 1994, this country's western neighbor invaded its islands of Diamant and Jabane as part of a
border dispute over the Bakassi peninsula that was resolved by the 2006 Greentree Agreement. The
city of Kousseri in the north of this country is flooded with refugees who crossed the Logone and
Chari Rivers. In 1986, 2,000 people died from volcanic gas emitted by Lake Nyos in this country. A
common language in this country is a pidgin hybrid of French and English, though prior to World
War I it was a (*) German colony. Douala, the most populous city in this country, is a major port on the
Gulf of Guinea. Both Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria have had border disputes with, for 10 points, what
country whose capital is Yaounde?
ANSWER: Republic of Cameroon [or Republique de Cameroon]
This country's coastal Sawa people host the aquatic Ngondo festival. This country has mined
bauxite in the city of Edea, near a namesake geologic "line" of volcanoes which runs northeast to 
southwest into the ocean and includes the island of Bioko. This country's namesake "ghost
shrimp" live in the Wouri river estuary. This country, which, like Togo, was transferred from
German to French control after World War I, trades through its port of Douala on the Bight of
Biafra. For 10 points, name this country which has helped a neighboring country fight Boko
Haram after resolving a boundary dispute with Nigeria to its northwest.
ANSWER: Republic of Cameroon
This country's Mandara Mountains are home to the Mofu people, and the Juliana Makuchi book
Your Madness, Not Mine reveals the struggles of women in it. Buea was this nation's capital while it
was a German colony, and one of Usman dan Fodio's commanders, Modibo Adama, founded an
emirate in it. This country's name comes from the large number of prawns found in its Wouri River,
and it is the source of the Nyong, Sanaga and Benue rivers. Volcanic activity in the Oku region of this
nation has resulted in lakes Monoun and Nyos converting to pools of carbonic acid. This country's largest
cities include Garoua and Douala, and it shares Lake Chad with Niger and Nigeria. For 10 points, name this
African nation with capital at Yaounde.
ANSWER: Republic of Cameroon
The bell of the U.S.S. Endicott is now found at a church within this complex, the Evergreen Chapel. This
complex is the home of the Aspen Lodge, and is found within Catoctin Mountain Park near Thurmont.
Originally known as Shangri-La, this location was renamed in 1953 after Dwight Eisenhower's grandson.
For 10 points, name this designated rural retreat of U.S. Presidents, the site of several diplomatic summits
including landmark 1978 "accords" between Egypt and Israel.
ANSWER: Camp David
This country's only hot desert is the Nk-mip, located near the town of Osoyoos in the southwest. This
country disputes Hans Island with its eastern neighbor, and its political subdivisions come together in a
"Four Corners" near Kasba Lake. The Okanagan Valley in this country contains a trail used by gold-rushers
 to reach Fraser Canyon. Garibaldi Mountain may be an active volcano in this country, whose
northeast contains a gigantic region of bedrock known as the Laurentian Shield. For 10 points, name this
North American country often known as "America's Hat."
ANSWER: Canada
This country is home to the city of Thetford Mines, and was home to the Jeffrey mine in the town of
Asbestos. Earlier miners passing through the western edge of this country used the eastern side of the
Chilkoot Pass. This country was supplanted by Kazakhstan as the world's largest uranium producer
in 2009, but its McArthur Mine in the Athabaska basin continues to produce millions of pounds of
yellowcake annually. Recently, its town of (*) Ft. McMurray has seen massive development of its tar
sands for oil production. For 10 points, name this country rich in minerals and fossil fuels which would
benefit from the construction of the Keystone Pipeline to its southern neighbor.
ANSWER: Canada
This country's oldest national park is at Banff. The Ambassador and Peace Bridges connect this country
with its southern neighbor that disputes its claims in the Beaufort Sea. This country's Confederation Bridge
in the Gulf of St. Lawrence links New Brunswick to Prince Edward Island. The most populous city in this
second largest country in the world is on the shores of Lake Ontario; that city is Toronto. For 10 points,
name this country that shares its long southern border with the United States.
ANSWER: Dominion of Canada [or le Dominion du Canada]
Nk-mip is this country's only hot desert, located near the town of Osoyoos. This country is home to the
world's largest freshwater sand dunes and bar system, which is located in its most populous political
subdivision. The volcano Mount Garibaldi is found in this country, and this country's highest point is at
Mount Logan. This country's longest river was dubbed "disappointment" river by its founder. That river is
the Mackenzie River which has its source at the Great Slave Lake. For 10 points, name this North American
country with capital at Ottawa.
ANSWER: Canada
The longest river in this country has tributaries including the Finlay and Peace rivers and is a site of
natural gas extraction at a delta near Mallik. Its Burgess Shale oil reserve is found partially in its Yoho
national park. Great Bear and Great Slave lakes lie in this country. Its highest peak, found in the St. Elias
range, is Mount Logan. This country's namesake "shield" surrounds Hudson Bay. For 10 points, name this
country whose cities include Edmonton, Calgary, and Montreal.
ANSWER: Canada
The Sahtu people in this country speak the endangered "Slavey" language, and the book Languages in
Conflict describes its "bilingual belt." The "children of Bill 101" here are educated in a specific language.
In a territory of this country, Inuktitut (in-UHK-teh-TUT) and Inuinnaqtun (IN-oo-uh-NOK-tin) are official
languages. Leonard Jones sued to challenge the 1969 Official Languages Act here. This country features a
large French-speaking Acadian minority in a bilingual province. For 10 points, name this country where
both English and French are spoken in places such as New Brunswick.
ANSWER: Canada
This nation is home to the volcano Mount Garibaldi and its highest point is at Mount Logan. This country's
longest river, which flows into the Beaufort Sea, is the Mackenzie. In 1999, the territory of Nunavut, which
includes Baffin Island, was created in this country's northern region. Its provincial capitals include Regina
and Halifax, and it contains the Hudson Bay. For 10 points, name this country with capital at Ottawa, the
northern neighbor of the US.
ANSWER: Canada
Protestors of this policy formed a group that included conspiracy theorist Jock V. Andrew and a
government employee who complained of discrimination, Irene Hilchie; that group was called APECt.
Other opponents of this policy stomped on a flag in Brockville during debate over the Meech Lake Accord.
This policy has been resisted by the infamous "Bill 101," which, among other provisions, forbids the
children of immigrants from receiving education in English. This policy's cornerstone was the Official
Languages Act of 1969, advocated by Pierre Trudeau. For 10 points, identify this policy of giving equal
status to English and French in Canada.
ANSWER: Canadian official bilingualism policy [or descriptive answers such as "giving equal status to English and French" before it is read]
A dispute over a project of this typewas resolved by the Peace of the Braves. A crown corporation
running projects of this type launched many takeovers during Rene Levesque's tenure as Minister of
Natural Resources during the Quiet Revolution. Projects of this type are found at James Bay and Churchill
Falls. One provincial crown corporation uses the output of these projects to meet over 90% of British
Columbia's power needs. For 10 points, name this type of project that generates electricity in the world's
second largest country by area by damming rivers.
ANSWER: Canadian hydroelectricity dams
In 2012, activist Greg Norton successfully led a campaign against creating a new one of these
places. Currently, the Never Forgotten Foundation is attempting to build an enormous war memorial
between Ingonish and Neils Harbour in this kind of place. Since 2002, Alan Latourelle has led the
agency which manages these places. A theater troupe named for these places frequently discusses
spiritualism at the Laurier House and performs historical shows at Bellevue House and Fort
Wellington. There currently exist plans to create another five of these places, including Thaydene (*)
Nene and Mealy Mountains. Two of these places are traversed by the restricted Icefields Parkway. Spirit
Island is found within Maligne Lake in one of these places, named for trader Jasper Hawes. The oldest one
of these things borders two others, Yoho and Kootenay, and contains the Valley of the Ten Peaks and the
Bow River, as well as several Albertan glaciers. For 10 points, identify these nature preserves which
include Banff.
ANSWER: Canadian national parks [or obvious equivalents; prompt on partial answer]
It is not the Red River, but it flows through both Texas and Oklahoma. It marked the northern boundary of
the Choctaw nation after the Treaty of Doak's Stand. It begins just south of the Raton Pass on the
Colorado/New Mexico border, and flows through New Mexico, Texas, and Oklahoma, meeting up with the
Arkansas River after flowing through the Eufaula (Eu-Fall-A) Reservoir. For 10 points, identify this river,
named for inhabitants of a North American country.
ANSWER: Canadian River
A so-called hydrological "triple point" occurs at the Snow Dome in this range. This mountain range is
home to the Columbia Icefield Glacier, which is located on the Icefields Parkway. Lake Louise is located in
this section of a larger range. Its highest peak is Mount Robson, but this range is somewhat shorter than the
Saint Elias Mountains, home to Mount Logan. This section, home to Jasper National Park and Banff
National Park, was the major impediment in constructing the Canadian Pacific Railway. For 10 points,
name this northern section of a Western mountain range.
ANSWER: Canadian Rockies [or Canadian Rocky Mountains; prompt on Rockies]
This group of islands includes Adan Martin, an auditorium designed by Santiago Calatrava Valls, and a
subsection of these islands is the Chinijo Archipelago. These contain a beach in Ajuy in the municipality of
Betancuria on the island of Fuerteventura. Outside of Hawaii, this island chain contains the largest volcano
in the world, Teide. Its largest city is Las Palmas, and its capital is located on the island of Tenerife. Name
this group of islands located west of Morocco controlled by Spain.
ANSWER: Canary Islands
This archipelago is the site of the M25 magnetic anomaly, which is found on the ocean crust on its
western side. Antonio Cubillo formed a separatist group that sought independence for residents of
this archipelago. The largest one of these islands is home to the Achaman-worshipping Guanche
people. The world's tallest volcano outside of Hawaii, Mount Teide, can be found on this archipelago,
whose unsuccessful conquest by the (*) British in 1797 cost Lord Nelson an arm. These islands were
granted autonomy by King Juan Carlos I and are located off the coast of Morocco. For 10 points, Tenerife
is the largest island in what archipelago, which shares its name with a type of colorful bird?
ANSWER: Canary Islands [or Canaries]
Gallotia bravoana is a giant lizard which is also named for this region's Garajonay National Park, found
in its island of La Gomera. A whistled language called Silbo Gomero is used by the Guanches of this
archipelago, which is south of the Savage Islands. One of the world's largest volcanoes, Mount Teide, is
located in this archipelago. This island group includes Lanzarote, La Palma, Fuerteventura, and
(ten-ey-REE-fay) Tenerife, the latter of which is the most populated island of Spain. For 10 points, identify
this Spanish archipelago within the Atlantic Ocean, which is actually named for native dogs, not birds.
ANSWER: Canary Islands
The painting Menin Gate at Midnight and the Remembrance Driveway are found in a National War
Memorial in this city, which is also home to Mount Stromlo Observatory. The Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organization is headquartered in this city. This city's workforce mostly commutes
from suburbs such as Belconnen, Weston Creek, and Tuggeranong. An elongated lake in this city was
formed by damming the Molonglo River. This city was built over a fourteen-year period based on a plan by
Walter Burley Griffin. For ten points, name this planned city that is 150 miles southwest of Sydney and
comprises most of the Australian Capital Territory.
ANSWER: Canberra
The highest point in this city is Mount Majura, which is part of a nature park containing such other peaks
as Mount Ainslie and Mount Mugga Mugga. This city honors the founding of its major university in 1968
with a music festival called Stonefest. This city was officially "founded" on March 12, 1913, a national
holiday in the country where this city was located. It contains a Georgian mansion called "The Lodge,"
which has seen such occupants as Hazel Hawke and Ethel Bruce, along with their more notable husbands.
Designed by Walter Burley Griffin and his wife, Marion, this city features the "Parliamentary Triangle"
and was constructed as a compromise choice to settle a political dispute between Melbourne and Sydney.
For 10 points, name this capital of Australia.
ANSWER: Canberra
One of these geographic features contains an endpoint near a town whose name literally translates as
"burning water," Ai-Ais, and is most often viewed from Hobas. Another of these geographical
features contains the archaeological site of Buffalo Eddy and is home to a town named Pittsburg
Landing. A different example of this feature is traversed by the Chihuahua al Pacifico railroad and is
home to the Tarahumara people, who were driven there from the more fertile land around it by the
Spanish. One of the largest ones in the world is found in Namibia and named after the (*) Fish River.
Kaibab National Forest is located near the most notable one in the U. S., which can be seen from the Lipan
and Guano Points. For 10 points, name these features that include the Copper one in Mexico, the Hells one,
carved by the Snake River, and the Grand one, carved by the Colorado River.
ANSWER: canyons [accept synonyms such as gorges; accept more specific answers]
This place was named for the hometown of the captain of the Eendracht, Willem Schouten, a Dutchman.
This place is the northern boundary of the Drake Passage. It was the major point for the return to Europe on
the clipper route. It is the southernmost point in the Tierra del Fuego archipelago. Before the introduction
of the Panama Canal, it was the major rounding point for ships sailing from New York to San Francisco.
For 10 points, identify this cape on the southern tip of South America.
ANSWER: Cape Horn
Some islands near this feature include Wollaston, Deceit, and Hermite, while the much larger island
of Navarino lies to its north.This feature was named for the Dutch birthplace of Willem Schouten,
who sailed past it in 1616. As a part of a province of which Puerto Williams is the capital, its most
famous point is located at approximately fifty-six degrees south latitude. This piece of land is located
in [*] Chilean waters, immediately north of the Drake Passage, and its discovery was delayed due to
predominant use of the Strait of Magellan. For 10 points, name this point south of the Tierra del Fuego, the
southernmost point of the South American mainland.
ANSWER: Cape Horn [or Kaap Hoorn; or Cabo de Hornos]
Suburbs of this city include Constantia, Hout Bay, and Stellanbosch. Tourist attractions in this city include
the Victoria and Alfred Waterfront and the Bo-Kaap, the city's former Malay quarter, which lies on the
slopes of Signal Hill. Signal Hill along with three other mountains form the borders of the city bowl, which
contains the city's downtown, as well as District Six, where 60,000 residents were forcibly evicted in the
1970s. This city, the home of Africa's highest-ranking university, overlooks Table Bay, where Robben
Island lies. Table Mountain overlooks this city, and its Green Point Stadium is a 2010 World Cup Venue.
Name this legislative capital of South Africa.
ANSWER: Cape Town [or Kaapstad; or iKapa]
Leading into this city's center is the national highway N1 by way of Bellville, while N2 goes by its
international airport, which is located north of False Bay. Table Bay lies northeast of this city. Devil's Peak
and Lion's Head are prominent features that frame Table Mountain, located at the base of its namesake
peninsula, and a popular tourist destination is Nobel Square in the Victoria and Albert waterfront. Islands
near this city include Robben Island, where Nelson Mandela was held captive. For 10 points, name this city
which houses the National Parliament and was founded by the Dutch in 1652, the legislative capital of
South Africa on a namesake feature "of Good Hope".
ANSWER: Cape Town
The mutiny of the slave ship Meermin occurred off the coast of this city. This city's Boulders Beach has
been home to a colony of African penguins since 1982. Devil's Peak and Lion's Head rise on either side of
this city's Table Mountain. Off the coast of this city is Robben Island, where Nelson Mandela was long
imprisoned. For ten points, identify this South African city whose name comes from its location near the
south tip of the continent.
ANSWER: Cape Town, South Africa
The flat roofs prevalent in this town owe mainly to the influence of architect Louis-Michel Thibault. One of
the traditional boundary markers of this city was formerly called Lion's Rump, and it is bounded to the
south by Devil's Peak.. Sailors who confused this city's chief bay with another led to that smaller bay being
named False Bay, and one of its main thoroughfares is Adderley Street, renamed from Heerengracht in
1850. Sections of this city that houses the City Bowl include those along Table Mountain, and Guguletu and
Nyanga West were its two main black ghettos. Containing the Castle of Good Hope, for 10 points, name
this legislative capital of South Africa.
ANSWER: Cape Town
Cultural centers in this city include the botanic gardens at Kirstenbosch and the Newlands cricket and
rugby stadium. The original northwestern border of this city was the Signal Hill and Lion's Head ridges. A
cloud cover known as "the tablecloth" sits outside of this city, which overlooks False Bay. This city shares
governmental responsibilities with Bloemfontein and Pretoria. For 10 points, name this legislative capital
of South Africa, which is near a feature "of Good Hope."
ANSWER: Cape Town
District Six, a former residential area in this city, saw 60,000 of its residents forcibly removed during
the 1970s. Sea Point is one of this city's most densely populated and affluent suburbs and was a "whites
only" area. The Dutchman Jan van Riebeeck, working for the Dutch East India Company, founded this city
as a rest stop for ships sailing to India. Robben Island is an infamous penitentiary located off the coast of
this city and housed several notable political prisoners such as Jacob Zuma and Nelson Mandela. For 10
points, name this city located near the Cape of Good Hope and Table Mountain, the legislative capital of
South Africa.
ANSWER: Cape Town [or Kaapstad; or iKapa]
This city is the site of the Herbert Baker designed estate Groote Schuur, or "Big Barn." It was
established by Jan van Riebeeck. Cecil Rhodes imagined a railroad from this city to Cairo. Robben Island is
on the outskirts of this city, which is overlooked by Table Mountain. For 10 points, name this city which is
the capital of South Africa along with Pretoria and Bloemfontein.
ANSWER: Cape Town
The giant skink native to these islands was wiped out by starving prisoners seeking food. This nation's
islands are divided into the Barleyento group in the north and the Sotavento in the south. Its mountain of
Pedra de Lune contains a number of salt lakes in its crater and Boa Vista contains a miniature sandy desert
with notably tall dunes, the consequence of the Harmattan wind this nation regularly receives and is
attempting to harness for a quarter of its energy output via windpower. Also containing an active volcano at
Fogo, for 10 points, identify this nation where the island of Santiago contains its capital of Praia, an island
nation southwest of the Canary Islands and due west of the western
coast of Africa.
ANSWER: Cape Verde Islands [or Cabo Verde; or Kabu Verd]
This city's valley causes pollution problems for the Guaire (goo-ah-EE-ray) River, and it spills over the
boundary of Miranda state. The Parque Central area of this city is taking over municipal functions from the
surroundings of the Miraflores (mee-rah-FLOR-ehs) Palace. This city's National Pantheon contains the
tomb of Simon Bolivar. For 10 points, name this city which still leads Valencia and Maracaibo as the
population and economic center of Venezuela.
ANSWER: Caracas
Antonio Guzman Blanco [GOOZ-mahn BLAHN-koe] attempted to transform this city into a replica of
Paris. Royalists cited divine punishment when describing this city's 1812 Holy Thursday earthquake. Its
Altamira [ahltah-MEER-ah] neighborhood was severely damaged by another earthquake in 1967. This
city's cabildo [kah-BEELdoe] served as a national government before being sacked by English buccaneers.
Major suburbs of this city include El Hatillo [ah-TEEL-oh] and Chacao. It was the site of an unsuccessful
coup attempt in 1992, but the leader of that effort became president and held off a different coup attempt in
2002. Name this home of Hugo Chavez, the capital of Venezuela.
ANSWER: Caracas
Cable cars with names like Soberania and Sacrificio were recently installed on the San Augustin hill in this
city. The National Pantheon in this city honors men like Daniel Florence O-Leary and one-time president
Jose Tadeo Monagas. David Brillembourg lends his name to the unfinished Tower of David in this city,
sometimes called the world's tallest slum. In November of 2011, Juan Carlos Fernandez, a Chilean consul,
was subject to an "express kidnapping" in this city. El 23, a slum located near this city's airport, was
originally built by its star architect, Carlos Raul Villanueva. This city was connected with the coast by a
highway blasted through the mountains and El Avila National Park during the rule of dictator Marcos Perez
Jimenez. Attractions in this city include the birthplace of Simon Bolivar. For 10 points, name this capital of
Venezuela.
ANSWER: Caracas [or Santiago de Leon de Caracas]
This question of water's namesake community was established by the treaty of Chaguaramas. One
fruit that is grown on islands here is called the stinky toe, which one can purchase in Basseterre. The
Mosquito coast runs along this question of water, and (*) Montego Bay is an inlet of it. Mount Pelee is an
active volcano that formed the Leeward island that was home to Josephine Bonaparte in this sea. Home to
islands like Curacao, St. Kitts and Nevis, and Martinique, the Bay of Pigs is part of it. For 10 points, name
this sea that includes the countries Dominica, Haiti, Cuba, and Jamaica.
ANSWER: Caribbean sea
This question of water contains the volcano Soufriere Hills, which underwent a series of eruptions beginning in
1995 and destroyed Plymouth, the capital of this question's so-called "Emerald Isle." That island is northwest
of Guadeloupe in this question of water, and southeast of Philipsburg, the capital of Sint Maarten. It is fed by a
brackish bay on its southern end called Lake Maracaibo, which empties near the islands of Curucao ("CURuh-sow") 
and Aruba, two of its Lesser Antilles. Containing the islands of Montserrat, Hispaniola, and
Puerto Rico, for 10 points, name this large question of water north of Venezuela and Colombia.
ANSWER: Caribbean Sea
The national park named for this feature also contains Rattlesnake Springs, and it was formed
from remnants of the Capitan Reef. Explored by Jim White, this place is near Lechugilla Cave as
well as the home of The Monarch, Slaughter Canyon Cave. Its own features include the (*) Witch's
Finger, the Rock of Ages, and the Bottomless Pit in places like the Queen's Chamber and the Big Room.
For 10 points, name this cave system famous for its bat flight, located in southeastern New Mexico.
ANSWER: Carlsbad Caverns National Park
The main physical attractions of this national park were created as part of the Capitan Reef, limestone
remnants of an inland sea that disappeared 250 million years ago. Location of sites like Chocolate High and
Chocolate Drop, this park features the underground Lake Chandalar, home to extremophile microbes that
feast on hydrogen sulfide in the underground lake. Located in the Guadaloupe Mountains inside the
Chihuahua Desert, most tourists visit its Hall of the White Giants and The Big Room, home to dozens of
species of bats. FTP what New Mexico national park features an extensive cave system?
ANSWER: Carlsbad Caverns National Park
A series of small passages that total a mile are on the ceiling of a location of this feature. The
"Chocolate High" passages were discovered in this feature in 1993. This park contains the deepest cave in
the Continental U.S. This park is the home of Spider Cave, Lechuguilla Cave and Slaughter Canyon Cave.
Jim White explored and named most of the locations of this feature. The sections of the namesake feature
of this park include the Queen's Chamber, Mystery Room and the Big Room. This national park is famous
for its massive bat flights. For ten points, name this cave system in southeastern New Mexico.
ANSWER: Carlsbad Caverns National Park
Momo is considered the king of this event, which is dedicated to the Greek god Momus. Seven-year-old
Julia Lira notoriously broke into tears during this event in 2010. Pixinguinha (pee-sheen-GWEEN-ha) died
during this event in 1973 and is remembered each year in frevo music played by bands such as Monobloco.
The Gala de Madrugada occurs in Pernambuco during this event, and in another city, denizens of favelas
compete in samba competitions. For ten points, name this event which begins the Friday before Ash
Wednesday and ends on Mardi Gras, and is a huge festival in Brazil.
ANSWER: Brazilian Carnival [or Carnaval; or Rio de Janeiro Carnival]
The Fagaras are the highest mountains in the southern portion of this range while the Prahova
Valley is situated between the Bucegi and Baiu mountains in this range. Cities near this range include
Cluj-Napoca, Miskolc, and Kosice ("ko - shee - tsuh") and its highest peak is Gerlachovsky stit,
which is located in the subrange of the Tatras. During World War I, troops were sent over this range
to fight in Galicia by (*) Austria-Hungary. The southern limit of this range is often considered to be at the
Iron Gates on the Danube, in Northern Serbia. For 10 points, identify this Eastern European mountain
range, the majority of which is located in Romania.
ANSWER: Carpathian Mountains
The Western and Eastern branches of this are separated by the San and Oslawa rivers while the Eastern and
Southern branches meet at the Predeal Pass. Part of its western and northeastern Outer range is also known
locally as the Beskids. Its Tatra range includes Gerlach Peak, the highest point in Slovakia. Separated from
the Silesian and Moravian ranges by the March and Oder rivers respectively, this group only meets the Alps
across the Danube at Bratislava. For 10 points, name this group of mountain chains whose namesake
environmental convention was signed by Slovakia, Serbia, Hungary, Ukraine, Poland, the Czech Republic,
and Romania.
ANSWER: Carpathian Mountains [or Carpathians; or Karpaty; or Carpati]
One sub-range in this mountain range's northern section is the Tatra Mountains. This range's highest point
is Gerlach Peak, and it forms the northern, eastern, and southern borders of Transylvania. The Iron Gates
gorge on the Danube River separates this range from the Balkan Mountains. For 10 points, name this
mountain range in Eastern Europe that runs primarily through Slovakia, Poland, the Ukraine, and Romania.
ANSWER: Carpathian Mountains
The gap sections of such rivers as the Hernad, the Olt, and the Vah are found within this range, whose
geologic borders are the Timok River depression and the Leitha Gate. Just northwest of this range are such
cities as Stryy, Kalush, and Chernivtsi. Their arc encloses both the Little and Great Alfolds as well as the
Pannonian Basin. Stretching to the Iron Gate on the southeast, this mountain system includes Gerlach Peak,
located in its Tatras range. For 10 points, name this mountain range which extends from the Czech Republic
to southern Romania.
ANSWER: Carpathian Mountains [accept Karpaty or Kapnamu mountains]
This mountain range contains Prislop Pass in a region called the Rodna Mountains. One subgroup of this
range contains the mountain Babia Gora and is called the Beskids, and cities in this range include Tarnow
and Brasov. The southern boundary of this range is often considered to be the gorge called the Iron Gates,
and its subrange called the Tatras contains its highest peak, Mount Gerlach. Surrounded by the Galician
plain and the Pannonian plain, for 10 points, identify this mountain range which extends through parts of
Slovakia, Poland, Ukraine, and Romania.
ANSWER: Carpathian Mountains
The Southern portion of this mountain range includes the Retezat subrange, which contains many glacial
lakes, such as Bucura Lake. This mountain range's highest peak is located in the High Tatras range and is
called Gerlach Peak in English. Meeting the Alps only near Bratislava, this mountain range contains the
Iron Gate on the Danube. This range forms the historical barrier between Transylvania and the rest of what
is now Romania. For 10 points, name this group of mountain chains of Central Europe which stretches in an
arc from Poland and Slovakia down into Romania and Serbia.
ANSWER: Carpathian Mountains [or the Carpathians]
One city in this mountain range is home to a museum named for Samuel von Brukenthal as well as the
Passage of the Stairs. The "little" section of this mountain range contains the Zaruby peak, and that section
is adjacent to the most populous city in the general range, where one can find Devin Castle. A river that
traditionally marks this range's southern border also separates them from the nearby Stara Planina, and they
meet another large range in the Leitha Mountains. Cities found in the range include Miskolc and Brasov as
well as a capital established in the Velvet Divorce. Their highest point is Mount Gerlach, and they extend to
the Iron Gates in the Danube River Valley. FTP, name these mountains that pass through Bratislava and lots
of cities in Poland, Ukraine, and Romania.
ANSWER: Carpathian Mountains (or Carpathians or Carpati or Kapnamu or Karpaten or Karpatok)
province that shares its name with this city includes the Samir oil refinery and the site of the Battle of
Fedala. A controversially pricey building in this city includes a laser that points to the northeast and is the
world's tallest religious structure. This city's Old Medina region includes a replica of Rick's Cafe
Americain, a meeting site for expatriates in a movie set here. King Hassan II commissioned the
construction of a massive namesake mosque in this city, which also names a film that stars Ingrid Bergman
and Humphrey Bogart. For 10 points, name this North African port city, the largest city in Morocco.
ANSWER: Casablanca
The Barlow Road was built to circumvent this range's Lolo Pass. The Klamath River flows to sea through
this range, which once contained Mount Mazama. The Fraser River forms the northern border of this range,
and the Skagit River basin contains its Glacier Peak and Mount Baker. The southernmost part of this range
is the isolated Mount Shasta. This range also contains the Columbia River Gorge, and Wizard Island lies in
the deepest lake in the United States, Crater Lake, in this range. For 10 points, name this mountain range
that contains Mount Rainier and Mount St. Helens, located in the Pacific Northwest.
ANSWER: Cascade Range
Either six boys or a mountaineering club first ascended the "Three Fingered Jack" mountain in this
range in 1923. Two mountains in this range are humorously named for the fact that they are separated by a
large distance; they are Mt. Bachelor and The Three Sisters. A more famous part of this range is home to a
bobbing tree nicknamed the "Old Man" and has sacred significance to the Klamath Indians, who witnessed
the collapse of the Mount Mazama volcano. Another part of this range erupted in 1980, the most
catastrophic volcanic event in the United States. For 10 points, name this range that contains Crater Lake
and Mount St. Helens, found in Oregon and Washington.
ANSWER: Cascade Range [or the Cascades]
One volcano in this chain, Mount Mazama, was largely destroyed around 7,000 years ago. Lava Beds
National Monument lies in this group of peaks. Its southernmost mountain was thought extinct until it
erupted in 1914 and is called Lassen Peak. Other peaks in this range include Broken Top, Three Fingered
Jack, and the Three Sisters. This mountain range is separated from the Coast Mountains to the north by the
Fraser River and was formed from the subduction of the Juan de Fuca Plate. The Columbia River Gorge
runs through this chain, which also contains Crater Lake. For 10 points, name this section of North
America's Pacific mountain system that extends from northern California up into British Columbia whose
peaks include Mount Hood, Mount Rainier, and Mount St. Helens.
ANSWER: Cascade Range
During the Pleistocene this question of water was swelled by glacial meltwater to form the Khvalynian Sea, and
then overflowed via the Manych Depression. The gulf of Kara-Bogaz-Gol on its eastern shore, a source of
sodium sulfate, is now cut off by an artificial embankment. Cities on this question of water include Rasht and
Aktau, and Bulla Island, a major oil and gas source, is located in it. The Abseron Peninsula projects into
this sea, which is fed by the Terek, Kura, and Ural Rivers. FTP--Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan border what
habitat for sturgeon, the destination of the Volga?
ANSWER: Caspian Sea
It was formed around 5 million years ago from the Paratethys Sea, and the Huto cave suggests human
habitation in its proximity from 75,000 years ago. An area of rainforest on its southern coast known as the
Shomal is sustained by orographic precipitation. Holding a large percentage of the world's sturgeon, it is a
source of caviar, while underlying its Bulla Island are 4 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. Also known as the
Khazar Sea, its tributaries include the Kura, Gorgan, and most notably, the Volga. FTP, name this question of
water, bordered by Russia and Iran among other countries, the world's largest lake.
ANSWER: Caspian Sea
This question of water will lie at the eastern end of the planned Manych Ship Canal. The humid Hyrcanian
Forest is a temperate rain forest that lies south of this question of water in the Alborz Mountains. Baku,
Azerbaijan lies on a peninsula that juts into this question of water, and the Volga empties into this lake. For 10
points, name this largest lake in the world, which is sandwiched between the Caucasus, Iran, and Russia.
ANSWER: Caspian Sea
In one country, this question of water is named for the province of Mazandaran (mah-ZAHN-durr-ahn) that
borders it. Old records show that both the Syr Darya (sir DAH-ree-uh) and Amu Darya (ah-moo
DAH-ree-uh) rivers once flowed into this question of water, although neither one currently does. The Alborz
Mountains lie along the southern shore of this question. The Ural and Volga rivers both end in this question of
water, whose major cities include Baku in Azerbaijan. For 10 points, name this large sea in central Asia,
found north of Iran and to the east of the Black Sea.
ANSWER: Caspian Sea
In this question of water surrounding Bulla Island, Alfred Nobel's brothers launched a ship called the
Zoroaster. This home of the kutum fish was the center of the original habitat of the zebra mussel. The
landfill-expanded city of Oil Rocks is on oil platforms in this question of water, into which the Absheron
Peninsula juts. A delta that ends here contains Astrakhan, and the largest city on this salt lake's shores is
Baku. A Stalin-era project to bring its shore fresh water was begun in Turkmenistan, across this question of
water from Azerbaijan. The Ural and Volga Rivers feed this lake. For 10 points, name this inland sea
between Iran and Russia.
ANSWER: Caspian Sea [or Kaspiyskoye More; or Kaspiy Tenyizi; or Hazar Denizi ("DENG-izi"); o Kaspi Dengzi; or Khazar Danizi; or Darya-i Khazar; or Darya-i Kaspyan; or Darya-i Mazandaran]
The so-called Oil Rocks are on this question of water, as is the Tengiz Oil Field, and the world's first
offshore petroleum wells were drilled in this question of water. A city on this question of water was named for
dictator Saparmurat (sah-PAR-more-at) Niyazov, or Turkmenbashi. Baku, Azerbaijan lies on the banks of
this sea, which also receives the Volga. For 10 points, name this largest lake in the world.
ANSWER: Caspian Sea
Chechen Island sits in this question of water, which the Greeks called the Hyrcanian Sea and which is saline
because it is a remnant of the Tethys Sea. Along with Lake Baikal, it is home to one of only two species of
freshwater dolphin. In its north it receives both the Ural and Volga Rivers, and Turkmenistan and
Kazakhstan comprise its eastern shoreline. The largest city on this question of water is on the Absheron
Peninsula in Azerbaijan. Baku lies on, FTP, what inland "sea," sometimes described as the largest lake in
the world?
ANSWER: Caspian Sea
This region's namesake "game farm" provided most of the rare ungulates to the world's zoos before
closing in 2006. The term "clove" is used for rocky valleys in this region, which comprises much of
Greene County and Ulster County and is ultimately drained by the Delaware River. Sections of this area
include the Helderberg Hills and Slide Mountain. It is dotted by artificial lakes, including Neversink and
Ashokan, which supply water to the urban areas southeast of this region. This setting of certain Washington
Irving stories is found between the Mohawk and Hudson valleys. For 10 points, name this portion of the
Appalachian mountains which comprises a former resort hotspot in eastern New York.
ANSWER: the Catskill Mountains [or the Catskills]
The Rondout, Neversink, and Ashokan reservoirs are among the artificial lakes in these mountains. The
northern portion of these mountains are the Helderberg Hills, and the Blackhead range in these mountains
is the location of Thomas Cole Mountain. The highest point of these mountains is Slide Mountain. Several
resorts in these mountains were the location of early stand-up comedy shows in the so-called borscht belt,
and Rip Van Winkle fell asleep in these mountains in a Washington Irving story. For ten points, name these
mountains of the Appalachian system that are bounded by the Mohawk and Hudson river valleys and
located in southeastern New York.
ANSWER: Catskill Mountains
The Esopus Creek flows through this mountain range, which contains the Ashokan and Pepacton
reservoirs. A set of resorts in this mountain range that became a popular place for Jewish comedians was
called the Borscht Belt. Slide Mountain is the highest point in this mountain range, where the Woodstock
concert took place. It was the setting for Kindred Spirits and other paintings by the Hudson River School.
For 10 points, name this mountain range, a section of the Appalachians in southeastern New York.
ANSWER: the Catskill Mountains
This mountain range contains a city overlooked by the Narikala Fortress. The Aras and Kura rivers
flow through this mountain range. The so-called Mountain Jews get their name from being from
regions that this mountain range runs through, such as Dagestan. This range contains large cities like
Grozny and (*) Tbilisi. This mountain range's highest peak is also Europe's highest peak, Mount Elbrus.
For 10 points, name this range that runs through Russia, Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Armenia that is located
on the border between Asia and Europe.
ANSWER: Caucasus Mountains
They extend south from the Kuma and Manych river basins, and between their two ranges lie the Shirak
Steppe. They include the Dykshu, Bezingi, and Karaugom glaciers, and the largest lake in this mountain
system is Sevan. Mount Aragats is located to the west of Lake Sevan, and the Talish Mountains are located
in this system. Divided into the Greater and Lesser ranges, for 10 points name this mountain system located
between the Caspian and Black seas with their highest peak at Mount Elbrus.
ANSWER: Caucasus Mountains
Notable cities in this mountain range include Nazran, Nal-chik, and Vladikavkaz. Its southern
slopes are largely drained by the Kura River, while this range's northern slopes are home to
numerous autonomous regions such as Kabardino-Balkaria, Ingushetia, and North (*) Ossetia. Its
easternmost extension is the Abseron Peninsula, which juts into the Caspian Sea near Baku, while its
highest point of Mount Elbrus is also the highest mountain in all of Europe. For 10 points, name this
mountain range that separates Russia from Georgia and Azerbaijan.
ANSWER: Caucasus Mountains [or Kavkazskiy Khrebet]
Legendarily, this place was rewarded by the king after the Wreck of the Ten Sail, where settlers saved
all hands in a ten vessel wreck. Reporters erroneously predicted hundreds had died here after it was hit by
Hurricane Ivan in 2004. Tourist sites here include the Seven Mile Beach and Stingray City. In July 2012,
this place's leader McKeeva Bush proposed a "community enhancement fee," which would have been the
first direct tax on income in this region's history. For ten points, name this British Overseas Territory in the
Caribbean, a popular tax shelter consisting of three islands.
ANSWER: Cayman Islands
Its southern border is formed largely by rivers including the Mbomou River and the Ubangi River while the
Sangha River flows in the west and the Dzanga-Ndoki National Park occupies the far southwestern triangle
of this nation. The north is dominated by the Fertit Hills, the Yade Massif, and the Bongo Massif, while its
major cities include Bimbo, Mbaiki, and Carnot. Many of its inhabitants are of Baya and Banda ethnicity
and speak the official language of Sango; this country is sandwiched between Cameroon to the west and the
Sudan to the east, and to its north is Chad. For 10 points, name this landlocked African country with a
capital at Bangui.
ANSWER: Central African Republic
According to a 2008 survey, this country has the world's least light pollution. This country's chief
ethnic group was the subject of the "nightmare campaign" to bring them under French control, and
are the Gbaya. This modern-day country was absorbed by the Rafai and Zemio sultanates when it
was known as the colony of Ubangi-Shari. This country's plurality language is Sango, whose word
for "union" names the (*) Seleka militia that has brought it into a state of effective anarchy since the 2012
overthrow of Francois Bozize. Along with Chad, the Republic of the Congo, and Gabon, this country
comprised French Equatorial Africa. For 10 points, identify this country named for its position on the
continent.
ANSWER: Central African Republic [or Republique Centrafricaine]
This region extends the to north up to the Izozog Swamps. This region's southeast is the location of Isla
de Cerrito, which hosts an annual dorado fishing competition. The Bermejo River flows through the
southern portion of this region, and the Pilcomayo River further divides it so that the northernmost section
is called Boreal. That section of this region was wrongly believed in the 1930s to have oil deposits, leading
to a war named for this region. For 10 points, name this largely uninhabited region that spreads north from
Argentina, and over which a war was fought by Bolivia and Paraguay.
ANSWER: Gran Chaco plain
One range of inactive volcanoes located in this country is the Tibesti Mountains. The tallest mountain in
this country, Emi Koussi, is also the tallest in the Sahara region. Part of this country's border with
Cameroon is formed by the Logone River, and this country is bordered by Libya to the north. This nation's
second-largest city is Moundou. For 10 points, identify this landlocked African country, with capital
N'Djamena, (en-JUH-mee-na) which shares its name with a large lake.
ANSWER: Republic of Chad [or Republique du Tchad; or Jumhuriyat Tshad]
The Ouaddai region in the east of this country has capital at Abeche, and this country's largest and
northern-most region, Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti, contains Emi Koussi in the Tibesti mountains. The legendary
Sao empire ruled this present-day country which contains the Bongor region, and other cities in this country
include Sarh and Moundou. The Kanem region is north of a feature supplied by the Chari and Logone
rivers, and that lake has been negatively affected by irrigation in the region. For 10 points, name this
African country, bordered on the east by the Sudan, whose capital is N-Djamena and which shares its name
with a shrinking lake.
ANSWER: Republic of Chad [or Republique du Tchad]
The Sao civilization flourished near this lake, whose floating islands are home to the Buduma people.
Fish caught in this lake are sold as banda and salanga. The town of Bol lies on the shore of this lake. This
lake's northern and southern sections are divided by a ridge of swampland. The Ngadda and Yobe Rivers
both flow into this lake, but the Chari (SHA-ree) River provides ninety percent of its water. Over the past
forty years, its surface area has shrunk from 15,000 to 500 square miles. For 10 points, name this African
lake surrounded by Cameroon, Niger, Nigeria, and its namesake country, which is directly south of Libya.
ANSWER: Lake Chad
The Chari River is largest source for this question of water, providing about 90% of its water supply.
Geologists speculate that it was once a remnant of a former inland sea that continuously grows and
shrinks over 3 billion year spans; this explains why its depth is only 11 meters. Cameroon and Niger
were once in conflict over who actually had control of this lake, but the dispute was settled when its
namesake country claimed it. For 10 points, name this lake which shares its name with a country whose
capital is N-Djamena.
ANSWER: Lake Chad
The Buduma and Kuri people live near this question of water, and the area between it and a river to its West
was studied by the Anglo-French Boundary Commission in 1904. Once believed to be the origin of the Bahr
el-Ghazal River, it was first described in a map by Dixon Denham and Clapperton became the first
European to sight it. One question studying it has proposed diverting the Ubangi River into the Chari River
which feeds it, and it also receives water from the Logome River. An important source of water for the
Kanem-Bornu Empire, it has significantly shrunk due to "overgrazing" of the land around it in the recent
past. For 10 points, identify this lake located at the corner of Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon, and a namesake
country.
ANSWER: Lake Chad or Lac Tchad
Cities lying on this question of water include Bol and N-guigmi. When its water levels are high, its water is
diverted through a string of basins called the Soro, and its water is also discharged into the Bodele
Depression. It is partially fed by the Yobe River, but primarily by the Chari River, and it separated into
northern and southern basins by the Great Barrier. In the 1960s, there was a proposal to divert the Ubangi
River into this lake to maintain its volume. For 10 points, name this shrinking lake which borders Niger,
Nigeria, Cameroon, and its namesake country.
ANSWER: Lake Chad
The Bodele depression lies forty kilometers to its northeast, and is joined by the Gazal river. Islands on it
include Kofia and Malal, and the town of Baga lies on a peninsula at its southwest. The Adamawa plateau
lies off the Mandara hills to its south, while mount Bagzane lies at the north of the country to its west.
Rainfall on the town of Bol to its east has declined relative to its discovery by Hugh Clapperton. Supplied
by the Logone and Chari rivers, it is surrounded by Sahel, and is shrinking in size. Lying north of
Cameroon, and east of Niger and Nigeria, for 10 points, identify this lake that names a country in central
Africa.
ANSWER: Lake Chad
The Bogomerom archipelago is located in this question of water, as well some notable floating islands. The
Chari and its tributary the Logone form a major delta with this question. Seasonal water level fluctuations
create problems for fishermen who also have to deal with the thousands of square kilometers of wetlands
that surround it. The UN Food and Agricultural Organization labeled this lake an ecological catastrophe
because of its unsustainable depletion by growing population in the four countries that share its shores. For
10 points, what is this shallow African lake located on the southern edge of the Sahara desert that lends its
name to the country directly to its east?
ANSWER: Lake Chad
This region's counties were reunited by Thibaut the Great in 1125, and it was united to the French
crown when the son of Joan of Navarre and of this region became King Louis X. The fairs of this region
occurred in its towns of Troyes (TWAH) and Lagny and saw early credit transactions, and this area has
traditionally been divided into Wet and Dry regions. The product most associated with this region
undergoes processes such as remuage and degorgement and comes in amounts such as magnums,
jeroboams, and splits. For ten points, name this historical and cultural region of France that is noted for its
namesake sparkling wines.
ANSWER: Champagne
This question of water is the site of the oldest fossil reef built by multiple organisms, which is called the
Chazy Reef. It is the location of the towns North Hero and South Hero. Alburgh is the only town in Grand
Isle County that is not on an island in this question of water, which also contains Isle La Motte and Valcour
Island. This question of water is connected by the La Chute River to Lake George. This lake borders
Plattsburgh and Ticonderoga and is surrounded by the Adirondack Mountains to its west and, to its east, the
Green Mountains. For 10 points, name this lake that serves for much of its length as the border between
New York and Vermont.
ANSWER: Lake Champlain
The Mazza Paleoindian site is located near the Winooski River on the shores of this question of water. A
canal that connected this question of water to points southward notably used a type of canal boat with sails,
and this question of water contains Valcour Island and is overlooked by Mount Defiance. A bridge connects
Chimney Point to Crown Point across this question of water, which was the site of the 1814 Battle of
Plattsburgh. In 1998, it was briefly declared the sixth Great Lake. For ten points, identify this lake located
just south of the Canadian border and between Vermont and New York, named for a French explorer.
ANSWER: Lake Champlain
A group called the Brown Berets occupied these islands in 1972 and these islands were originally inhabited
by the Chumash and the Tongva. Pygmy Mammoths thrived on these islands, which still shelter rare
wildlife such as the Island Fox and a unique species of Torrey Pine. Reaching their highest point at Devil's
Peak, the northern islands in this chain were created by the Raymond Fault, which also formed the Santa
Monica mountains. Avalon is the only permanent civilian residence on these islands, of which Anacapa is
the closest to mainland while Santa Cruz is the largest. For 10 points, identify this chain of eight islands
including Santa Catalina and San Clemente, located off the coast of Southern California.
ANSWER: Channel Islands
One crossing over this river was measured at "364.4 smoots, plus or minus an ear" long, where Smoot
was the length of a fraternity student of that surname. The Hatch Shell is a concert hall on this river's
namesake esplanade. This river, which starts in Hopkinton, was crossed until the 60s by the Warren Bridge,
threatening the monopoly of a namesake structure which was revoked in 1837 by Chief Jusice Roger
Taney. Its outflow is near the neighborhood of Back Bay. For ten points, name this river between
Cambridge and Boston, Massachusetts.
ANSWER: Charles River
This city's East Bay Street features thirteen colorful houses known as Rainbow Row. A tupelo and
cypress marsh called the Audubon Swamp Garden can be found near its Magnolia Plantation. The massive
cable-stayed Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge connects its downtown to the town of Mount Pleasant. A group of
old defensive formations called The Battery is on this city's coast and provides views of Fort Moultrie on
Sullivan's Island. This city is divided naturally by the Wando, Cooper, Stono, and Ashley Rivers. It is the
location of the Citadel military college and the Fort Sumter historical site. For ten points, name this largest
coastal city in South Carolina.
ANSWER: Charleston, South Carolina
This city is home to the Beth Elohim Congregation, considered the birthplace of Reform Judaism in the
United States and the oldest surviving Reform Synagogue in the world. Home to Rainbow Row and
Hibernian Hall, its downtown is situated on a peninsula surrounded by the Ashley and Cooper rivers. It is
also home to the American leg of the "Festival of Two Worlds", also known as Spoleto Festival USA. It is
home to The Citadel and is the second busiest port on the East Coast. For 10 points, name "Holy City", a
South Carolina locale in whose harbor the first volleys of the Civil War were launched.
ANSWER: Charleston, South Carolina
The oldest fire-resistant building still standing in America is located in this city. Gian Carlo Menotti
established the Spoleto Festival in this city. This city is home to an array of vivid pastel-colored houses
known as Rainbow Row, and the Wando and Stono Rivers empty into its coast. A namesake tune by James
P. Johnson served as the basis for a wildly popular 1920s dance craze named for this city. For 10 points,
identify this coastal South Carolina city.
ANSWER: Charleston
Every April, this city hosts a running competition in which participants cross its Cooper River Bridge.
In 2010, this city saw another re-opening of its Dock Street Theatre. Gian Carlo Menotti founded another
annual event in this American city that begins in late May, the Spoleto Music Festival. An earthquake
struck this city in 1886, although a more recent natural disaster to affect this city was Hurricane Hugo,
which made landfall near this home of The Citadel. This city's Sullivan Island is home to Fort Moultrie
and Fort Sumter. For 10 points, name this city in South Carolina, an important port city during the 18th and
19th centuries.
ANSWER: Charleston, South Carolina
This city at the confluence of the Ashley and Cooper Rivers was unsuccessfully besieged by Peter Parker
in 1776 but successfully besieged by Henry Clinton in 1780. Denmark Vesey led an 1822 slave revolt in
this city. Fort Moultrie on Sullivan Island in this city's harbor is now part of Fort Sumter National
Monument. For 10 points, name this port city in South Carolina.
ANSWER: Charleston [or Charles Town]
The inhabitants of one island in this question of water speak an Elizabethan-era dialect of English.
That island is Tangier Island. The Calvert Cliffs are a set of fossil-rich chalk cliffs that lie on this
question of water. This question of water is spanned only by its namesake bridge and (+) bridge-tunnel, the
latter of which connects to Cape Charles. The British besieged Fort McHenry from this question of
water. John (*) Smith remarked that oysters "lay thick as stones" in it. Its tributaries include the James,
Potomac, and Susquehanna rivers. For 10 points, identify this largest estuary in the United States, a bay
bordered by Maryland and Virginia.
ANSWER: Chesapeake Bay
This American question of water is the site of a namesake impact crater caused by a bolide that hit about 35
million years ago. Its narrowest point is between Hartford County and Plum Point and its major eastern
tributaries include the Choptank, Chester, and Nanticoke Rivers. Near the mouth of this question of water, the
Comte de Grasse won a major victory while in the 17th century, many English royalist supporters moved to
its surrounding shores. For 10 points name this question of water bordered by the Calvert Cliffs and home to a
namesake Bridge-Tunnel which receives the Susquehanna and Potomoc Rivers- inflow.
ANSWER: Chesapeake Bay
Trudy Guthrie's photograph of a sea monster in this question of water turned out to be a manatee. William
Warner's book Beautiful Swimmers describes the life cycle of the blue crab here. This question of water
contains an island whose residents are probably incorrectly thought to speak an Elizabethan dialect of
English. In the same county as its Tangier Island, wild ponies are rounded up on Assateague Island and
driven across water to Chincoteague, another island in this question of water. Accomack is on the Eastern
Shore, a peninsula separate by this from the state mainland. A bridge-tunnel complex across this question
connects Cape Charles on the Delmarva Peninsula to Virginia Beach. For 10 points, name this estuary that
borders Virginia and Maryland.
ANSWER: Chesapeake Bay
Along with one of its tributaries, this question of water was the subject of the Compact of 1785. Nearly one
hundred years later, the Conowingo Dam was built on this question of water, near the mouth of the
Susquehanna River, its largest tributary. It is the largest estuary in the United States and collects waters
from West Virginia, New York, and several states in between. For 10 points, name the bay on which
Baltimore and other cities in Maryland and Virginia sit.
ANSWER: Chesapeake Bay
A bridge over this question of water connects the mainland to Kent Island. The majority of American
rockfish spawn in this question of water. The Patuxent and Rappahannock rivers flow into this question of water,
whose vast watershed reaches Pennsylvania, New York, and West Virginia. Its waters are responsible for
the strong seafood industry on the Eastern Shore and Baltimore. For 10 points, name this largest estuary in
the United States, a bay off the coast of Virginia and Maryland.
ANSWER: Chesapeake Bay
This state's Sumidero Canyon is where indigenous people jumped to their deaths after being
defeated at the Battle of Tepetchia. In the twentieth century, urbanization in this state focused on
people migrating out of its Lacandon Jungle. At an archaeological site in this state, turtle shell
drums, conch shells, and gourd rattles are depicted in a series of three mural rooms that show the
naming of the heir, a jaguar-skin-clad battle, and the ritual sacrifice of captives. The (*) Chan Muan
stele is found at ruins in this state, which is home to another site that includes the Temple of the
Inscriptions. A quarter of the population in this state are indigenous speakers of Mayan languages, and it is
the location of the ruins of Bonampak and Palenque. This state is also where Subcomandante Marcos
launched a 1994 uprising. For 10 points, name this impoverished state which borders Tabasco, Oaxaca, and
Guatemala and is where the Zapatista rebellion against the Mexican government is ongoing.
ANSWER: Chiapas
This state is the location of a complex that contains three stelae dedicated to the ruler Chan Muan at
Bonampak. The Grijalva River is sometimes known as the Rio Grande of this state and forms part of this
state's border with Tabasco, and the capital of this state is Tuxtla. Also the location of the Temple of the
Inscriptions at the Mayan city of Palenque, this state was the location of a guerrilla group headquartered in
the Lancadon rainforest that was led by the pipe-smoking, bemasked Subcommander Marcos. For ten points,
name this state in southern Mexico that is bordered to the east by Guatemala and is the location of the
Zapatista National Liberation Army.
ANSWER: Chiapas
The Statue of the Republic, or Golden Lady, is located in a park in this city. Statues of Ignace
Paderewski and Tadeusz Kosciuszko are found in this city's Humboldt Park. A park in this city contains a
rococo fountain, one of the largest in the world, named for Clarence Buckingham. Lollapalooza occurs at a
park in this city. The Pritzker Pavillion and Cloud Gate are located in Millennium Park in this city. Its
Jackson Park was the site of the 1893 Columbian Exposition, and a plaza named for the Daley family is
located in another of its green spaces. For 10 points, name this city home to Grant Park and Lincoln Park in
Cook County.
ANSWER: Chicago
The largest convention center in the U.S. is located in this city, and the Canal Street railroad bridge lies on
its namesake river. That river's branches converge to form the Main Stem at Wolf Point, and the tomb of
Stephen Douglas is located in this city. The neighborhood of Streeterville contains its Navy Pier, and the
Lake Point Tower is located east of its Lake Shore Drive. Its Orange Line connects Midway Airport with
"the Loop," and it holds the tallest building in the U.S. For 10 points, name this home of the Willis Tower,
the largest city in Illinois.
ANSWER: Chicago
This city was the inspiration for Ernest Burgess's concentric zone model of city growth. It contains a
toll road known as the "Skyway", and this city's namesake river had its flow reversed in the early 20th
Century as a sewage control measure. Home to Millennium Park and an 1893 World's Fair famous for its
"White City", the downtown configuration of this city's elevated railways name its central business
district, the Loop. For 10 points, name this "windy" city on Lake Michigan, the largest in Illinois and the
entire Midwestern US.
ANSWER: Chicago
This city was founded by Jean-Baptiste-Pointe du Sable. It was the site of the World's Columbian
Exposition of 1893, and Lake Shore Drive runs along its lakefront. Notable locations in this city include
Adler Planetarium, Shedd Aquarium, Navy Pier, and the recently renamed Willis Tower. For 10 points,
name this city nicknamed the "Windy City," which is located on the southwestern shore of Lake Michigan
and is the largest city in Illinois.
ANSWER: Chicago
This city was the original site of the company that makes CaramelCrisp popcorn, Garrett Popcorn
Shops. This city is home to the three-million-gallon Abbott Oceanarium, inside its Shedd Aquarium.
The Lurie Garden and Crown Fountain are both located in a park in this city, where (*) Anish
Kapoor's sculpture Cloud Gate sits. The Smith Museum of Stained Glass Windows and a Ferris wheel can
be found on this city's Navy Pier. For 10 points, name this Midwestern city where Millennium Park is home
to a stainless-steel, bean-shaped sculpture.
ANSWER: Chicago
This city contains a Sanitary and Ship Canal that is connected by the Cal-Sag Channel to the Little
Calumet River. Sections of highway in this city are named the Edens, Calumet, and Dan Ryan. This city
has a 150 foot high Ferris wheel located on its Navy Pier. Each Saint Patrick's Day, this city's main river is
dyed green. For 10 points, name this city located on Lake Michigan that is the third largest in the U.S. and
the largest in Illinois.
ANSWER: Chicago
This location was founded around and named for a large cenote [suh-NOH-tee] that was excavated by
Edward Herbert Thompson. This location's Temple of the Warriors is structurally similar to a pyramid
complex at Tula. This location was once part of a league with neighboring Uxmal [oosh-MAHL]. This
location is home to an observatory known as the Caracol, as well as a pyramid dedicated to Kukulcan,
known as El Castillo. Home to the largest ballcourt in Mesoamerica, for 10 points, this is what Mayan site
located on the Yucatan Peninsula?
ANSWER: Chichen Itza
The Presa de la Boguilla is a lake that lies along the Conchos river which lies entirely in this state. Cities in
it include Santa Rosalia de Carmago and Delicias and this state is home to the Cumbres de Majalca
National Park and the Copper canyon. This state's capital includes attractions like the Gameros estate and
the Church of San Francisco which houses the remains of Miguel Hidalgo. It is bounded by Durango to the
South, Coahuila to the East, and Sonora to the East, and it contains Ciudad Juarez. For 10 points, name this
largest Mexican state which shares its name with a breed of small dogs.
ANSWER: Chihuahua
This nation's capital was founded by Pedro de Valdivia, who defeated the native Mapuche people. This
nation contains the world's largest copper mines at Chuquicamata and Escondida. This nation's most
important seaport, Valparaiso, houses its legislature. Easter Island is owned by this nation, which splits
Tierra del Fuego with its eastern neighbor. It controls Cape Horn, the southernmost point in South America.
For 10 points, name this long, narrow country on the Pacific, which lies west of the Andes and Argentina,
and has its capital at Santiago.
ANSWER: Republic of Chile
In 1647, the captaincy-general that is now this country was hit by a major earthquake, whose relics
include the miraculously preserved Cristo de Mayo crucifix. Its city of Concepcion was among the hardest
hit by another earthquake, of magnitude 8.8, that struck in 2010. This country owns the western portion of
Tierra del Fuego, and most of the Atacama Desert lies within this country, which owns Easter Island. For
the point, name this extremely elongated South American nation with its capital at Santiago.
ANSWER: Chile
In this country's Araucania Region, the CAM terrorist organization of the Mapuche people has
fought for land rights. Though not Bolivia, controversial plans are underway to build new mines near
this country's city of Arica in traditional Aymara lands. The Santa Maria School in the city of
Iquique in this country saw a massacre in 1907 of sodium nitrate miners, while its city of (*) Valdivia
was struck in 1960 by the most powerful earthquake ever recorded. major 1903 maritime strike shut down
its chief port of Valparaiso. Much of this country's economy still comes from copper mines in and around
the world's driest place, the Atacama Desert. For 10 points, identify this country that borders Peru, Bolivia,
and Argentina, whose capital is Santiago.
ANSWER: Chile
Among this country's possessions are two islands named for saints, San Felix and San Ambrosio, which
make up two of the four Desventuradas, or Unfortunate, Islands. This country also owns two islands whose
names are inspired by a work of Daniel Defoe, the whole group of which are named after the Spaniard who
discovered them and San Felix and San Ambrosio. In addition to the Juan Fernandez Islands, which include
Alexander Selkirk and Robinson Crusoe Islands, this country possesses another Pacific Ocean island known
for its moai. For 10 points, what is this country that owns Easter Island, with its capital at Santiago?
ANSWER: Republic of Chile
This country's highest point is the stratovolcano, Nevado Ojos del Salado. The Corcovado Gulf separates
its mainland from an island possession, and its longest river is the Loa River which runs through the world's
driest desert to its north. It controls Rapa Nui on which stand the mo-ai statues; that is also known as Easter
Island. Dominated by the Andes mountains and home to the Atacama, this is for 10 points, this is what
South American country with its national congress in Valparaiso and capital at Santiago?
ANSWER: Republic of Chile
The northern part of this country is bordered to the west by the Tacna Region, and its city of
Antofagasta is found west of the Cordillera Domeyko. Its Los Lagos district contains Chiloe Island,
and it also holds dominion over the Juan Fernandez Islands, whose namesake discovered them after
setting sail from (*) Valparaiso. Led by Bernardo O-Higgins upon its 1818 independence, it expanded its
territory with a victory in the War of the Pacific, which ended 5 years before this country annexed Easter
Island. Once led by such men as Salvador Allende and Augusto Pinochet, for 10 points, identify this South
American nation with capital at Santiago.
ANSWER: Republic of Chile
This country's Araucania [ah-rao-kah-NEE-ah] region contains many of the indigenous Moluche people,
a group of Mapuches. Its German minority is mostly settled in the southern cities of Osorno and
Valdivia. This country's copper industry is centered at its northern city of Antofagasta. Its congress
meets in Valparaiso [val-par-"eye"-EE-soh], a port city on the Pacific Ocean. The north of this country
contains most of the Atacama Desert. This country controls Easter Island and most of an island
group bordered by the Strait of Magellan called Tierra del Fuego. Name this country with short
borders with Peru and Bolivia and a very long border with Argentina.
ANSWER: (Republic of) Chile [or (Republica de) Chile]
A controversy exists over whether this country's Monte Verde site predates the Clovis people as the
oldest civilization in the Americas. Its Maipo river valley is famed for Cabernet Sauvignon production.
This country's Trancura River is a popular rafting destination, as it flows past the active volcano Villarrica.
Its Brunswick Peninsula is the site of its southernmost major city, Punta Areanas. One island possessed by
this country is also called Rapa Nui and is known for its birdman cult and giant moai. It administers the
Juan Fernandez Islands and Easter Island as special territories. For 10 points, name this South American
country which shares Tierra del Fuego and a long border with Argentina.
ANSWER: Republic of Chile
This country's highest point is Nevado Ojos del Salado, found on its eastern border, and that
mountain's range is responsible for the driest desert in the world, the (*) Atacama, in this country.
Since 1990, this country's legislature has met in Valparaiso, a coastal city seventy-five miles north of its
capital. For 10 points, name this country whose offshore holdings include Easter Island and which has a
capital at Santiago.
ANSWER: Republic of Chile [or Republica de Chile]
The genus Sapindaceae is alternatively named for this object. Its name can be translated as "woman in ice"
or "sacred winds of the moon." Located in the southern part of the Avenue of Volcanoes, its collapse
temporarily dammed the Rio Chambo. About 20 miles northwest of Riobamba, it was first explored by
Alexander von Humboldt. Its sister peak in the Cordillera Occidental is Carihuairazo. One of the routes up
it is the Whymper route, named for the first man to scale it. Its summit is the furthest point from the center
of the Earth. For 10 points, identify this South American peak, the tallest in Ecuador and second tallest in
the Andes.
ANSWER: Chimborazo
On an undefined border with a neighbor to its south, this country claims the volcano Mount Baitou
and its crater lake, known as Heaven Lake. This country's northwest is the site of the Tarim Basin,
which contains the Takla Makan Desert. The (*) Loess (LESS) Plateau in this country covers a portion
of the basin of its second longest river, which takes its name from the color given to it by the loess. For 10
points, name this country that has the Yellow and Yantze Rivers and a population of over one billion.
ANSWER: People's Republic of China [or Zhongguo; or Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo]
The large Tarim Basin is part of this country, whose northern border is partly formed by the Amur
river. The Taklimakan desert is in its east, and this country is north of the Yalu river. This country
shares Mt. Everest with (*) Nepal and includes the region of Tibet. Including rivers like the Yangtze and
the Yellow, for 10 points, name this country featuring the cities of Shanghai and Beijing.
ANSWER: People's Republic of China (do NOT accept "Republic of China")
The death of two Muslim workers in this country caused riots in 2009 in Urumqi (oo-ROOM-chee). This
country's Muslim population includes the Hui ethnicity and a group that has its own Autonomous Region in
the northwest. That ethnic group is the Uyghurs (WEE-gurs), who mostly live in this country's Xinjiang
(SHIN-jahng) province. For 10 points, name this country that placed a ban on the Falun Gong following
thousands of members protesting in Beijing.
ANSWER: People's Republic of China [or Zhongguo; or Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo]
One dish from this country is a kind of steamed bun dipped in sweet condensed milk. This country is
home to a place known as the Stone Forest, which has been renamed after its use as a filming location for
Avatar. In 1994, this country started building the world's second-largest electricity-generating hydroelectric
dam, known as the Three Gorges Dam. This country managed to reduce some of the pollution of its capital
city in time for the 2008 Summer Olympics. For ten points, name this Asian country with the highest
population in the world.
ANSWER: People's Republic of China [or PRC; or Zhongguo; or Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo; do not accept or prompt on "Republic of China"]
One territorial dispute between this nation and a southern neighbor was settled at the Battle of the
Paracel Islands. This nation maintains control over the Mischief Reef in the Spratly Islands, and it also
disputes a thin strip of land adjacent the Line of Actual Control, called Aksai Chin, with India. This nation
also maintains control of East Turkestan, which has a large population of (WEE-gurz) Uighurs. For the
point, name this nation which has nominal control over Macau and Hong Kong.
ANSWER: People's Republic of China
The widely memorized poem "A Night Mooring by Maple Bridge" describes hearing the bells of
the Cold Mountain one of these structures. One of these structures is named in honor of the mount of
Kumarajiva, who transported scriptures. The Yufo one of these structures houses a noted jade
statue. The "Flying Peak," which legendarily transported itself from (*) India, is found at another one
of these structures, the Soul's Retreat or Lingyin one. Another one of these structures is found on Mount
Song and is home to the Pagoda Forest. For 10 points, identify this kind of Chinese religious building,
examples of which include the home of martial arts-practicing monks at Shaolin.
ANSWER: Buddhist temples in China [or Buddhist monasteries until "monks" is read]
A maligned practice during these events is nicknamed "digging your grave." A bent finger is
intermittently tapped twice during these events, which make use of a Lazy Susan, or a circular rotating tray.
The phrase "ganbei!" (gone-BAY) is often yelled during these events. Baozi (BOUT-suh) is offered near
the end of these events, types of which include hot pot and dim sum. For ten points, name these Chinese
events whose participants wield chopsticks.
ANSWER: Chinese meals [or Chinese breakfasts; Chinese lunches; Chinese dinners; or any other such answer]
The most sparsely populated one of these twenty-two entities has a capital at Xining (SHIN-ing) and
hosts a historic lake which is home to the migratory stopover Bird Island. Another of these entities is
assigned control, on paper, of Quemoy and Matsu, which are under the de facto control of another
government. In addition to Qinghai and Fujian, these entities include one which is coterminous with a
southern island, Heinan, and cuisine namesakes such as Hunan and Sichuan. For 10 points, identify these
most common administrative divisions of the world's most populous country.
ANSWER: provinces of China [accept obvious equivalents; or sheng]
One of these places in Lima, Peru contains restaurants serving "chifa" (CHEE-fah) cuisine. The Six
Companies is a benevolent society found in one of these places in San Francisco, which also contained
secret societies called "tongs." The example in Manhattan is the largest in the Western Hemisphere. For 10
points, name these enclaves of people from places such as Guangdong and Shanghai.
ANSWER: Chinatowns
This city's "four avenues" surround its central square, and at the center of that square is the city's
original cathedral. That cathedral was replaced in 2013 by the transitional "Cardboard Cathedral" after the
original became structurally unsound. This city was founded by the Canterbury Association, which lends its
name to the surrounding region. Its suburb of Lyttelton was the launching point for Ernest Shackleton's
Antarctic expedition. Programs called "Gap Filler" and "Greening the Rubble" have created community
centers and gardens in this city's debris from two large earthquakes in 2010 and 2011. For ten points, name
this largest city of New Zealand's South Island.
ANSWER: Christchurch, New Zealand
Of the several highways designated I-275, the one circling this city is the only one that is a complete loop;
that eighty-four-mile beltway passes through three states, and intersects Interstates 75, 71 and 74. The
Roebling suspension bridge is one of the more than half-dozen of this city's spans over its nearby river. The
city's major airport is located across the river, in Covington. It is the seat of Hamilton County, and the
largest city in both the first and second Congressional districts of Ohio. For 10 points, name this city located
near the Kentucky border, the namesake of a disgusting kind of chili.
ANSWER: Cincinnati, Ohio
One of these places is on the southern end of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains. Another of these places is
the location of Elkhorn Tavern and contains a portion of the Trail of Tears. Those locations of these type
are Glorieta Pass and Pea Ridge. The oldest of these west of the Mississippi River is at Wilson's Creek in
Missouri. One of these places is the location of Water Oaks Pond and the Peach Orchard as well as a
sunken road that became known as the Hornet's Nest, and Cemetery Hill and Seminary Ridge are located
at one of these places that also is the location of Little Round Top. For 10 points, Shiloh and Gettysburg are
what types of locations on which military actions took place in the 1860s?
ANSWER: American Civil War Battlegrounds [or reasonable equivalents, such as "Places on whic Civil War battles were fought"]
During the last Census in 2000, this city was found to have the thirty-third largest population in the US, but
since then, it has suffered from large population decline. The present mayor is Frank G. Jackson, and the
current Music Director of the city's orchestra is Franz Welser-Most. This city is located on the banks of
Lake Eire, and the Cuyahoga River flows through it. Most famously, this city houses the Rock and Roll Hall
of Fame. FTP, name this second largest city of Ohio, home of the Indians, the Browns and Lebron James.
ANSWER: Cleveland
One of this city's highways is known as the Memorial Shoreway. Suburbs of this city include Euclid
and Shaker Heights, and it sits on land once part of Connecticut's Western Reserve. Its architectural
landmarks include the Key Tower and a museum featuring a tower and glass pyramid, but it may be better
known for being the site of a waterway which was so polluted it caught fire, the Cuyahoga River. For 10
points, name this home of I.M. Pei's Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and derided "mistake on the lake", a city
in northeastern Ohio.
ANSWER: Cleveland
A nightlife district in this city is known as The Flats, and its park system is known as the Emerald
Necklace. NASA's Glenn Research Center is located in and around this city. This city is at the mouth of a
river that caught fire in 1969 due to excessive chemical waste. For 10 points, name this Ohio city south of
Lake Erie on the Cuyahoga River that is the location of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum.
ANSWER: Cleveland
This city is named after a man who worked for surveyors of the Connecticut Land Company, as it once
belonged to Connecticut's Western Reserve. This American city has a museum with a glass pyramid
designed by I.M. Pei. This city is located at the mouth of a river which notoriously caught fire in June of
1969. It is home to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. For 10 points, name this second-largest Ohio city,
located on the mouth of the Cuyahoga River and on the shores of Lake Erie.
ANSWER: Cleveland
A large quantity of this substance is located on Hopi lands near Black Mesa, Arizona and a small quantity
of it was found at Coos Bay, Oregon. The Bowen region in Queensland produces much of Australia's share
of this substance. The Netherlands government bought out and stopped the mining of this substance in
Limbourg. The West Midlands, especially south Staffordshire near Birmingham, were a major source of this
substance for Britain and most of the United States- current production of it comes from the Powder River
basin. For 10 points, identify this mineral whose varieties include anthracite, a noted deposit of which has
been underneath Centralia, Pennsylvania and burning for forty years.
ANSWER: coal
One plausible origin for this modern-day English term is the name of a mythical land where skies rain
cheese and nuns frequently expose their bottoms, an imagined utopia for many peasants. This term also can
refer to people born within earshot of the bells of the St. Mary-le-bow church, which was destroyed during
the Blitz. Henry Higgins attempts to erase this identity from the flower-girl Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion.
These people often use rhyming slang like "namby pamby," address people as "govnor," and usually drop
the "h" sound. For ten points, give this name for a popular London accent linked, for better or for worse,
with lower-class people.
ANSWER: Cockney
This city's Museum Ludwig contains 900 Picasso paintings, while its Roman-Germanic museum
contains artifacts such as the Dionysus Mosaic. Since 2008, couples have placed "love locks" on this city's
Hohenzollern Bridge. Since World War II, it has rebuilt the prominent twelve Romanesque churches in its
old town. Nicholas of Verdun designed the golden Shrine of the Three Kings for this city's namesake
Gothic cathedral. For 10 points, name this German city on the Rhine, the namesake of a kind of perfume.
ANSWER: Cologne [or Koeln]
The city of Pereira in this country is located in the western part of this nation and serves as the
capital of the state of Risaralda. The longest river in this country runs north from the Cordillera
Central; that river is the Rio Magdalena. A popular beach resort in this country is the Caribbean
city of (*) Cartagena (carta-henna). At one point, drug trafficking in this country was centered in the cities
of Cali and Medellin (medi-yeen). For ten points, name this South American nation which borders Panama
and has capital at Bogota.
ANSWER: Republic of Colombia (or Republica de Colombia)
Much of this country's southern border is delineated by the Putumayo River, a tributary of the Amazon, and
the city of Leticia on the Amazon is the largest south of the Putumayo. Its highest peak lies in the Sierra
Nevada de Santa Marta, which in turn is just east of a large swamp near the mouth of the Magdalena River.
This nation also controls most of the Guajira Peninsula, and the Andes split into three branches in it. This
country's Atrato River was once considered for an Atlantic-Pacific Canal. Its other large cities include
Medellin, Cartagena de Indias, and Barranquilla. For 10 points, name this country whose capital is Bogota.
ANSWER: Republic of Colombia
This nation's southernmost city is the port of Leticia, and its city of Buenaventura is often called the world's
wettest city. This country occupies the northern portion of the Guajira Peninsula. The Cauca department is
home to its third-largest city Cali. This nation's Magdalena River empties into the ocean at the city of
Barranquilla, and this nation is known for its emerald production. Its border with a northern neighbor is
formed by the Darien Gap, and this country is home to the cities of Medellin and Cartagena. For 10 points,
name this South American nation troubled by a guerilla group called FARC, which has its capital at Bogota.
ANSWER: Colombia
This state's Fish Canyon Tuff was created 26 million years ago by an eruption in the La Garita
Caldera, while its Castle Rock was the result of earlier activity in the Thirtyninemile Volcanic Field.
Mining sites in this state include the Rangely Oil Field, the Summitville Mine in the San Juan
Mountains, and Cripple Creek. In 2004, part of this state's San Luis Valley was designated (*) Great
Sand Dunes National Park. This state is also home to the deep Black Canyon of the Gunnison as well as the
Spruce Tree House and Cliff Palace at Mesa Verde National Park. For 10 points, identify this state that
contains the Front Range and Pike's Peak.
ANSWER: Colorado
One national park in this state contains the historic Beaver Meadows Visitor Center and is accessible via the
city of Estes Park. This state contains a park with the highest sand dunes in North America and Medano
Creek, which flows in punctuated bursts instead of a constant flow. The Black Ridge Canyon Wilderness
lies on the namesake plateau of this state, which contains 53 "fourteeners," including Long's Peak, Mount
Evans, and Mount Elbert, the tallest of the Rocky Mountains. For 10 points, name this state, home to Pike's
Peak and Denver.
ANSWER: Colorado
This state is home to the Roaring Fork River, which flows past the town of Woody Creek, where Hunter S.
Thompson painted a large middle finger on the roof of a barn to greet air travelers arriving at nearby Aspen.
National parks in this state include Great Sand Dunes and the Anasazi site at Mesa Verde, and suburbs of
this state's capital include Cherry Creek and Aurora. this state features a large university in its city of
Boulder, a city located along the Front Range, a major mountain range in this state. For 10 points, name this
state home to a large portion of the Rocky Mountains, with capital at Denver.
ANSWER: Colorado
This state's Trail Ridge Road is the highest highway in the United States. This state contains Mt. Harvard,
Mt. Princeton, and Mt. Yale in its Collegiate Peaks range, and its national parks include Great Sand Dunes
and Black Canyon of the Gunnison. Containing Dinosaur National Monument on its western border and the
historic Mesa Verde, its highest peak is Mt. Elbert, though another mountain in this state inspired "America
the Beautiful." For 10 points, identify this state, home to Pike's Peak, which contains the cities of Aurora,
Boulder, and its capital, Denver.
ANSWER: Colorado
Comanche and Pawnee are the two National Grasslands in this state, where Gunnison National Forest is
located just south of the town of Glenwood Springs. Parks in this state include Great Sand Dunes and the
cliff dwellings at Mesa Verde. The United States Air Force Academy is located in this state. Crested Butte,
Breckenridge, Aspen, and Winter Park are ski resorts located in this state. It has the highest mean altitude of
any state, and its mountains include Mt. Elbert and Pike's Peak. For 10 points, name this "Rocky Mountain"
state with capital at Denver.
ANSWER: Colorado
Along with the state to its north, this state contains the Front Range Urban Corridor. The highest
incorporated town in America, Leadville, is also found here. It is home to Mount Elbert and the
Western Slope, which is the location of (*) Telluride, Vail, Aspen, and other ski resorts. This state, which
forms the northeastern part of the Four Corners, contains Pike's Peak and cities such as Pueblo and Boulder.
For 10 points, name this state whose capital is Denver.
ANSWER: Colorado
One river with this name, fed by the Salado River, flows through central Argentina and empties into
the ocean south of Bahia Blanca. Another river of this name is the longest to be completely contained
within Texas and flows through Austin. A third river with this name flows through (*) Grand Junction
and passes by Yuma before entering Mexico. That river flows through the man-made Lake Mead, empties
into the Gulf of California, and originates in its namesake state near Boulder. For 10 points, give this name
shared by the river that passes through the Grand Canyon and the state with capital Denver.
ANSWER: Colorado
The Dolores and Virgin Rivers are tributaries of this larger river, and it flows by the Vermillion Cliffs
National Monument. Fort Collins is located to the East of the Poudre Pas Lake, where this river begins. One
can go gambling in the casino at Lake Havasu City which lies along this river, while Interstate Highway 10
crosses it near the city of Blythe. The Gila River is a tributary of this river which empties into the Gulf of
California, while Lake Powell lies on it due to the creation of the Glen Canyon dam. For 10 points, identify
this long river in the American Southwest which shares its name with a state and also passes through the
Grand Canyon.
ANSWER: Colorado River
The endangered razorback sucker is native to this question of water, which can be found in Dead Horse
Point State Park and is fed by the Paria River near Lee's Ferry. It is also fed by the Green River
upstream from the Powell Dam; other dams include the Davis and Parker Dams, the latter of which
forms Lake (*) Havasu. Known as the Grand River until 1921, it begins at Poudre Pass Lake in Rocky
Mountain National Park and forms the western border of the Mexican state of Sonora before emptying into
the Sea of Cortez. Lake Mead was formed from the Hoover Dam's blockage of, for 10 points, what river
that formed the Glen and Grand Canyons.
ANSWER: Colorado River
This river traces its headwaters to the La Poudre Pass. At Glenwood Canyon, the Hanging Lake flows into
this river, and the canal joining this river and Lake Havasu is spanned by the 1831 London Bridge. Cities
along this river include Moab and Yuma, where the Gila River flows into this river. The All-American
Canal is used to irrigate the Imperial Valley with waters from this river upon which (*) Lake Mead was
created after the Hoover Dam was built. This river forms the boundary between Baja California and Sonora
before emptying into the Gulf of California. For 10 points, name this river on which the Grand Canyon lies.
ANSWER: Colorado River
lake near La Poudre Pass is considered to be the source of this river. Part of the southern stretch
of this river forms the border between Sonora and Baja California. Near the city of Yuma, this river
joins with the Gila River. In the 1900s, heavy rainfall caused this river to overflow and form what is
now the Salton Sea. Lake (*) Mead was formed from the water of this river during the construction of the
Hoover Dam. For 10 points, name this river of the Southwestern U.S. that forms the border between
California and Arizona after flowing through the Grand Canyon.
ANSWER: Colorado River
The Roaring Fork, Gunnison, and Green Rivers are all tributaries of this river, and in the early 20th
century, water from this river helped refill the Salton Sea. Uranium waste from the Atlas Minerals
Corporation forms the Moab Tailings near this river, and the All-American Canal was built to divert
its water to (*) irrigate nearby Imperial Valley. This river forms the border between Arizona and
California, and Lake Mead was created on it after the construction of the Hoover Dam. For 10 points,
identify this river in the American Southwest that runs through Grand Junction in its namesake state, as well
as the Grand Canyon.
ANSWER: Colorado River
The Havasupai people live along this river. Its headwaters are west of La Poudre Pass and flow into Lake
Granby. The Gunnison and Gila rivers feed this river. Its path includes Lake Powell, formed by this
steadily-shrinking river's Glen Canyon Dam. This river powers the Hoover Dam, but no longer reaches the
Gulf of California. For 10 points, name this river that runs through the Grand Canyon and shares its name
with a rectangular state.
ANSWER: Colorado River [accept Grand Canyon until "river" is read]
A plan to build the Yuma Desalting Plant might prevent damage from salty water originating from this river.
Valley of Fire State Park leads to one of this river's famous locations into which the Virgin River empties.
The Gila River is a major tributary of this river, which is also joined by the Green River. This river, which
serves as the source of water for irrigation of the Imperial Valley, contains the Hoover Dam, which creates
Lake Mead. For 10 points, name this river which empties into the Gulf of California and flows through the
Grand Canyon.
ANSWER: Colorado River
One tributary of this river is fed by the Duchesne and Yampa rivers; that tributary of this river is called the
Green river. The Black Canyon is formed by this river, which then flows south where it is met by the Gila
River near the city of Yuma. The town of Page is near the Glen Canyon Dam on this river. A Compact
named after this river divvies up its water between six states, although California's use of the surplus water
has caused calls for renegotiation. Lake Powell and Lake Mead are both formed by dams on this river. For
10 points, name this river of the Southwestern U.S. that flows through the Grand Canyon.
ANSWER: Colorado River
This river is fed by the Bill Williams River at the southern end of Lake Havasu. It is fed near its
origin by the Gunnison River and is then fed by the Green River soon after flowing past Moab. This
river also flows close to the terminus of the Gila River near Yuma. This passes through Glen Canyon,
the location of Lake Powell, and through the Black Canyon, which is the location of Hoover Dam and
Lake Mead. This river eventually flows into the Gulf of California after entering Mexico. Name this
river that goes through the Grand Canyon and goes through Grand Junction in its namesake state.
ANSWER: Colorado River
Located in the Long Island Sound, an island with this name was once called Little Pea Island. One
city with this name is home to the main campus of the University of Missouri, and the Yakima,
Spokane, and Snake Rivers are tributaries of a river with this name. That same river also forms the
border between (*) Oregon and Washington, and this word names an Ivy League university in New York
City. For 10 points, identify this word that names the capital of South Carolina, as well as the federal district
that contains the Smithsonian and the White House.
ANSWER: Columbia
Senators Charles McNary and Clarence Dill based their campaigns around public ownership of dams
on this river, and the Celilo Canal was built to facilitate travel on it. Until about 13,000 years ago,
this river discharged water from the melting Missoula Glacier, resulting in around forty catastrophic
floods. Construction projects on this river were initiated by the Bonneville Power Administration,
and it became shallower after Mount (*) Saint Helens erupted. Banks Lake is formed by the major
hydroelectric installation on this river, the Grand Coulee dam. Rising in the Rocky Mountains in British
Columbia and receiving water from the Snake and Willamette Rivers, for 10 points, name this fourth-largest
American river which forms most of the border between Oregon and Washington.
ANSWER: Columbia River
The Celilo Canal connects two points on this river, and it flows by cities like Revelstoke, Longview,
and Astoria. Massive amount of radioactive waste have been present in this river since the 1940s due
to leaks from the Hanford Site. Man-made lakes on this river include (*) Kinbasket, Umatilla, and
Franklin Roosevelt. Both the Grand Coulee and Bonneville Dams are on this river, and its major tributaries
include the Willamette and Snake. For ten points, name this river that forms the most of the border between
Oregon and Washington, the longest in the Pacific Northwest.
ANSWER: Columbia River
Maya Lin's Confluence Project is a series of art installations located along this river. Navigation on this
river was once impeded by Celilo Falls before it was flooded by The Dalles Dam, located near the entrance
to this river's namesake gorge. The city of Pasco is located at the junction of this river and its longest
tributary, the Snake. Also located on this river is Franklin D. Roosevelt Lake, a reservoir formed by the
Grand Coulee Dam. For 10 points, the border between Oregon and Washington is partly formed by what
largest river of the Pacific Northwest?
ANSWER: Columbia River
Lake Umatilla was created by the opening of the John Jay Dam on this river. Its namesake Bar prevented
early explorers from sailing up it. Lewis and Clark looked for a passage between it and the Missouri River,
but none was found. Had it been found, a passage from New Orleans to the Pacific would have been
opened up. The Snake River drains into, FTP, what large river which forms part of the border between
Oregon and Washington, named for an early explorer of the Americas.
ANSWER: Columbia River
Among this river's tributaries are the Klickitat, Cowlitz (KOE-litz), Pend Oreille (pawn-doe-ray) and
Okanogan (oak-uh-noggin), and it passes through the cities of Invermere and Golden in one country it flows
through. Among the notable dams along this river include the Wanapum, Priest Rapids, and the Bonneville,
and the Channeled Scablands are a series of coulees along this river, the most notable of which gives its
name to this river's most notable dam. Flowing through Wenatchee, Kennewick, and Pasco, one of its most
treacherous sections for gamers is The Dalles (dallz). The site of Grand Coulee Dam, and forming a large
part of the Oregon-Washington border, FTP, name this river.
ANSWER: Columbia River
Tributaries of this river include the Umatilla, the Incomappleux, and the Goldstream River, and minor
towns on it include Boardman, Cascade Locks and Pateros. The sections near its mouth around Fort Stevens
and its namesake Bar are still especially treacherous to navigate. Due to significant manmade alteration of
the river, it is open to navigation all the way to Clarkston, leaving as the last free-flowing portion a fifty-one
mile reach around the Hanford Nuclear Reservation. Massive Ice Age floods, caused by the breaking of an
ice dam near Missoula, carved its namesake Gorge and the nearby Grand Coulee. For 10 points, name this
heavily dammed largest river of the Pacific Northwest.
ANSWER: Columbia River
This river goes by the city of The Dalles [daalz], which is close to where Lake Umatilla was created
with the construction of John Day Dam. The early part of this river includes dams called Mica and
Revelstoke. The Bonneville Slide created a mudslide called the Bridge of the Gods which rested on
this river. On this river lies the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Lake, a result of the construction of a dam
that uses fish ladders to ease the climbing of migrating salmon, called the Grand Coulee Dam. This
river's largest tributary, which goes through Hells Canyon, is the Snake. Name this river that flows
to the Pacific Ocean in the Northwest, setting most of the border between Oregon and Washington.
ANSWER: Columbia River
This river flows north from its namesake lake where it meets the Kicking Horse River at Golden after
flowing past Invermere. This river flows past the Arrow, Revelstoke, and Kinbasket Lakes and it merges
with the Pend-Oreille River after rounding the Selkirk Mountains. Lake Roosevelt was formed by this river
due to the construction of the Grand Coulee Dam, and this river merges with the Yakima and another
tributary in the Tri-Cities area. Travelling between Vancouver and Portland before flowing into the Pacific
Ocean, for 10 points, name this river which receives the Snake and forms part of the border between Oregon
and Washington.
ANSWER: Columbia River
Features along the upper section of this river include Kinbasket Lake and the cities of Golden and
Invermere. The Potholes Reservoir is located in this river's basin. Lake Umatilla is formed in this river by
the John Day Dam, which lies just east of The Dalles. One of this river's tributaries is called the "Mult-nomah 
River" on William Clark's map of the Lewis and Clark expedition, though that tributary is today known
as the Willamette. This river's largest tributary, which flows through Hell's Canyon, is the Snake. For 10
points, name this river which flows into the Pacific Ocean in the northwest United States and forms the
western part of the boundary between Washington and Oregon.
ANSWER: Columbia River
Home to the Wallula Gap, this river's geologic history included a mudslide called the "Bridge of the
Gods," for which a modern cantilever bridge over it is named. Two of its major hydroelectric dams,
equipped with 'fish-ladders- to help salmon climb, are the John Jay and [*] Bonneville Dams. It forms
its infamous 'bar- of shoals near Astoria, its confluence with the Willamette River is in the city of Portland,
and its largest tributary is the Snake River. For 10 points, name this Pacific Northwest river which forms the
border between Oregon and Washington State.
ANSWER: Columbia River
This river passes near the city of Kettle Falls, although the rapids that give the city its name no
longer exist. Tributaries of this river include the Okanogan River, and this river passes through the
artificial Franklin D. Roosevelt Lake. In 1979, the Chief Joseph Dam opened on this river. The 1915
opening of the Celilo Canal provided access to (+) Lewiston from this river, although the Celilo Falls
were eventually flooded by the construction of The Dalles Dam on this river. An important source of
power in the region comes from the Grand (*) Coulee Dam on this river. It is the largest North American
river to flow into the Pacific Ocean. For 10 points, name this river that provides much of the border
between Oregon and Washington State.
ANSWER: Columbia River
One structure that lies along this river is the plutonium-producing Hanford Site. The city of Astoria
lies near this river's mouth, and this river flows past Golden and Invermere. "Fish-ladders" help
salmon cross this river's numerous hydroelectric dams, which include John Jay and Bonneville. The
Yakima River joins this river at Tri-Cities, while Franklin Delano Roosevelt Lake is formed by the
(*) Grand Coulee Dam on this river. This river is joined by the Willamette at Portland, while its largest
tributary goes through Hell's Canyon and is called the Snake. For ten points, name this river which lies on
the border between Washington and Oregon.
ANSWER: Columbia River
A city in Indiana by this name is the location of First Christian Church and North Christian Church,
both designed by Eero Saarinen. A city of this name in Mississippi was the birthplace of Tennessee
Williams. The Chattahoochee River runs through a city of this name that is located just north of the U.S.
Army Infantry School in Fort Benning, Georgia. The largest city of this name is located at the junction of
the Scioto and Oletangy rivers, and is the location of a zoo that employed Jack Hanna. For 10 points, give
this name of numerous United States cities, including the location of Ohio State University and the capital
of Ohio.
ANSWER: Columbus
This city's Old Deaf School Park contains a topiary rendering of the painting Sunday Afternoon
on the Island of La Grand Jatte. The Batelle Memorial Institute is headquartered in this city, whose
historic monuments include the Camp Chase Confederate Cemetery and James Thurber's house.
Found at the confluence of the Olentangy and (*) Scioto (sai-OH-tuh) Rivers, it is the seat of Franklin
County. It is the capital of a state whose other large cities include Dayton and Toledo. For 10 points, name
this capital of Ohio.
ANSWER: Columbus, Ohio
In this country, women apply yellow facial cream called m-sidazanou in order to block out the sun.
One can find the Humblot's Flycatcher only in this country. President Said Mohammad of this
country was overthrown in a 1995 coup by Mohamed Taki. The French mercenary Bob Denard
extracted the natural resources of this country when its first president Ahmed (*) Abdallah came to
power. In April 2005, this archipelago's volcano of Karthala violently erupted. One island of this country
came to be known as the "pearl of the Indian Ocean." Much of the world's supply of ylang-ylang and
palmarosa can be extracted from its island of Anjouan. Other islands in this country include Mayotte and
Moheli. For 10 points, name this group of African islands between Mozambique and Madagascar.
ANSWER: Union of the Comoros
In 1957, the US's oldest aquarium was moved to this place. A recent book by Claire Prentice
describes how, in 1905, a tribe of Igorot people was placed in this place's Luna Park. This place is
easily accessed via Stillwell Avenue. Diane Arbus's photos of this place include Masked Boy with
Friends and Two Girls on a (*) Beach, while "I Am Waiting" and "Junkman's Obbligato" are two poems
from
a collection named for it by Lawrence Ferlinghetti. This place was originally named for the diversity of
rabbits
found in it. Requiem for a Dream is set in this place, where Nathan's Famous hot dogs originated. For 10
points, name this so-called "island" in New York City known for its amusement parks.
ANSWER: Coney Island [prompt on "New York (City)" or "Brooklyn"]
A widening of this river that holds Mbamu Island is the Pool Malebo. This river passes near the city
of Matadi, which is near this river's Inga Falls. One of its feeder rivers is the namesake of a deadly
virus first identified in 1976, Ebola. This river is generally considered to begin at the Boyoma Falls,
which are at the end of the Lualaba River, though this river's main tributary is the Chambeshi River.
Its mouth help forms the northern border of Angola. Name this river formerly called the Zaire that
flows to the Atlantic Ocean and which flows between Brazzaville and Kinshasa, which are the capitals
of the two countries named for this river.
ANSWER: Congo River [prompt on Zaire River]
In 2006 a new species of the predatory Raiamas genus of fish was discovered in a tributary of this river,
the Inkisi River, and other tributaries of it include the Lomami. This second most voluminous river in the
world includes a tributary that also runs through Angola, the Kasai River. A railroad beginning at Matadi
was built to bypass the non-navigable Livingstone Falls on this river, which also includes the Stanley Falls.
At Boyoma Falls, the Lualaba River becomes this river, whose sources include Lake Mweru and Lake
Tanganyika. For 10 points, name this waterway, the second-longest in Africa, that flows through cities of
its namesake country like Brazzaville and Kinshasa.
ANSWER: Congo River [or Zaire River; accept Inkisi river before "tributary"]
One awesome species that lives in this river is the Giant Tigerfish, which has been known to attack humans
and crocodiles. The Inga Dams lie on this river, which features the Malebo Pool. This river is the second
most voluminous but the deepest in the world and its tributaries include the Lomami and the Kasai, which
runs through Angola. The Livingston Falls prevent boat access to the sea through this river, and it also
includes the Stanley Falls. Sources of this river include Lake Tanganyika. Kinshasa and Brazzaville lie on,
for 10 points, what second largest river in Africa and namesake of two central African countries.
ANSWER: Congo River
A kingdom named for this river had its capital at Sao Salvador. Its Inga Falls has a large hydroelectric
power plant. The end of this river is located in Katanga Province. This river has a series of rapids called the
Livingstone Falls and has part of its source in Lake Tanganyika. For part of the twentieth century, this river
was called the Zaire River. For 10 points, name this long central African river found in the name of two
nations whose capitals are Brazzaville and Kinshasa.
ANSWER: Congo River
Before this river reaches the Bateke (bah-TEH-kay) Plateau, it receives water from two of its main
tributaries, the Ubangi (oo-BON-gee) and Sangha. Part of this river includes Inga Falls, which are part of
the Livingstone Falls, and this river's Boyoma Falls were once called Stanley Falls. Bamu Island is located
in an extension of this river called Malebo Pool, which borders the capital cities Brazzaville and Kinshasa.
For 10 points, name this second-longest African river, that shares its name with two countries.
ANSWER: Congo River
Edgar Allen Poe may have made the first reference to this question of water in Western literature, but
erroneously reported it to be located in Libya. Expansions of the dams near this river's Inga Falls have been
proposed to create a massive hydroelectric power plant. This river contains a series of cataracts called
Boyoma Falls, though they were earlier named for Henry Morton Stanley. It is fed by the Lulalaba river,
which itself originates from Lake Mweru and Lake Tangyanika. Two national capitals lie directly across
this river from one another and are named Kinshasa and Brazzaville. For 10 points, name this central
African river that lends its name to two countries.
ANSWER: Congo River
One of this river's headstreams flows through Lakes Bangweulu and Mweru. This river forms the
Malebo Pool, and its source is the Chambeshi River. Boyoma Falls lies on this river, and after it
reaches Kisangani, it is no longer called the Lualaba. This river's mouth lies downstream of Boma,
which is located south of Cabinda. Livingstone Falls is located on this river, which receives the Kasai
and Ubangi Rivers. This river, which flows through (*) Katanga and receives water from Lake
Tanganyika, separates the cities of Brazzaville and Kinshasa. For ten points, name this African river which
flows through a namesake Democratic Republic.
ANSWER: Congo River (or Zaire River; accept Lualaba River until "Malebo")
This river's Inga Dam will soon produce double the output of the Three Gorges Dam, and it was
independently explored by Diogo Cam and James Tuckey. This waterway has tributaries including the
Inkisi, Sangha and Kasai rivers, while it reaches the ocean near Muanda. Forming Boyoma or Stanley
Falls, this river flows through Kisangani and the Malebo Pool while its largest tributaries include the
Lualaba and Ubangi. The city of Brazzaville lays on, for 10 points, which second-longest river in Africa,
once known as the Zaire?
ANSWER: Congo River [accept Zaire River before it is read]
This river contains a seventy-five-mile stretch of rough rapids dubbed "The Gates of Hell." The
central portion of this river's basin is known as the "cuvette" and contains the second-largest
rainforest in the world. This river splits off at a point, creating a lake-like area now known as the
Malebo Pool. The (*) Lualaba is this river's largest tributary. The cities of Kinshasa and Brazzaville lie on
the banks of this river, which lends its name to the countries both of those cities are located in. For 10
points, name this major river of central Africa, the second longest on the continent.
ANSWER: Congo River
This river contains a seventy-five-mile stretch of rough rapids dubbed "The Gates of Hell." The central
portion of this river's basin is known as the "cuvette" and contains the second-largest rainforest in the
world. This river splits off at a point, creating a lake-like area now known as the Malebo Pool. The Lualaba
is this river's largest tributary. The cities of Kinshasa and Brazzaville lie on the banks of this river, which
lends its name to the countries both of those cities are located in. For 10 points, name this major river of
central Africa, the second longest on the continent.
ANSWER: Congo River
This state's vacation spot of Candlewood Lake was created by hydroelectric damming. Its two most
populous cities contain shuttered gun factories from the Remington and Winchester companies. A town in
this state whose Union Station clock tower reflects a historical clock company is Waterbury, and its most
southwesterly county is Fairfield County. It formerly hosted America's Lego brick factory in its town of
Enfield, and P.T. Barnum got his start in this state's most populous city, a site of urban decay called
Bridgeport. For 10 points, name this state where Old Saybrook sits by the terminus of a namesake river,
whose cities include New Haven and Hartford.
ANSWER: Connecticut
This state's far western area includes the manmade Candlewood Lake, whose northern end juts into
Litchfield County. In 2008, a large LEGO factory closed in this state's town of Enfield. Sun-Myung
Moon's Unification Movement runs a university near the Housatonic River in this state's populous
coastal city of [*] Bridgeport, and the town of Old Saybrook lies by the delta of its namesake river. Mayor
John deStefano was sued by firefighters in this state's city of New Haven, home to Yale University. For 10
points, name this New England state with capital at Hartford.
ANSWER: Connecticut
This state lost the Oblong and the Congamond Notch in territorial disputes. The first nuclear submarine, the
U.S.S. Nautilus, is now a museum in its town of Groton. The peak Sleeping Giant overlooks a polling center
at this state's Quinnipiac University in Hamden. Its namesake river passes Windsor Locks on its way to Old
Saybrook. The Mohegan Sun casino is close to its towns of Mystic and New London, and its wealthy cities
of Greenwich and Stamford are in Fairfield County. A debated high speed train proposal bypasses its cities
of Bridgeport and New Haven. For 10 points, name this "Nutmeg State" north of Long Island Sound, with
capital at Hartford.
ANSWER: State of Connecticut
The pre-historic Lake Hitchcock was formed when this river was blocked by a moraine in the
Pleistocene epoch. The New Deal-era creation of the Quabbin Reservoir diverted flow from its major
tributary, the Chicopee. Thomas Cole's painting The Oxbow is a depiction of this river from nearby Mount
Holyoke. Its massive 1936 flood occurred when huge chunks of ice breached the Vernon Dam and
inundated the towns of Hadley, Hatfield and Northhampton. This river flows into the Long Island Sound
and rises near the U.S. border with Quebec. For ten points, name this major New England river which forms
the border of Vermont and New Hampshire and flows through Hartford.
ANSWER: Connecticut River
Its tributaries include the Mascoma and Mill rivers. The Westfield River meets up with this river near a
non-Illinois Springfield, and the Deerfield River meets it just upstream. Interstate 83 crosses this river in the
north, while Interstate 90 crosses it near the Chicopee. Its name is Algonquian for "long tidal river", and the
"Great Attack" occurred at Essex along this river during the War of 1812. Named for a state which has had
former governors Lowell Wicker, John Roland, and Jodi Rell, this is, for 10 points, what New England river
which passes through Hartford to the Long Island Sound?
ANSWER: Connecticut River
In 1843, Georg Carstensen started the amusement park found in this city called Tivoli Gardens.
This city, the largest on the island of Zealand, is home to the "free town" Christiania. The Oresund
Bridge connects this city to Malmo. Edvard Eriksen created a sculpture in this city's harbor of a (*)
woman seated on a rock. For 10 points, name this Scandinavian capital city that is connected by a bridge to
Sweden, and whose statue of The Little Mermaid was inspired by Hans Christian Andersen.
ANSWER: Copenhagen [or Kobenhavn]
This city has a pedestrian boulevard for shopping called the Stroget (STROY-et). This city has an
amusement park originally built in the 1840s called Tivoli Gardens, and is located on the island of Zealand.
A seated figure near this city's city hall and a statue on a rock in this city's harbor pay homage to an
author of children's stories from here. For 10 points, name this city that is home to the Little Mermaid
statue honoring Hans Christian Andersen, and is the capital of Denmark.
ANSWER: Copenhagen [or Kobenhavn]
Israeli activist Benjamin Kahn promotes the conservation of these geographical features around the Red
Sea. A city named after these features is called the "Brazilian Venice," and is the capital of Pernambuco.
One of these features includes the "Great Blue Hole," and is the top tourist destination in Belize. The loss of
zooxanthellae in these formations, causing a rise in temperature, leads to their "bleaching." Another of these
features is threatened by the Crown-of-Thorns starfish and is located to the east of Mackay, a city in
Queensland. For 10 points, name these living geographical features found on coasts, the largest of which is
the "Great Barrier" one.
ANSWER: coral reefs [or barrier reefs]
Cities on this island, which is home to the famous GR 20 hiking trail, include the port of Calvi on its
northern coast and the university town of Corte, which was once its capital. This island's Golo River flows
from Mt. Cinto, its highest point, to the sea just south of Bastia. Its first constitution was drafted by
Pasquale Paoli, who supported its temporary takeover by the British. Located south of the Ligurian Sea, it is
separated from its sister island by the Strait of Bonifacio. Its capital is Ajaccio and its traditional language is
much closer to Italian than to French. For 10 points, identify this birthplace of Napoleon, the largest French
island in the Mediterranean.
ANSWER: Corsica
This island was the site of the Bronze Age Torreen Culture, and it contains the Scandola Nature
Reserve. This island's longest river, the Golo, begins near Monte Cinto, its highest point. In the
eighteenth century, Pasquale (*) Paoli founded the world's first democracy on this island, although it was
short lived. This island lies north of the Strait of Bonifacio and south of the Liguria Sea. With capital at
Ajaccio, for 10 points, name this island north of Sardinia controlled by France, the birthplace of Napoleon.
ANSWER: Corsica [or La Corse]
This country contains a national park whose name translates to "full of turtles," which is where the
endangered green turtle goes to nest. This is the first country in the American continent to ban recreational
hunting. It contains numerous plant species at the Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve and it receives much
rain at the Central Cordillera (cor-dee-YAIR-uh) mountains. For ten points, name this Central American
country ranked first among the Americas in the 2012 Environmental Performance Index, a status fueled by
the stability created by its longstanding democracy and lack of military.
ANSWER: Costa Rica
Chira Island is located in this country's province of Puntarenas near where its Tempisque River empties into
its Gulf of Nicoya. This country's Cordillera Central range includes the Poas and Irazu volcanoes. Tourism
to national parks, which cover about 25% of this country's land, has overtaken coffee and bananas in
driving this country's economy. The San Juan River lies on this country's border with Nicaragua to the
north. For 10 points, name this northern neighbor of Panama, a Central American country with no standing
army and its capital at San Jose.
ANSWER: [Republic of/Republica de] Costa Rica
Sharing its name with the Connecticut town where Nathan Hale was born, this West Midlands city is the site
of the University of Warwick. This onetime center of the English silk and bicycle industries is home to such
modern buildings as the Lanchester Library and Basil Spence's St. Michael's Cathedral. The former St.
Michael's, along with Greyfriars Church, was destroyed along with most of this city's buildings in April
1941 air raids. For 10 points, name this English city that is also where the legendary incident of Lady
Godiva and Peeping Tom occurred.
ANSWER: Coventry
In 2012, twenty-two Buddhist temples in the suburbs of this city were burned down in the Ramu riots,
after a man with a Buddhist name posted an image of a desecrated Quran to Facebook. Maheshkhali island
lies off the coast of this city. This city is the gateway to an uninterrupted seventy-eight-mile stretch of
beach, where Fazlul Karim planted the Tamarisk Forest. This city's unusual name honors a British East
India Company captain who resolved a Rakhine-Arakan conflict here. For ten points, name this city found
about ninety miles south of Chittagong, a resort spot in Bangladesh.
ANSWER: Cox's Bazar
One feature of this lake is a small, vertically-floating stump of a submerged tree that has been
named the Old Man of the Lake. One island located in this lake resembles a sailing boat, which led to
its being named the Phantom Ship. Another island in this lake reaches over 700 feet above the
surface of this lake and is a volcanic cinder cone named (*) Wizard Island. This lake was created from
the collapse of the volcano Mount Mazama. For 10 points, name this deepest lake in the United States,
which is located in Oregon.
ANSWER: Crater Lake
Mountains located near this question of water include Mount Scott and Union Peak. This question of water is
home to a namesake species of newt notable for its dark-colored underside. According to the Klamath
Indians, this question of water was created when the gods Skell and Llao fought each other. This question of water
is home to a rocky outcropping known as "Phantom Ship." Notable landmarks in this question of water
include "The Old Man of the Lake," a wooden stump which has been floating in it for over a century
without decomposing. This site of Wizard Island was created 7,700 years ago by Mount Mazama, a
volcano. For 10 points, name this deepest lake in the United States, found in a caldera in Oregon.
ANSWER: Crater Lake
According to the mythology of the Klell tribe, this question of water was formed after a destructive
battle between the gods Skell and Llao. In this question of water are Merriam Cone and Wizard Island.
John Hillman, the first European to discover this lake, named it the Deep Blue Lake and the efforts
of William Steel turned this lake and its surrounding area into a national park. At the center of this
lake is a floating tree stump known as the Old Man of the Lake. This lake was formed by the collapsed
caldera of Mount Mazama, found in the Southern Cascades, and it is the deepest lake in the United States.
For 10 points, name this lake found in southern Oregon.
ANSWER: Crater Lake
In the "Sistema de Castas," this term was applied to people with at least seven-eighths Spanish blood
that were born in the New World, as contrasted with "peninsulares." This term is applied to vernacular
languages that are believed to arise from pidgins. This term is applied to an ethnic group that is related to
the group formed when Acadians were forcibly relocated by the British, the Cajuns. For ten points, identify
this term applied to descendants of the colonial settlers of French Louisiana.
ANSWER: creole [or criollo]
Suriname is home to one of these constructs called Sranan. Another of these constructs is most
common among the Geechee people on the Sea Islands off of South Carolina and Georgia.
Exemplified by Jamaican Patois and Gullah, these constructs develop when a child adopts the (*)
Pidgin of their parents as a native language. For 10 points, give this term for a language mixed from two
parent languages, as exemplified by the mixture of French and African tongues in Louisiana.
ANSWER: Creole languages [prompt on languages; prompt on Pidgins until it is read]
This island is close to the former leper colony of Spinalonga, which is near the city of Elounda. It includes
the Sitia Mountains near the archaeological site at Zakros and large palm forest at Vai. Those are in its
eastern region of Lasithi, while its western regions are Chania and Rethymno. Its capital, which used to be
known as Chandax and was then renamed by the Venetians to Candia, is now called Heraklion. An ancient
civilization centered on this island, which is believed to have been destroyed in part by a volcano to the
north at Thera, used a script called Linear A. Name this largest and most populous Greek island, the former
center of the Minoan civilization.
ANSWER: Crete
This island's Samaria National Park is the last refuge of the agrimi, a type of goat once thought to
be wild but was in fact introduced by Bronze Age colonists. Spinalonga, a small artificial island near
this larger island, was used as a Venetian outpost after this island's government, known as the
"Kingdom of Candia," was overthrown by the (*) Ottomans. Heraklion is the largest city on this island,
where Duncan Mackenzie and Arthur Evans excavated a palace containing tablets written in Linear A. That
city, Knossos, was located on, for 10 points, what island in the Mediterranean that was once the center of
the Minoan civilization?
ANSWER: Crete [or Kriti]
After conquest by Quintus Caecilius Metellus, Gortyn served as the Roman capital of this, and it is
home to one of the last refuges of the kri-kri, which is found at its Samaria Gorge. After the Fourth
Crusade, this island came under the rule of Venetians, who called their capital Candia, and its
mountain ranges include the Dedros and Dikti. This island's Amari Valley was the center of the
resistance movement during German occupation following Operation Mercury, and its highest point
is Mount Ida, where Zeus was supposedly born. With capital at Heraklion, for 10 points, name this largest
Greek island on which the Minoan site of Knossos lies.
ANSWER: Crete
Tourist attractions here include the Kazarma Fortress in its city of Sitia. The Germans successfully captured
this place as part of Operation Mercury. Its city of Gortyn began to eclipse the neighboring settlement of
Phaestus during Roman times. A species of goat named the Kri-kri can now only be found in the wild on
this island, and one city on this island was an important trading post for Malmsey for the Venetians and was
known as Retimo. A former capital of this island was damaged during World War II and is named Khania.
With a modern-day administrative center at Iraklion, for 10 points name this island which was home to the
ancient Minoan civilization.
ANSWER: Crete [or Kriti or Krete or Creta or Candia]
This island is the center of production for the myzithra and graviera varieties of cheese. Culture
on this island also involves the "mandinades" and "sitiakos" song and dance forms. German general
Heinrich Kreipe was kidnapped during World War II near this island's town of Archanes. Since the
1970s, this island's rural areas have depopulated into cities such as Khania and Rethimnon. This
island's capital, then called (*) Candia, was taken by the Ottomans from Venice in 1669 after a lengthy
siege. Near this island's city of Iraklion, Arthur Evans excavated the Palace of Minos in the Knossos
archaeological site. For 10 points, name this large island, often thought to be the oldest outpost of Greek
civilization.
ANSWER: Crete [or Kriti]
This island's city of Khania is located on the Akrotiri Peninsula. This island's only major
flatlands is the Mesara Plain, which is separated from the Libyan Sea by the Asterousia Mountains.
This island's mountains als include the Levka Ori and the Dhikti Ori. The oldest known theater was
located at this island's site of Phaestus, and Nikos Kazantzakis Airport is located at this island's
capital of (*) Heraklion. The highest point on this island is Mount Ida. For 10 points, name this island that
was the home of the Minoan civilization.
ANSWER: Crete
Ogier De Busbeq recorded in his book to have spoken a dialogue of Gothic from this area. Today it is
part of the Pontic Steppe and houses the ruins of Panticapaeum in Kerch, which can be seen from
Mt. Mithridat. it also houses the Lavadia Palace and this region has namesake mountains that
Medved mountain and Angara Pass that runs through Alushta. It holds Chersonesos, one of the
Seven Wonders of Ukraine. Bordering the Kherson Oblast, the Sea of Azov, and jutting into the Caspian
Sea, for ten points name this peninsula that home to namesake Tatars with a capital at Simferopol.
ANSWER: Crimea or Crimean Peninsula or Autonomous Republic of Crimea
Sivash, a series of bays off the coast of this region, is a producer of brines, and the Tonka of Arabat is a
sandspit off this region's coast. Its namesake mountains are home to the highest point here on Mount
Roman-Kosh. Cities on its coast include Eupatoria and Theodosia, and it was inhabited by Tatars with their
capital at Bakhchisaray, which led to it being a part of the Tatar A.S.S.R. Its current headquarters are at
Simferopol, and a city here is Kerch, which gives its name to the straight connecting the Black Sea to the
Sea of Azov. For 10 points, name this peninsula in the Ukraine that was home to a war that pitted the
Russians against the British and French.
ANSWER: Crimean peninsula [or Krymsky Poluostrov; or Crimea]
This region's lone President was deposed in 1995, when this polity's constitution was abolished by
Leonid Kuchma's government. One island part of this territory was the subject of a 2003 boundary
dispute when one country tried to construct a dam on it and is Tuzla Island. This region was transferred
to its current ownership in 1954. Kerch in this region's eastern part is connected by ferry to Port Kavkaz in
a neighbouring country, while its largest city is the capital Simferopol. Its Parliament recently voted to join
its eastern neighbour and scheduled a referendum for the people to vote. For 10 points, name this part of
Ukraine that Russia is currently trying to acquire.
ANSWER: Crimean Peninsula [DO NOT accept or prompt on Ukraine as the first clue is about Ukraine abolishing Crimea's 1992 constitution]
This region contains the bays of Kalamita and Karkinit, and the latter lies to the west of the Isthmus of
Perekop which connects it to the mainland. The city of Kerch in this region lies just opposite the Taman
Peninsula. In ancient times, it was known as Tauris. Lying to the west of the Sea of Azov, its cities include
Feodosiya, Yalta, and Simferopol, the capital, as well as Sevastopol and Balaklava. FTP, name this
Ukrainian peninsula jutting into the Black Sea.
ANSWER: The Crimea or the Crimean Peninsula
This country owns the island of Hvar, which is home to the Stari Grad Plain. The capital of this country is
home to the Mimara Museum, and its city of Split is home to Diocletian's Palace. The kuna is the official
currency of this country, whose city Pula is located on the Istrian Peninsula. The resort city of Dubrovnik is
located in its coastal Dalmatia [dal-MEY-shuh] region along the Adriatic Sea. This former Yugoslav
republic is located south of Hungary and east of Slovenia. For 10 points, name this country with capital at
Zagreb.
ANSWER: Croatia [or Hrvatska]
This nation contains the city of Pula, which lies at the tip of the Istria peninsula, whose capital is Pazin.
Nearby to Istria is this country's principal seaport, the city of Rijeka . This country also contains the coastal
region of Dalmatia, which, along with Pula and Rijeka, lies on the (*) Adriatic Sea. This country contains
the western part of Slavonia, whose largest city in this country is Osijek, located on the Drava River. The
highest point of this country is Dinara, located in an extension of the Alps. For 10 points, name this NATO
member country that surrounds Bosnia and Herzegovina on two sides and has its capital at Zagreb.
ANSWER: Republic of Croatia
Found within Mt. Velebit, this country's Lukina jama cave descends for nearly 1300 meters. Gorski Kotar,
Karlovac and Rijeka are regions in this country's mountainous north. Its capital is situated on the Sava
River, at the base of Mt. Medvednica. An unfortunate event in this nation's history is the 1991 massacre of
Vukovar, which is situated on the banks of the Danube. In its far south, this country is home to the port
town of Dubrovnik. Natives of this country include Nikola Tesla, who was born in Gospic. It is bordered on
the east by Serbia, while Slovenia and Hungary border its north. For 10 points, name this country on the
Adriatic Sea, whose capital is at Zagreb.
ANSWER: Republic of Croatia
The "Salt Pan" is a section of the Cienaga de Zapatas Park, which is located in its Matanzas province. The
longest river in this country partly forms the border between the Holguin and Granma provinces after
originating in the Sierra Maestra, and the chain of islands extending from its Hicasos peninsula to the
Nuevitas bay is called the Sabana-Camaguey archipelago. Isla de la Juventud is located south of the Gulf of
Batabano off the Caribbean coast of this country, whose cities include Pinar del Rio and Santiago. Located
south of the Straits of Florida, for 10 points, identify this country whose easternmost province is
Guantanamo and whose capital is Havana.
ANSWER: Republic of Cuba
Just off the north-central coast of this island nation is the Sabana-Camaguey Archipelago. The Nicholas
Channel borders the north of this nation, which also contains the Isla de la Juventud. Narciso Lopez once
attempted to filibuster this nation, which is home to the celebrated sports team Industriales. The Windward
Passage separates Hispaniola from this island, which is a mere ninety-mile journey across the Strait of
Florida from Key West. For 10 points, name this island nation that houses many 1950s automobiles and fine
cigars in its capital of Havana.
ANSWER: Republic of Cuba
Karst hills in this country originated the term mogotes and are found in the Sierra de los Organos range
of its Pinar del Rio province. A movement against a dictator in this country was started in the Sierra
Maestra range, which is the source of its longest river, the Cauto. The second-largest island in this country
is separated from the mainland by the Gulf of Batabano and is the Isla de la Juventud. Its city of Cienfuegos
contains a monument to its national hero, Jose Marti. An inlet on the Gulf of Cazones was the place of a
1961 CIA-backed invasion of this country known as the Bay of Pigs. For 10 points, name this largest
Caribbean island nation whose capital is at Havana.
ANSWER: Cuba
Native crocodiles in this country can be found at the Zapata Swamp. This country owns the Isle
of Youth, which was also known as the "Isle of Parrots" and "Treasure Island." The oldest Spanish
settlement here was at Baracoa. It is to the west of the (*) "Windward Passage," which separates it from
an island split into two countries. The United States maintains a base on a bay in this country named
Guantanamo. For 10 points, name this Caribbean island 90 miles to the south of Florida.
ANSWER: Cuba
A popular tourist location in this country is a strip of land known as Varadero. The Sierra
Maestra mountain range is located in the southern part of this country, near which is a shrine
dedicated to this country's patron saint, the Virgin of Charity. This country owns Isla de la (*)
Juventud, which can be reached by crossing the Gulf of Batabano. Major port cities of this country include
Santiago and Havana. For 10 points, name this country, which owns the largest island in the Caribbean.
ANSWER: Cuba
The Zapata Swamp is located in this country's Matanzas province. The south-central portion of this nation
is dominated by the Escambray Mountains. The Colorados Archipelago extends over the northern portion of
Pinar del Rio, this country's westernmost province, which lies north of the Isla de la Juventud. The
Windward Passage east of this nation separates it from Haiti. At its closest, this country is less than one
hundred miles away from Florida. For 10 points, name this Caribbean nation with capital at Havana.
ANSWER: Cuba
El Baga Nature Park is a part of this nation's Jardines del Rey, which is an archipelago that is part of the
Sabana-Camageuy. The Marea del Portillo is part of this country's Turquino National Park, which contains
Pica Turquino, this nation's highest point. The Canarreos Archipelago contains the Isla de la Juventud,
which is the second largest island in this nation and which is located south of its capital city. Its longest
river, the Cuato, flows through the province of Santiago before emptying into the Caribbean. It is located
approximately 90 miles south of Florida. For 10 points, name this largest Caribbean island nation home to
Guantanamo Bay with capital at Havana.
ANSWER: Republic of Cuba
In 1971, this country opened the Zaza Reservoir, which replaced Milk Lake as its largest internal question of
water. This country's religious center is the shrine to the Virgin of Charity in Cobre. The second-largest city
in this country is overlooked by the Morro Castle and sits within a valley of the Sierra Maestra. It controls
the Isle of Youth and has an extraterritorial spot on its southeast owned by the United States. For 10 points,
the Guantanamo Bay naval base is found in what country, ninety miles south of Florida?
ANSWER: Republic of Cuba [or Republica de Cuba]
This country's second-largest island, Isla de la Juventud, is separated from this country's province of
Pinar del Rio by the Gulf of Batabano. This country's highest point, Pico Turquino, is part of its
Sierra Maestra mountain range. That range ends at the Gulf of Guacanayabo, which is bordered by
Las Tunas and (*) Granma provinces. Major cities in this country include Holguin, Camaguey, and
Cienfuegos, and Baracoa can be found in its Guantanamo province. For 10 points, name this country with
capital at Havana.
ANSWER: Republic of Cuba
The explorer Diego Velazquez de Cuellar established the first European settlement in this country at
Baracoa. The Panopticon prison Presidio Modelo is located on this country's island Isle of Youth, which is
separated from the mainland by the Gulf of Batabano. This country is just north of the Cayman Islands and
Jamaica. The Windward Passage separates this country from Haiti by fewer than ninety miles at its
Guantanamo region. For 10 points, name this Caribbean island nation, long ruled by the Castro family.
ANSWER: Cuba
Mayor Rensselaer R. Herrick called this river "a sewer that runs through the heart of the city." One of
the first black majors of a major American city, Carl Stokes, held a press conference urging legislation in
response to an incident involving this river. It appeared on the cover of a 1969 issue of Time after an
incident that damaged railroad bridges near a Republic Steel mill. The film Major League opens with a
montage set to a song about this river, Randy Newman's "Burn On." Due to mass pollution, this river
infamously caught on fire in 1969. For ten points, name this river that feeds Lake Erie at Cleveland, Ohio.
ANSWER: Cuyahoga River
This location's town of Ayia Napa, named for a Venetian monastery, has become a holiday centre
and destination for European House music concerts. A series of 108 dams runs through this area (*),
the largest being Kouris Dam. Containing Akamas National Park, where emblematic moufflon can be
found, it is also home to Dhekelia and Akrotiri, military bases administered by Great Britain from the town
of Episkey St. Paul. Containing the Troodos and Kyrenia mountain ranges as well as Larnaca Salt Lake and
Paphos Forest, this island's highest point is at Mount Olympus. For 10 points name this alleged birthplace
of Aphrodite, divided by the Green Zone with one capital at Nicosia.
ANSWER: Cyprus [or Republic of Cyprus until "108 dams"]
Alain Le Brun has led excavations in this region at places like Kastros and Choirokoitia, and although it is
not Jerusalem, one site here features a necropolis known as the Tombs of the Kings. Home to the pilgrimage
site of the Hala Sultan Tekke, this region reaches its furthest eastern extent at Cape Andreas and is indented
by Morphou Bay. This island's north is marked by the Kyrenia Mountains, while renowned painted
churches can be found in its southerly Troodos Mountains. Important cities here include Famagusta and
Limassol, and it was home to a cult center of Aphrodite at Paphos. Divided between north and south by the
Green Line, for 10 points, name this island with capital Nicosia, marked by ethnic strife between Greek and
Turkish inhabitants.
ANSWER: Cyprus
This island achieved independence with the Zurich and London Agreement, and among its largest
cities are Famagusta and Limassol. The eastern portion of this island is noted for the long Karpass
peninsula. The invasion of this island by a nearby foreign power led its capital to be divided along
Ledra Street up until April 2008. That invasion led to the downfall of the so called Regime of the
Colonels military junta. A 1974 invasion of this island led to a United Nations buffer called the Green
Zone. For 10 points, Nicosia is the capital of what Mediterranean island with disputed Greek and Turkish
halves?
ANSWER: Cyprus
Copper has long been mined from this island's Troodos Mountains. A temple to a goddess of love was
contained on this island's city of Paphos. This island's capital is currently divided by a Green Line, which
separates the part of this country that sought "enosis" from the unrecognized northern republic. After
Sardinia and Sicily, this island is the third-largest Mediterranean island. For ten points, name this island
which is divided into Turkish and Greek sections.
ANSWER: Cyprus [or Kipros; or Kibris]
The largest district in this region, which also makes up its entire southern half, is the Kufra District. In
December 2013, a pro-autonomy group in this region signed a deal with the lobbying firm Dickens and
Madson. In October of 2013, a government for this region with 24 ministers and prime minister Abdraba
Abdulhameed Al-Barasi was declared. That government in this region has largely been orchestrated by
Ibrahim Jadhran, who has taken control of oil production in this region. For ten points, name this region that
once bordered Tripolitania and Fezzan and currently has some movement for autonomous governance in
eastern Libya..
ANSWER: Cyrenaica
The town of Kutna Hora in this country is the site of a famous ossuary made entirely of human
bones. The Holy Trinity monument in this country's town of Olomouc is among Europe's grandest
baroque plague columns, while a simpler plague column is found in Mala Strana in its capital near
the church of St. Nicholas. The Rabbi Low is buried in the Old Jewish (*) Cemetery in the capital city
of this country, home to the Terezin concentration camp and the cities of Ostrava and Brno. St. Wenceslaus
Square and the Charles Bridge over the Vltava River can be found in, for 10 points, what country governed
from Prague?
ANSWER: Czech Republic [prompt on Czechoslovakia]
This city's Hann Park contains a national zoo, and its tourist attractions include the bizarrely pink Lake
Retba. A huge bronze monument outside this city depicts a black man holding a woman in his right arm
and looking towards a pointing baby he holds up in his left. The historical "House of Slaves" lies off the
coast of this city's mainland on the isle of Goree. This capital city is home to the African Renaissance
Monument and lies on the Cap-Vert peninsula, which juts into the Atlantic. For 10 points, name this
westernmost city of mainland Africa, the capital city of Senegal.
ANSWER: Dakar
The Ozan and Gober Chalk Formations run directly through this city. Buildings like the Nasher
Sculpture Center and the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center can be found in this city's
namesake Arts District, the largest in the United States. White Rock Lake is the main reservoir for
this city, while another important source of water here is the (*) Trinity River. Its suburb of University
Park is home to Southern Methodist University, and its West End district is the home of the John F.
Kennedy Memorial. For ten points, name this sister city of Fort Worth, the third most populous in Texas.
ANSWER: Dallas
Fun museums in this city's Fair Park include the Science Place and the Age of Steam Railroad
Museum. Surrounding University Park and Cockrell Hill, its Theater Center was the only theater
designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. Lying on the (*) Trinity River, some of its teams play at American
Airlines Arena and the Cotton Bowl; others, in its suburb of Arlington. For 10 points- name this city that
shares an airport with Fort Worth, the second largest in Texas.
ANSWER: Dallas
This city's Union Bankers Building was the site of a Knights of Pythias temple designed by William
Sidney Pittman and is located in one of its art districts, Deep Ellum. Lakes in this city include
Bachman Lake and White Rock Lake. This city is the site of the Reunion Tower and it lies on the
Trinity River, which isn-t navigable to an ocean. One of this city's two largest airports is the largest
hub for (*) American Airlines, which is the sponsor of the sports arena that contains this city's hockey and
basketball teams, and the other, Love Field, is the corporate HQ of Southwest Airlines. It is the larger of the
two cities in the Metroplex; the other is Fort Worth. This city is the site of a Philip Johnson-designed John
F. Kennedy Memorial. For 10 points, name this 3rd largest city in Texas after Houston and San Antonio,
home to sports teams such as the NHL's Stars and the NFL's Cowboys.
ANSWER: Dallas, Texas
The Congolese Inga I and Inga II examples of these structures are considered technological failures,
while the Gibe III one in the Omo Valley has caused a conflict between Kenya and Ethiopia. Omar
al-Bashir campaigned for re-election by boasting about the Merowe one in Sudan, while the Cahora
Bassa one in Mozambique is the largest in southern Africa. The (*) Akosombo one in Ghana is closely
associated with the Volta Aluminum Company, and the Kariba one on the Zambia-Zimbabwe border is
particularly tall. For 10 points, identify this kind of structure typified by the Aswan High one that created
Lake Nasser along the Nile.
ANSWER: dams
A binational effort between Brazil and Paraguay centered on building one named for Itaipu Island. William
Wilcox oversaw the creation of one of these first attempted by Alhazen, which created the Toshhka Lakes
and the subject of the New Valley Project, a question named for the leader of the Free Officers Movement. The
destruction of the Shen Nong Hanging Coffins and extinction of the Baiji dolphin have resulted from the
creation of one of these in Hubei province. For 10 points, name these structures which often provide
hydroelectric power, whose examples include the Aswan and Three Gorges, as well as one in the United
States named for Hoover.
ANSWER: Dams
One type of this project is the Snowy Mountains Scheme of Australia. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
and the Belo Monte projects of this type are under construction. Krasnoyarskaya and the James Bay Project
are examples of this type of project. The Suez Crisis began when the canal was seized by Nasser to provide
funds for one of these projects at Aswan. For ten points, name these engineering projects that place
power-generating stations on rivers.
ANSWER: conventional hydroelectricity dam
The tallest one of these structures in the world is located in Nurek in Tajikistan. Another one of these
structures is located under Monte Toc near Venice and had a 1963 landslide into it cause over 2,000 deaths.
In addition to the Vaiont, another of these structures was built on the border between Brazil and Paraguay
and called Itaipu. That type of this structure destroyed the Guiara Falls. For 10 points, name these
structures, the longest of which is the 1.5 mile long Three Gorges one that interrupts the flow of the
Yangtze River.
ANSWER: dams
Previously surrounded by an oasis in the Ghouta region and watered by the Barada river, this city is situated
about 80 kilometers inland from the Mediterranean and is perched atop a plateau at the eastern foothills of
the Anti-Lebanon mountain range. Sometimes called the "Jasmine City", in antiquity it routed caravan
traffic to and from Southern Arabia, Palmyra, Petra, and China, and after in 1189 it adapted techniques
probably invented in India and became a major producer of steel. Despite being conquered by Alexander
the Great and changing hands between the Romans, Arabs, Turks, and Mongols, it currently stands as the
longest continuously inhabited city in existence and was chosen as the 2008 Arab Capital of Culture by
UNESCO. For ten points anme this city, the capital and second largest of Syria.
ANSWER: Damascus
This river's tributaries include the Iller and Abens Rivers. Previously, this river contained the Ada Kaleh,
now submerged following the construction of the two dams at the Iron Gates. The confluence of this river
and the Siret is at the port city of Galati, while this river joins a large tributary called the Sava in a Balkan
capital. Receiving the Tisza in Serbia, this river begins in the Black Forest of Germany and is the second
longest river in Europe. For 10 points, name this river that passes through Belgrade, Budapest, and Vienna,
and flows into the Black Sea.
ANSWER: Danube River
A journey down this river is the subject of Between the Woods and the Water by Patrick Leigh Fermor.
Before flooding due to a hydroelectric project, this river's small island of Ada Kaleh was home to a large
Turkish population. In 2000, tributaries of this river were affected by a huge cyanide spill from a gold mine
near Baia Mare. This river is home to Europe's largest binational hydroelectric dam at the Iron Gate. A
major canal links this river to the Main. The Regen flows into this river at Regensburg, and its other
tributaries include the Sava and the Tisza. Before the construction of the Szechenyi Chain Bridge, this river
divided the twin cities of Buda and Pest. For 10 points, name this river that flows past Belgrade and Vienna
and empties into the Black Sea.
ANSWER: Danube River [or Donau]
The Statue of Decebalus is located on the banks of this river nearby an ancient structure called the Tabula
Traiana, which is the primary ruin left from a bridge believed to be the longest arch bridge for a millenium.
The primary sources of this river are the Brigach and Berg Rivers. Tributaries of this river include the
Drava River in Croatia and the Tisza River in Serbia. A notable gorge on this river is called the Iron Gates.
This river flows through the capital cities of Belgrade, Bratislava, Budapest, and Vienna. For 10 points,
name this second longest river of Europe that starts in the Black Forest of Germany and flows into the Black
Sea.
ANSWER: Danube River
This river's "Middle" section starts at Devin Gate, and the Gemenc Forest lies along its banks.
Two of the largest hydroelectric dams on this river are near the Iron Gate, which separates the
Carpathian and (*) Balkan Mountains. It also flows through Bratislava, Belgrdae, Vienna, and Budapest.
For 10 points, name this second-longest river in Europe which starts from the Black Forest and empties into
the Black Sea.
ANSWER: Danube River [or Donau River; or Dunaj River; or Dunav River; or Dunay River]
The Ister is an alternate name for this river, home to a gorge and hydroelectric station at a section
known as the Iron Gate. This river is formed by the confluence of the Brigach and Breg rivers, both
of which originate in the Black Forest; later this river passes through the cities of Ulm and Passau,
both found in the state of Bavaria. This river empties into the Black Sea in a delta in northern Romania
and Southern Ukraine and the blue color of this river inspired a waltz by Johann Strauss II. For 10 points,
name this Eastern European River that flows through Belgrade, Vienna and Budapest.
ANSWER: Danube River
Ukraine is controversially planning to reopen the Bystroe Channel by digging out wetlands in this
river's delta. This river passes through the Devin Gate and, downstream, the Iron Gate gorge on the
Romanian-Serbian border. This river, which empties into the (*) Black Sea, passes through Vienna,
Bratislava, Budapest, and Belgrade--the most capital cities of any river. For 10 points, name this central
European river, the second-longest in Europe.
ANSWER: Danube River
Patrick Leigh-Fermor begins Between the Woods and the Water by crossing this question of water on Holy
Saturday. A Turkish community once lived on Ada Kaleh, an island in it that was submerged after dams
were built in the Iron Gates gorge. Apollodorus of Damascus built what was for many years the longest
arch bridge in the world across this river to help Trajan in his war with the Dacians. The Elizabeth Bridge
crosses it in the same city as a chain bridge designed by William Tierney Clark, and those bridges connect
what used to be two separate cities. For ten points, name this river that passes through Vienna and Budapest.
ANSWER: Danube River
This river is home to the enormous Huchen salmon. This river passes through two hydroelectric dams at
the Iron Gates, which form part of an international border. A canal links this river to the more northerly
Main ["MINE"] river. This river formed the Wachau valley, known for its wines and castles. Its tributaries
include the Inn and the Prut. A city on this river is known for its Hofburg and Schonbrunn palaces. This
river flows through both the Pannonian and Carpathian basins. This river originally separated two cities
that merged to become a central European capital. For 10 points, name this river that passes through
cities like Bratislava, Belgrade, Vienna, and Budapest before flowing into the Black Sea.
ANSWER: the Danube [or Donau; or Dunav; or Dunarea; be very lenient with vowels]
Margaret and Csepel Islands can be found in this river near a national capital, where it is spanned by the
Megyeri Bridge. It originates in the Black Forest, meets tributaries including the Nava and Plut, and flows
through Vienna before emptying into the Black Sea. For 10 points, name this second-longest river in
Europe.
ANSWER: Danube river
Pools of industrial waste line the banks of this river in Almasfuzito, and sludge from an aluminum
plant spill in Ajka reached this river in October 2010. In 2000, two tributaries of this river were
devastated by a cyanide spill at Baia Mare, a gold mine on the Somes River. Industrial cities on this
river include Novi Sad, the capital of Vojvodina, and (*) Linz, and this river is joined by the Morava, the
Drava, and the Tisza. Rising in the Black Forest, it is dammed on the border between Serbia and Romania.
Before it empties into the Black Sea, what river, for 10 points, flows through Budapest, Belgrade, and
Vienna?
ANSWER: Danube River [or Duna River; or Donau River]
Its tributaries include the Drava River in Croatia and the Tisza River in Serbia, the latter of which forms the
border of Hungary and Slovakia. Flowing through ten nations before emptying into the Black Sea between
Romania and Ukraine, this 1,771 mile long river passes through four European capitals, including
Bratislava, Belgrade and Budapest. Originating near the town of Donaueschingen in the Black Forest of
Germany, for ten points, identify this river that also flows through Vienna, Europe's second longest river.
ANSWER: Danube River [or Donau, Dunaj, or Dunay]
This river can be traced to the town of Furtwangen. The river is referenced many times in the
Bulgarian national anthem. This river and another one of its tributaries make up the southern
border of Vojvodina. The city of Innsbruck is located in a tributary of this river. This river was
partly responsible for the 2006 European floods and was subjected to a red (*) toxic sludge spill in
2010. Tributaries of this river include the Vah, Hron, and Iller. The cities of Novi Sad, Regensburg, Backa
Palanka, and Mohacs are all located on this river, as are the capitals cities of Belgrade, Vienna, Budapest,
and Bratislava. For 10 points, name this second longest European river.
ANSWER: Danube
This city's most affluent neighborhood is Oyster Bay, which is located near Ali Hassan Mwinyi Road.
German administration established major transportation links, including the Bagamoyo and Morogoro
Roads to other regions in its country. Losing its official status in 1996 to an inland city, most of its nation's
government offices and foreign embassies are still located in its downtown core, but the U.S. embassy has
been relocated to the suburban Msasani district following an 1998 event. For 10 points, name this city,
whose name translates as "Abode of Peace", the most populous city in Tanzania.
ANSWER: Dar Es Salaam
The city of Nyala in this region is home to one of the three branches of the Amel Center for Treatment
and Rehabilitation for Torture Victims. The highest point of a country is located in this region at the Deriba
Crater, which is part of this region's Marra Mountains. The Masalit, Zaghawa, and Fur people in this region
were targeted in the 2000s after a raid on an air base in Al-Fashir in this region was carried out in part by
the Justice and Equality Movement. This region was where Janjaweed forces were used by Omar al-Bashir.
For ten points, name this region where hundreds of thousands of people have been killed and millions
displaced since 2003 in Sudan.
ANSWER: Darfur
This city is home to the fish-feeding exhibit at Aquascene as well as the historic Deckchair
Cinema. This city's namesake 1918 rebellion was led by Harold Nelson, who burnt an effigy of
John Gilruth. In 1974, Cyclone Tracy completely destroyed this city. This home to many
saltwater crocodiles is the largest city in the "Top End." In February 1942, this city on the Timor
Sea was destroyed by a Japanese bombing raid. It was named by John Clements Wickham in
1839 when the HMS Beagle sailed into this city's harbor. For 10 points, name this capital of
Australia's Northern Territory, named for an English scientist who formulated natural selection.
ANSWER: Darwin, Northern Territory
In the 1980s, this practice was advocated for by a namesake coalition funded by Clorox, 7-Eleven, and
Idaho senators wanting to sell more French fries. The Navajo Indian Reservation obeys this practice, even
though the state it is located in does not for energy conservation reasons. It is notably not observed by the
US's overseas territories, Hawaii, and Arizona, and until April 2006, parts of Indiana did not observe it. For
the point, name this practice that ends in November, in which the clock is set forward by one hour during
the warmer parts of the year.
ANSWER: daylight saving time [or DST; or daylight savings time]
In 1987, Clorox and 7-11 co-funded a coalition that supported this policy. In 2011, Dmitry Medvedev
signed a law implementing this policy in Russia eternally to limit stress-induced suicides. This policy was
first proposed by an entomologist from New Zealand named George Vernon Hudson. Most countries first
nationally implemented this policy during World War I to save fuel. Among US states, Arizona does not
use this policy. It was legendarily initiated by Benjamin Franklin while living in Paris. For 10 points, name
this policy which involves turning clocks forward one hour every March.
ANSWER: daylight savings time [prompt on changing clocks or equivalents]
A successful potash company was founded near this question of water, with a plant at Kalya.
Benjamin Volcani wrote his doctoral thesis on a type of archaea found here. A town near this
question of water, Ein Gedi, produced persimmon, and it is also near the Neve Zohar health resort.
In the 1940s, Bedouin shepherds discovered objects at Wadi Qumran near this question of water. A
structure here is supposedly that of the transformed Lot's wife. The "Cities of the Plain" such as
Zoar, as well as the sinful Sodom and Gomorra, were said to be near this question of water, which is
the lowest elevation on land in the world. For 10 points, name this very salty lake in Israel.
ANSWER: Dead Sea [or Yam ha Melah]
A constant 39-degree Celsius pool can be found in this question of water's Mineral Beach. This remnant of
the prehistoric Lake Lisan is connected by the Arabah to the Gulf of Aqaba and the Sea of Galilee. It is also
adjacent to some caves near Qumran, in which several scrolls were discovered in 1947. For 10 points,
Jordan and Israel share what lake containing the lowest point of dry land and a very high salinity?
ANSWER: Dead Sea [or al-Bahr al-Mayyit; or Yam Ha-Melah; prompt on Salt Sea]
The west bank of this lake is the location of a kittbutz on the En Gedi oasis. A peninsula known as
"The Tongue" separates this question of water into two basins, and Mount Sodom is located at its
southwestern end. Khirbat Qumran was the location of a discovery made by a (*) shepherd boy in a
cave near this question of water's shores in 1947. For 10 points, name this salt lake between Israel and Jordan
that is about 1,300 feet below sea level and is known for its namesake scrolls.
ANSWER: Dead Sea [prompt on Salt Sea]
At this location, the Harmony Borax Works employed twenty-mule teams to transport borax to the
nearest railroad. The phenomenon of "sailing stones" has been studied at this location at (+)
Racetrack Playa. Undrinkable water here can be found at the popular tourist site of "Badwater
Basin." At Furnace Creek, this location's July 1913 (*) temperature was measured at 134 degrees
Fahrenheit, the hottest temperature ever in the western hemisphere. For 10 points, name this location in the
Mojave Desert in California, the lowest point in North America.
ANSWER: Death Valley [prompt on Mojave Desert until mentioned]
This location is the site of an evaporated glacial lake that was once over 80 miles long and 600 feet deep
called Lake Manly. The highest point in this desert is located at Telescope Peak. The highest temperature in
the Western hemisphere was recorded at Furnace Creek in this desert. Another point of interest located in
this desert can be found in the Badwater Basin. For 10 points, name this American desert that contains the
lowest point on land in the Western hemisphere, at 282 feet below sea level.
ANSWER: Death Valley
This location is intersected by the Garlock Fault. One short-lived question of water in this location was Lake
Badwater, which is now the Badwater Basin. Located between the Sylvania and Owlshead mountains, this
natural feature contains an oasis called Furnace Creek, where the highest recorded temperature in the
Western Hemisphere was recorded. For 10 points, name this California location, the lowest point in the
United States.
ANSWER: Death Valley
This location attracted a sizable number of Basque settlers, including Pete Aguereberry, who names a
scenic point here. This place once held a rich deposit of borax and is home to some beautiful wildflower
blooms. In the Pleistocene Era, this place was home to Glacial Lake Manly, which was succeeded by the
unimpressive Badwater Lake which appeared here for a few months in 2005. This place received its name
from prospectors traversing it in 1849 and contains the appropriately-named Furnace Creek, which in 1913
recorded the highest temperature in the world. For 10 points, name this inhospitable place in the Mojave
Desert, the lowest point in North America.
ANSWER: Death Valley
This area is located between the Amargosa Range on the eastern border and the Panamint range on its west,
and has numerous salt flats. Badwater Basin is located within this location, and nearby features include
Furnace Creek and the Funeral Mountains. Located east of the Sierra Nevada, this area is among the hottest
and driest parts of the Mojave Desert. For 10 points, name this valley in California, which has the highest
recorded temperature and the lowest elevation in North America.
ANSWER: Death Valley
This region is located mostly in Inyo County, bordering the Amargosa Range to the west and the
Panamint Range to the east. A natural oasis in this area is called Furnace Creek and shares a name
with a river that flows into this place. The Garlock Fault intersects this area in the east and another
river that flows in this region is called the Amargosa River, which flows directly into the [*] Badwater
Basin. This area's only exploitable resource is its borax salt pans. For 10 points, name this place in
California that is known for being the lowest and hottest place in the Western Hemisphere.
ANSWER: Death Valley
This region is drained by the Godavari river and is made primarily of basalt. The mantle plume that
created this region may have also formed the Reunion Hot Spot. This region is home to a series of hills
called the "traps", which are the remains of the massive volcanic eruption that created this plateau 67
million years ago, and which was once suspected of killing the dinosaurs. This region is separated from the
sea by a mountain chain called the Western Ghats. Mineral wealth, including gold, is mined in this
plateau's Golkonda region. Many people in this region speak Kannada or Telugu, and cities here include
Bangalore. For 10 points, name this plateau in southern India.
ANSWER: Deccan plateau [or Deccan lava flats]
This state controls the former Confederate prison camp at Pea Patch Island, parts of the small
sliver it controls on the extreme west of Finns Point. This state sits to the north of the
Transpeninsular Line, which was drawn to settle a dispute over which of two sites named Cape
Henlopen was its true southern border. In 1921, the federal government awarded this state definitive
ownership of The (*) Wedge, an area created by imprecise drawing of this state's northwestern border, the
Twelve Mile Circle. In 1935, the Supreme Court forbade this state and New Jersey from ever again suing
each other over ownership of this state's namesake river. For 10 points, name this state with a flagship
public university located in Newark and a large metropolis at Wilmington.
ANSWER: Delaware
The first permanent settlement in this state was founded by Dutch colonists from the Kalmar Nyckel. At the
onset of World War II, Fort Miles was built at Cape Henlopen in this state, whose northernmost boundary is
formed by the 12-Mile Circle. This state's Christina River is fed by a creek whose banks are the site of an
early American gunpowder plant, which is owned by a still-existing company that later discovered nylon
and Teflon. The DuPont Corporation was founded and is still headquartered in this state, whose namesake
river forms the border of New Jersey and Pennsylvania. For 10 points, name this state home to the cities of
Wilmington and Dover.
ANSWER: Delaware
This question of water is home to the largest population of horseshoe crabs in the world. This question of
water receives the Smyrna and Appoquinimink rivers. Peter Minuit founded New Sweden at the
intersection of two rivers that feed into this question of water, and a powder mill along one of those rivers was
founded by E. I. DuPont. Those two rivers on this bay are the Christina and the Brandywine. The two capes
that mark the end of this bay are Cape Henlopen and Cape May. For ten points, name this bay south of
Philadelphia which separates New Jersey from its namesake state.
ANSWER: Delaware Bay [prompt on Delaware; do not accept "Delaware River"]
During the Civil War, a prison for captured Confederates was built on an island within this river.
Tributaries of this river include Beaver Kill and Big Bushkill Creek. It begins at the confluence of the
East and West portions of this river at Hancock. One tributary of this river has a secondary
tributary of Pennsauken and lies along the town of Reading. The (*) Schuylkill is a tributary of this
river, whose namesake bay is bound by Cape Henlopen and Cape May. A minor tributary of this river is the
Brandywine. Philadelphia lies on, for 10 points, what river that separates New Jersey from Pennsylvania
and its namesake state?
ANSWER: Delaware River
This river was first explored by Adriaen Block and was initially named the South River to mark the
southernmost point reach of the colony. The source of the river is the West Branch in Schoharie
County, New York, after which it has a fall of about 8 feet at Trenton. This notable river became famous
when George Washington and his army crossed it in 1776 to attack Trenton, NJ. For ten points, identify this
North American river.
ANSWER: Delaware river
The West branch of this river rises in Scoharie Country, while the East branch includes the Pepacton
Reservoir. The Foul Rift are rapids in this river. Tocks Island was the location for a dam on this river, but it
was never built. Tributaries of this river include the Neversink and Schuylkill (SCHOOL-kul) Rivers.
Cities on this river include Wilmington, Trenton, and Philadelphia. For 10 points, name this river which
empties into the Atlantic Ocean after flowing past New Jersey and a namesake state.
ANSWER: Delaware River
This river's tributary, the Christina, flows past the largest city of its namesake state and its namesake
Bay holds Capes May and Henlopen. It forms the easternmost border of New York and Pennsylvania and
the western border of New Jersey. For 10 points, name this river that flows past Philadelphia and
Wilmington.
ANSWER: Delaware River
Cities found in these geographic features include Tanta, the birthplace of Muhammad Abduh, and Shenzhen
and Zhuhai, which are two of China's Special Economic Regions. They can be classified as cuspate,
arcuate, or bird's foot, and the largest island located in one is Marajo, which lies near the city of Belem in
northeastern Brazil. The Rosetta and Damietta branches form the triangular shape of the classic example,
which begins downstream from Cairo. FTP, identify this geographical feature that forms where a river fans
out to meet the sea.
ANSWER: delta
Inland ones of these features are demonstrated near Marajo in Brazil and by the Okavango in
Botswana. The Gilbert type of these are formed by coarse sediments, while erosion controls the shape
of the wave-dominated type of these. These features come in arcuate, cuspate, and bird foot varieties,
and their slopes are shallower than (*) alluvial fans. Belem lies near one of these, as do Rotterdam,
Nanjing, Ho Chi Minh City, New Orleans, and Cairo. For ten points, name this geographic feature where
rivers form a roughly triangular shape as they meet the sea, named after the fourth letter of the Greek
alphabet.
ANSWER: Deltas (prompt on descriptions like "mouth of a river" after "Gilbert"; accept descriptions like "mouth of a river" before "Gilbert")
This country's Cuvette Centrale contains numerous swamps and habitat for the forest elephant.
Conflict between the Lendu and Hema peoples in this country's region of Ituri led to the first-ever 
conviction by the ICC. After Emmanuel de Merode was shot, the oil company SOCO announced in
June 2014 it would stop exploring in this country's first national park. That park in this country
includes the world's largest lava lake within the Nyiragongo Volcano among the Virunga Mountains.
The success of the Playstation 2 led to a dramatic increase in conflict among Mai Mai militias over
tantalum and (*) coltan in this country's North and South Kivu provinces. This country has hydroelectric
potential west of the Malebo Pool along the Stanley Falls and major copper deposits in the province of
Katanga. For 10 points, identify this country currently led by Joseph Kabila from Kinshasa.
ANSWER: Democratic Republic of the Congo [or DRC; prompt on "Congo"]
In 2002, this nation's city of Goma was devastated by the eruption of nearby Mount Nyiragongo.
The eastern border of this country contains the Rwenzori mountains. Lake Mweru lies on its border
with Zambia. This country is home to the Yellala Falls upstream from Matadi, as well as the (*)
Livingstone Falls. In 1996, the Tutsi-Hutu conflict spilled over to this country from neighboring Rwanda.
For 10 points, identify this African country with capital at Kinshasa, formerly known as Zaire.
ANSWER: the Democratic Republic of the Congo [do not accept "Republic of the Congo"]
In 1983, the completion of a suspension bridge in this country's principal ocean port of Matadi
linked its capital to the coast for the first time. This country's city of Goma has suffered because the
Dodd-Frank Banking Act requires companies to report the use of coltan originating in this country.
The northeastern part of this country relies on trade in the city of Kisangani, while its southern city
of Lubumbashi has boomed because of the high price of copper mined in the (*) Katanga region.
Angolan security forces raped female citizens of this country en masse in 2010 while deporting them, and
this country has also seen a dramatic rise in rapes in provinces that border Rwanda and Uganda. For 10
points, name this African country whose capital is Kinshasa.
ANSWER: Democratic Republic of the Congo [accept DRC; prompt on "Congo"; accep Congo-Kinshasa before "Kinshasa" is mentioned; do NOT accept "Republic of the Congo"]
This country's capital is connected to Malmo by the Oresund Bridge. Its monarchs are buried in the
cathedral of Roskilde. This country fought the Torstenson War over its practice of charging the Sound Dues
to ships passing near its coast, and it lost the provinces of Schleswig and Holstein to Germany in the
Convention of Gastein. Its capital is split between the islands Amager and Zealand, but most of its land is
on the Jutland Peninsula. For ten points, name this Scandinavian country.
ANSWER: Denmark [or Danmark]
This country's easternmost possession is its island of Bornholm, and its island of Funen is the terminus of
two "Belt" Bridges. Its second largest city, Aarhus, is located on the Jutland (YUT-land) Peninsula, while
its largest city, its capital, is found on the island of Zeeland. For 10 points, name this Scandinavian country,
the home to Copenhagen.
ANSWER: Denmark
Its not the Netherlands, but Zealand is an eastern island in this country that contains Roskilde, where this
country's monarchs are buried, as well as its current capital. That capital contains the amusement park
Tivoli and is connected by the Oresund Bridge to Malmo, Sweden. In terms of area, most of this country
exists on the Jutland peninsula. For 10 points, name this Scandinavian country with capital Copenhagen.
ANSWER: Denmark
This country's Amalienborg Palace is a winter home for its royal family. Part of this country's capital
is on the island of Amager, where the Oresund Bridge connects it to Malmo, though most of the
capital, including (*) Tivoli Gardens, lies on the island of Zealand. The Jutland peninsula is home to, for
10 points, what European country north of Germany with capital Copenhagen?
ANSWER: Kingdom of Denmark
The Guden River is this nation's longest, rising in Vejle and flowing through Randers. Cultural sites in this
country include a circular fort at Fyrkat, located near the town of Hobro, and the Jelling Stones, which
include one erected by Gorm. This country's oldest town, Ribe, was the birthplace of the photographer who
wrote The Making of an American, while its town of Esbjerg was constructed as a replacement for Altona,
which this country lost in an 1864 war. Travel time between Nyborg and its capital was halved by the
building of the Great Belt Bridge. This country's island of Fyn [FUUN] is home to the city of Odense, while
the Oresund Bridge connects its capital on the island of Sjaelland to Malmo. Its second largest city is
Aarhus, located on the Jutland Peninsula. For 10 points, name this country whose capital is Copenhagen.
ANSWER: Denmark
This country's Salling Peninsula is located near its islands of Fur and Mors. Its principal port city, which
changed the spelling of its name in 2011, is Aarhus. Egeskov Castle and the city of Odense are located on
its Funen Island, which is attached by the Great Belt Bridge to its largest island of Zealand, which in turn is
connected by the Oresund Bridge to Sweden. Zealand [ZEH-laan] and the island of Amager share its capital
and largest city, which contains Tivoli Gardens. Name this country that includes the Jutland Peninsula and
has its capital at Copenhagen.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Denmark [or Kongeriget Danmark]
For four centuries, ships passing through the waters of this modern-day county had to pay the "sound
dues" or risk being sunk by cannon fire. This was the first country in the world to offer gay couples civil
unions in the form of "registered partnerships." Off this country's east coast is a question of water named for
the fact that even a cat would have difficulty navigating through it. This home of the Kattegat lost the
province of Schleswig-Holstein to its southern neighbor. During World War II, several boats of Jews
departed this country across the Oresund strait from its main island of Zealand. For 10 points, name this
Scandinavian country located on the Jutland peninsula.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Denmark [or Kongeriget Danmark]
This European country controls the humorously-named island of "Lol Land". The criteria that
countries must meet in order to join the European Union are named after this country's capital. This
country's northern-most point is located near the city of (+) Skagen. The Kattegat and the Skagerrak
are sea channels that separate this country from its northern neighbors. Much of this country is on
the (*) Jutland peninsula. In 1864, this country fought Prussia and Austria for control of its two southern
regions, Schleswig and Holstein. Found between the North and Baltic seas, for 10 points, name this
Scandinavian country with capital Copenhagen.
ANSWER: Denmark
One city in this country contains the pedestrian street Jomfru Ane Gade. That city, Aalborg, is located on
the Limfjord just south of Vendsyssel-Thy. Hammershus Castle overlooks the Baltic Sea on an island
controlled by this nation, Bornholm, but this nation no longer governs a North Atlantic archipelago 450
kilometers southeast of Iceland, the Faroe Islands. This country's capital city in the Oresund region contains
the Tivoli Gardens and is mere kilometers away from Malmo in Sweden. This nation's main peninsula,
located east of the North Sea, is Jutland. For 10 points, name this Scandinavian nation with capital
Copenhagen.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Denmark [or Kongeriget Danmark]
Many municipal buildings in this city's downtown were built during the reign of its long time mayor
Robert Speer. This city lies along the confluence of the South Platte River with Cherry Creek. A
town just south of this major city was the site of a 1999 school shooting committed by Eric Harris and
Dylan Klebold. This city forms a large metropolitan area with nearly cities like Aurora and Boulder, and in
it visitors can see the sights that were home to the 2008 Democratic National Convention. In this city, Pepsi
Center and Invesco Field lie south of Coors Field. For 10 points, name this "Mile High City", the capital of
Colorado.
ANSWER: Denver
Located in a namesake geologic basin that contains the Fountain Formation and the Pierre Shale, this city
was the site of Montana City, and was the base for gangsters like Soapy Smith. Containing a downtown
amusement park called Elitch Gardens, it was selected to hold, but never actually held, the 1976 Winter
Olympics, and used to be the seat of Arapahoe County. Surrounded by suburbs including Lakewood,
Littleton, and Aurora, for 10 points, identify this city on the South Platte River, the capital of Colorado.
ANSWER: Denver
Parks in this city include James W. Cownie Soccer Park and Waterworks Park, and it is home to
Easter Lake and Gray's Lake. This city's second tallest building is The Ruan Center, and its tallest
building is The Principal Tower. This city's colleges include the AIB College of Business and Grand
View University, and it is home to a minor league hockey team called the Stars, as well as the Chicago
Cubs Triple A team. The Raccoon River intersects this city's namesake river in its downtown, which is also
home to Drake University. For 10 points, name this city that is both the most populated city and capital of
Iowa.
ANSWER: Des Moines
student newspaper in this city, The Times-Delphic, published the first known "Paul is dead" hoax
story about the Beatles. The Meredith Corporation, which publishes Better Homes and Gardens, is located
here. It's not in Minnesota, but the Norman Borlaug-founded World Food Prize ceremonies are given here,
and it is home to the headquarters of the Principal Financial Group and Aviva insurance. It shares its name
with a river whose name may mean "River of the Monks," and it is home to the AAA affiliate of the
Chicago Cubs and Drake University. For 10 points, name this capital of Iowa.
ANSWER: Des Moines
These regions can contain extremely flat, sea-like areas called ergs. Wind blowing through these
regions can produce a 450 Hz signal that resembles "singing" or "booming." Plants like yuccas and agaves
can thrive in these areas, where animals like kangaroo rats adapt by burrowing. The largest one on Earth is,
by one definition, Antarctica, but more traditional examples include the Chilean Atacama. For 10 points,
the African Sahara is an example of what class of arid region?
ANSWER: arid deserts
One of these regions, named the Taklimakan (TAHK-lim-uh-CON), was on the route of the Silk Road.
The world's largest oilfield is found in one of these called the Empty Quarter, or the Rub- al-Khali. One of
these geographic features named for Sonora runs into California and Arizona, where it includes the smaller
Mojave one. The largest one in the world is north of the Sahel in Africa, and has massive dunes. For 10
points, name these dry regions of land, such as the Gobi, Great Sandy, and Sahara.
ANSWER: deserts
The Saint Anne Catholic Church in this city is the second oldest continuously operating parish in the United
States. That Church is located in the Richard-Hubbard neighborhood just a block away from the
Ambassador Bridge, which connects this city to (*) Windsor. The white and black neighborhoods of this
city have historically been divided by the Eight Mile Road. This city lies adjacent to Lake St. Clair and the
city of Dearborn. Wayne State University is situated close to the interchange between the Ford and Chrysler
Freeways in, for 10 points, what largest Michigan city and home of the American auto industry?
ANSWER: Detroit
A 73-story Marriott sits at the center of this city's seven skyscraper complex called the Renaissance
Center. A sculpture here depicting a man holding a golden orb and family is named "the Spirit" of this city.
Founded by Antoine Cadillac, it forms a metropolitan area with Windsor, Ontario. For 10 points, name this
headquarters of Ford and GM, the largest city in Michigan.
ANSWER: Detroit
The discovery of a number of these sites provided the impetus for the annexation of Griqualand West.
The "Premier" one of these places was formerly owned by Sir Thomas Cullinan. Barney Barnato made his
fortune by finding these sites, whose only American example is in Arkansas. An enormous complex of this
type provided for the expansion of Kimberley and was operated by the De Beers company. For 10 points,
name these lucrative operations often found in Southern Africa, built to extract a type of precious gem from
the ground.
ANSWER: diamond mines [prompt on partial answer]
This national monument is the home of Mantle's Cave, a significant resource to learn about the Fremont
culture. A 1955 book about the "magic rivers" in this national monument was edited by Wallace Stegner
and proposed by David Brower. It was the subject of a major 1950s debate over the building of a dam at
Echo Park. This site's name references a 1909 discovery by a Carnegie Museum of Natural History scientist
who was exploring the confluence of the Green and Yampa Rivers. For ten points, name this national
monument on the border between Colorado and Utah, named due to numerous fossils being found there.
ANSWER: Dinosaur National Monument [prompt on Echo Park until it is read]
A military base in this country, Camp Lemonnier, is the only US military base in Africa. The port town
of Obock in this country is located where the Gulf of Tadjoura opens into the Gulf of Aden. The dominant
ethnic groups in this country are the Afars and Somalian Issas. This country contains Lake Assal, a crater
lake that is the lowest point in Africa. The capital of this country is connected by rail to the capital of
another country, Addis Ababa. For 10 points, identify this small country in the Horn of Africa that is
bordered by Ethiopia and Eritrea and whose capital is of the same name.
ANSWER: Republic of Djibouti
A South American type of these creatures called the boto becomes pink with age. These endangered
creatures belong to the superfamily Platanistoidea, and a bulbous-headed, nearly-blind example of them
from the Indian subcontinent travels on its side. In 2006, a Chinese subtype of this creature called the baiji
was declared functionally extinct. In Burma, these creatures collaborate with humans to drive fish into nets.
For ten points, name these large mammals whose Irrawaddy and Indus subtypes are threatened by water
pollution and damming.
ANSWER: river dolphins
This country's second largest city is home to a monument called the Monument to the Heroes of the
Restoration. This nation is bordered to the east by the Mona Passage. A major book fair takes place
in this country's third largest city, La Vega. Its three main islands are Catalina, Beata, and Saona.
This country is home to the city of San Pedro de (*) Macoris, which is not to be confused with the
similarly-named city of San Francisco de Macoris in the same country, and which is nicknamed "The Cradle
of Shortstops" due to the large number of baseball players it has produced. It is home to the highest peak in
the Caribbean islands, Pico Duarte. This country lies to the east of a country which includes Gonave Island
and which suffered a 2010 earthquake. For 10 points, name this nation with capital at Santo Domingo,
which shares Hispaniola with Haiti.
ANSWER: Dominican Republic [or Republica Dominicana]
A smaller river of this name joins with the Humble River to form the traditional boundary for the
city of Toronto. The fortress of Sarkel was flooded to create the Tsimlyansk Reservoir on this river.
Failed attempts to link it with a longer river were carried out by John Perry and Peter the Great, but
that (*) 63-mile long canal was only completed in 1952. The best known river of this name flows past the
city of Liski and empties near Rostov. Gregor Melekhov lives in the basin of this river in a novel by
Mikhail Sholokhov. For 10 points, name this Russian river that flows into the Sea of Azov, and which lends
its name to a group of Cossacks.
ANSWER: Don River
This city contains the largest civilian cemetery in the world and its Chilehaus is a World Heritage
Site designed by Fritz Hoger. Wandsbek and Altona are two of this city's is seven boroughs, and it is
home to the aforementioned Ohlsdorf Cemetary and two artificial lakes, the Inner and Outer Alster.
This city is the namesake of one of the Wadden Sea National Parks, and the island of Neuwerk belongs to
this city. It is located at the confluence of the Billie and the Elbe. For ten points, identify this city that is
Europe's second largest port and the namesake of edible round patties of meat.
ANSWER: Dresden
The Japanese Palace is part of this city's Zwinger museum complex, and it is home to the planned
community of Hellerau. This city saw its designation as a UNESCO World Heritage site revoked in
2009(*), and namesake porcelain industry moved to nearby Meissen in the early 18th century. It is located
on the Elbe River, and this city is the capital of Saxony. For 10 points, name this German city, the site of a
massive allied bombing raid during World War II.
ANSWER: Dresden
In the summer of 2002, the flooding of the Weisseritz caused heavy damage in this city. The Grunes
Gewolbe in this city's state art galleries hosts a magnificent treasure collection, and its Semperoper is one of
the most prominent opera houses in Europe. Other monuments include the Zwinger Palace, the Hofkirche,
containing the heart of king August the strong, and the Frauenkirche, the reconstruction of which was
finished in 2005. It is often referred to as the Florence of the Elbe. For 10 points, what is this capital of
Saxony, ravaged by a February 1945 bombardment?
ANSWER: Dresden
One recently-proposed building in this city, which will allow each floor to rotate independently, is the
Dynamic Tower, while many other tall buildings are located near Sheikh Zayed Road. This city has been
ruled since 1833 by the al-Maktoum family, and it was criticized recently for labor conditions among
immigrant workers that Human Rights Watch calls "less than human". It contains a hotel built to look like a
sail, the Burj Al Arab, as well as an artificial archipelago shaped like the world and three man-made 
palm-shaped peninsulas off its coast. For 10 points, name this most populous city in the UAE, home to a
formerly-namesake tower now called Burj Khalifa, the tallest in the world.
ANSWER: Dubai
This city is home to a self-proclaimed seven-star hotel. This city is ruled by the Maktoum family, and the
man-made Palm and World Islands are found off the coast of this city. The government of this city has been
criticized due to its lax standards for treatment of this city's large guest worker population. In 2006, a
company owned by the government of this city controversially attempted to purchase the contracts to
operate six United States seaports. For 10 points, name this home of the world's tallest building, the largest
city in the United Arab Emirates.
ANSWER: Dubai [or Dubayy]
In 2013, this city opened the world's largest natural flower garden, the Miracle Garden. The Al
Shindagha Tunnel under this city's namesake creek links it with the Al Ras community. The Business
Bay is a district in this city which is home to Port Rashid. The Palm Islands are two artificial islands
off the coast of this city, which contains an artificial (*) archipelago in the shape of a world map. This
city is home to the world's largest shopping mall as well as a supposed "seven star" hotel built in the shape
of a sail. For 10 points, name this city on the Persian Gulf in the United Arab Emirates that is home to the
world's tallest building, the Burj Khalifa.
ANSWER: Dubai
This city's oldest standing building was originally the Al Fahidi Fort though that structure is now
incorporated into a namesake maritime history museum. Wooden boats called abras transport people
across this city's namesake saltwater creek and allow access to the Deira sub-area. This city is home a
set of (*) artificial islands shaped like palm trees and another like a map of the world. As of December
2009, this nation is home to the world's tallest building and is known as the Burj Khalifa. FTP, identify this
extremely wealthy tourist city of the Middle East which is after Abu Dhabi the second-largest city in the
United Arab Emirates.
ANSWER: Dubai
The Wild Wadi Water Park is located in this city, which contains a lighted fountain on top of a
man-made lake that sprays water in time with performances of popular music. A supposedly "7-star" hotel
in this city was designed in the shape of a sail. Adrian Smith drew on the shape of the Hymenocallis flower
for the footprint of a skyscraper in this city, which is now the tallest in the world. This city is in the process
of constructing a series of artificial islands shaped like palm trees. For 10 points, name this home of the
Burj Khalifa, a city located on the coast of the United Arab Emirates.
ANSWER: Dubai
This city's largest park is home to a natural amphitheater known as the "Fifteen Acres," and its name
derives from a large pool where the Poddle enters this city's main river. A large northern suburb of this city
is called Swords, which is served by its light rail system, dubbed the "Luas." One can hit the bars in the
vibrant Stephen's Green district of this city, or catch a soccer game at its Croke Park. This city is home to
the green-domed judicial center known as the Four Courts. This city is home to Trinity College, Phoenix
Park, and O-Connell Street. For 10 points, name this city on the mouth of the River Liffey, the capital of
Ireland.
ANSWER: Dublin, Ireland [or Baile Atha Cliath]
Elias Clayton and two other circus workers were lynched here in 1920, and an 1871 speech titled the
"Untold Delights" of this city was given by Kentucky Rep. Knott. The newspaper Paivalehti was
published by its large Finnish population. One structure here, sits near the mouth of the St. Louis
River, the Aerial Lift Bridge. Known as "The Air Conditioned City," it is home to the Tweed Museum of
and is the northern terminus of I-35. For 10 points -name this Minnesota city on the shore of Lake Superior.
ANSWER: Duluth, MN
The world's largest printing exhibition, Drupa, is held in this city. The Volkswagen Crafter and
Mercedes-Benz Sprinter are built in this city, where the Handelsblatt business paper is published. This city
replaced Hamburg as the center of the Japanese community in Germany, with over five hundred Japanese
companies now headquartered here. The narrow, parallelogram-shaped Stadttor overlooks the entrance to
the Rheinufer Tunnel in this city, whose port is Duisburg. For ten points, name this city on the Rhine, the
capital of Germany's North Rhine-Westphalia state.
ANSWER: Dusseldorf
The native population of this island has traditionally divided itself into "long-ear" and "short-ear" groups.
Its first Western visitor was Jacob Roggeveen, and James Cook described a war on this island. Much of
this island is made up of tuff, a type of volcanic rock, and its lakes include Rano Kao and Rano Aroi. Its
highest point is Mount Terakava, and its largest town is Hanga Roa. Its traditional writing system is called
Rongo-Rongo, which can be found on the ahu platforms that hold the most notable remnants of its original
inhabitants. For 10 points, name this Pacific island controlled by Chile, notable for its large moai statues.
ANSWER: Easter Island (or Rapa Nui or Isla de Pascua)
Around 1680, the Poike (POY-kay) massacre took place here, in which the Short-Ears overthrew the
rule of the Long-Ears. The crater lake Rano Aroi provides the only moving question of water on this island, a
stream that flows down Mount Terevaka. The rongo-rongo writing system was used in this place, where the
red hairlike pukao and the ahu platforms were found. For 10 points, name this Chilean-controlled island
that preserves several hundred moai, which are giant stone heads.
ANSWER: Easter Island [or Rapa Nui; or Te Pito te Henua; or Isla de Pascua]
The undeciphered script of this location is known as Rongorongo. This island is administered by a nation
which also controls the Juan Fernandez Islands. Hanga Roa is the capital of this island, whose first settler,
according to legend, was Hotu Matua. This island is home to boat-shaped houses known as hare paenga,
along with ceremonial platforms called ahu that support moai. Belonging to Chile, it was discovered by a
Dutch explorer on its namesake holiday. For 10 points, name this remote island in the Pacific Ocean, home
to many gigantic stone heads.
ANSWER: Easter Island [or Rapa Nui; or Isla de Pascua; or Mata-kite-ran]
This landform's "Short Ears" people rebelled against their enslaving "Long Ears" people. This
home of the undeciphered rongorongo script housed a society that died out after deforesting its palm
trees, as told in Jared Diamond's Collapse. This island's natives, who call it and themselves (*) Rapa
Nui, have been governed since 1888 by Chile. For 10 points, name this Pacific island home to hundreds of
moai stone heads.
ANSWER: Easter Island [accept Rapa Nui until read]
This nation's Machalilla state park is home to the Agua Blanca archeological site which contains relics of
the Guangala and Valdivia cultures while indigenous peoples to the east regions of this nation include the
Secoya and Siona. The Agoyan Waterfall, this country's highest, is part of the Pastaza River which
originates at Mt. Tungurahua. This nation's capital is found on the eastern slopes of Mt. Pichincha and this
country is also home to the volcanoes, Cotopaxi and the farthest point from the Earth's center, Mt.
Chimborazo. The country that holds the Galapagos Islands, For 10 points, identify this South American
Andes nation, home to the cities of Guayaquil and its capital, Quito.
ANSWER: Ecuador
The Jambeli and Morro Channels flank this country's Puna Island, home to the aboriginal Tumbez
Indians, and this country's Santa Elena peninsula contains primitive settlements from the Las Vegas
culture. The Sierra Negra of Isabela Island and Indefatigable Island's (*) Charles Darwin Research
Station are located within this country's province of the Galapagos Islands. For 10 points, name this
South American country containing the port cities of Manta and Guayaquil and bordered by Columbia
and Peru, with capital at Quito.
ANSWER: Ecuador
Cattle are raised along this country's important transportation river, the Napo. This country's
international trade is concentrated at its largest city, Guayaquil (guy-uh-KEEL). This country's highest
peak is the inactive volcano located at Chimborazo, and it also contains the world's highest continuously
active volcano at Cotopaxi. For 10 points, name this South American country with a capital located at
Quito.
ANSWER: Republica del Ecuador
This nation's largest city contains the Malecon 2000, and its capital was founded as a colony at
Cuenca. Attractions in this nation include the Mitad del Mundo and the open-air markets at Otavalo.
This nation contains the Avenue of the Volcanos, and its highest peak is the furthest from the center
of the earth. An 1822 meeting between Jose de San Martin and Simon Bolivar took place in its largest city.
It contains the peaks of Chimborazo and Cotopaxi, and this nation owns an archipelago that contains the
islands of Isabella and Santa Cruz and the Charles Darwin Research Station. For 10 points, name this South
American nation containing the Galapagos Islands, whose cities include Guayaquil and Quito.
ANSWER: Ecuador
This nation's Podocarpus National Park is home to an endemic species of conifer and many other
plants. The largest province of this country is Azuay. One island group controlled by this country
includes Floreana Island and Isabela Island. This country is home to the farthest location from the
(*) Earth's center, Mount Chimborazo. This country is home to the large active volcano Cotopaxi. Its
largest city is Guayaquil. For 10 points, name this South American nation with capital at Quito.
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador
This nation contains a corridor called the Avenue of the Volcanoes, and its city of Otavalo is famous for its
open air markets. This nation is where Panama hats are produced, and its highest point is the furthest point
on earth from the earth's center. One island group controlled by this nation contains Baltra, Isabela, and San
Cristobal. This nation is home to the volcanoes Cayambe, Cotopaxi, and Chimborazo, and this country's
largest city is Guayaquil. For ten points, identify this South American nation which controls the Galapagos
Islands and has capital at Quito.
ANSWER: Ecuador
This country's El Oriente region is the source of the source of the Napo and Putumayo rivers. The
port cities of Manta and Esmeraldas lie on the western coast of this country, which also controls the
Floreana and Isabela Islands. Mountains in this country include Tungurahua, Illiniza, and Pichincha.
The Charles Darwin Research Station is located in this country, and its second highest peak is (*)
Cotopaxi. The farthest point from the center of the earth, Chimborazo, is located in this country, which saw
a 1822 meeting between Jose de San Martin and Simon Bolivar in Guayaquil. Along with Chile, it is one of
only two South American countries that do not have a border with Brazil. For ten points, name this country
which controls the Galapagos Islands and has its capital at Quito.
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador
The pasillo is a popular form of dance in this nation, whose traditional foods include a goat stew called
seco de chivo. The Valley of Longevity is an area near this country's city of Vilcabamba whose inhabitants
claim to have an unusually long life span. Puyo is the capital of its largest province, Pastaza. Textiles are
sold in this nation at the famous Otavalo Market, while the Incan ruins of Ingapirca are near its third-largest
city, Cuenca. Cotopaxi and Chimborazo are mountains within it. This nation owns an archipelago to its
west made famous by Darwin's finches, the Galapagos. For 10 points, name this country whose cities
include Guayaquil and Quito.
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador
The Whymper route can be used to climb one of the mountains in this country, which has both a province
and a city named "Banos", named for the hot springs that can be found there. Major ports in this country
include Machala, a major center of banana transport, and Puerto Bolivar, both of which are located on a bay
named for one of this country's cities. Notable volcanoes in this country include Pichincha, famous as the
site of a battle. The highest mountains in this country are Mount Chimborazo and Cotopaxi, a volcano. This
country controls the Galapagos Islands, and its cities include Guayaquil. For ten points, name this South
American nation with capital Quito, named for a famous line that runs through it.
ANSWER: Ecuador
It continues to dispute its border between its southern neighbor and this country's Zamora and Morona-
Santiago Provinces. Cotopaxi is its highest active volcano, while its two major river systems are the
Esmereldas and the Guayas. Its three main regions are La Costa, La Sierra, and El Oriente, and its capital is
serviced by Mariscal Sucre International Airport. This country's highest point, Chimborazo, is the point on
the earth's surface farthest from the center, and the capital of this country is surrounded by snow-capped
volcanoes like Pichincha. Owner of the Galapagos Islands, FTP, name this South American country whose
largest city is Guayaquil and whose capital is Quito.
ANSWER: Ecuador
Cultural life in this country's capital centers on the Avenida Amazonas. Rural migrants who come to cities
in this country speak the pidgin language "Media Lengua." A volcano in this country temporarily dammed
the Rio Chambo when it erupted, and lies just north of its city of Riobamba. This country's independence
was won during a battle on the slopes of an active volcano outside of its capital. In addition to Mount
Pichincha, the mountains Chimborazo and Cotopaxi are in this country. For 10 points, name this country
that owns Isabela, San Cristobal, and the rest of the Galapagos, whose largest city is Guayaquil, with a
capital at Quito.
ANSWER: Republic of [or Republica de] Ecuador
This country's Tungurahua Volcano is located just outside its city of Banos de Agua Santa, a tourist
destination, which has been repeatedly evacuated due to eruptions. The source of the Pastaza River is
in this country on the slopes of a volcano that is part what Alexander von Humboldt named the
"Avenue of the Volcanoes;" that volcano could destroy this country's city of Latacunga and threaten its
capital and is called Cotopaxi. The island of Baltra in this country, also known as South Seymour, is home
to the Charles Darwin Research Station and part of a chain whose largest is Isabela. This country largest
city is Guayaquil. For ten points, name this South American country with the Galapagos Islands and capital
Quito.
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador [or Republica del Ecuador]
This nation's easternmost point lies along the Napo River, and its largest island is Isla Puna. Its largest
cities were formed after Belalcazar's defeat of Ruminyahui, and this country's western shore is home to the
port cities of Manta and Machala, while much of its northern border is formed by the eastward-flowing
Putamayo River. Other locales in this country include the active volcanoes of Pichincha and Cotopaxi as
well as a mountain considered by some to be the tallest in the world because its peak is the farthest from the
center of the earth- Mount Chimborazo. Also home to Guayaquil and the owner of the Galapagos Islands,
for 10 points, identify this South American country with capital at Quito.
ANSWER: Republica del Ecuador
With its early history shrouded in mythology, its first distinguishable cultures were the Valdivia and
Manchalilla Cultures around 3500 BCE. Volcanoes in this nation include Pichincha, Illiniza,
Cotopaxi, and Chimborazo. It gained its independence from the Spanish Vice-Royalty of Peru (*) in
1822 and its capital city was made a UNESCO cultural heritage site in 1978. For ten points, name this
country to which the Galapagos Islands belong and which has its capital at Quito.
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador
Passengers are now banned from riding on the roof of trains to Alausi along this country's
Nariz del Diablo, or Devil's Nose railroad. This city's capital contains an winged aluminum
statue of the Virgin Mary stepping on a snake on Panecillo hill. This country's fastest-growing
city shares a name with Manta Bay on its coast. This country sued Chevron for extensively
polluting around the Napo oil formation in the Lago Agrio region. Because the Earth is an oblate
spheroid, the peak farthest from the earth's center is in this country, which owns Isabela island
and the finches thereon. For 10 points, name this country home to the Cotopaxi and Chimborazo
volcanoes, which owns the Galapagos Islands.
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador [or Republica del Ecuador]
This country reformed its census in 2010 after accusations of massive undercounting of the
Montubio ethnicity. In 2011, Chevron was ordered to pay nine billion dollars in compensation for
pollution near this country's Lago Agrio oil field. This country's Sangay National Park is home to the
Tunguraha volcano, which erupted in February 2014. The Avenue of the Volcanoes is located south
of its capital city. "Hieleros" mine ice from a mountain in this country that is the (*) farthest surface
point from the center of the Earth, Mount Chimborazo. An archipelago here contains the islands of Baltra,
Santa Cruz, and San Cristobal. For 10 points, name this South American country which controls the
Galapagos Islands and whose largest city is Guyaquil (gwai-ah-KEEL).
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador [or Republica del Ecuador]
This country's coast can be traveled by taking the Ruta del Spondylus, which is also known as the Ruta
del Sol. The largest indigenous market in South America takes place in the city of Otavalo in this country.
This country's city of Puerto Lopez is located near to its Machalilla National Park, which includes the Isla
de la Plata home to many blue-footed boobies. A crater lake can be found in this country in Quilotoa, and
this country's capital is located near Cotopaxi. The Wolf and North Seymour Islands are located to the west
of this country as part of its Galapagos Islands. For ten points, name this country whose largest cities are
Guayaquil and Quito.
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador [or Republica del Ecuador]
The Rio Protocol governed the border between this country and neighboring Peru, which started a
conflict with this country in 1995 over the disputed Condor Cordillera. This country was liberated from
Spanish rule at the Battle of Pichincha. This country contains a highland region called La Sierra, which is
the location of its highest point, Chimborazo. For 10 points, name this country, the home of Mount
Cotapaxi, which also claims the Galapagos islands.
ANSWER: Ecuador
This polity's most active volcano, located in the southern portion of the Northern Volcanic Zone, is Sangay,
which is taller than Pichincha in this country's north. This nation's largest city contains the Malecon 2000, a
boardwalk on the Guayas River. That city shares its name with a gulf in this country whose southern border
extends into Punta Parinas in Peru. This nation also owns a Pacific archipelago which includes Fernandina
Island and Isabela Island, home to marine iguanas and a variety of finches. For 10 points, Guayaquil is the
largest city of this South American nation, owner of the Galapagos Islands, with capital at Quito.
ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador
Every August since 1947, this European city has held the oldest multi-week "Festival Fringe"
for theater productions, founded in competition with its International Festival. Its tourist
attractions include a vertically-oriented Camera Obscura, which projects images of it down onto
a white table; that attraction and its Grassmarket area are along its Royal Mile in Old Town. The
port area of Leith is in this city, where the historic Holyrood Palace is visible from a parliament
building. The Waverley railway station lets passengers off in this city in the Midlothian region,
the largest on the southern coast of the Firth of Forth. For 10 points, name this major Scottish
city east of Glasgow.
ANSWER: Edinburgh, Scotland
This country is home to many tombs called Mastabas. This nation's Siwa Oasis can be found in its
Qattara Depression, which is the second lowest point in all of Africa. The ancient cities of Thebes and
Memphis would be located in this nation. For 10 points, name this country that once sported the Pharos
Lighthouse in its city of Alexandria.
ANSWER: Egypt
Several stelae [STEE-lee] from this country are shaped like lunettes on top, including the twin
Nectanebo stelae. Another stele [STEE-luh] from this country which describes the religious vision
of a leader and shows him feeding a creature is the Dream Stele. The ancient unification of this
country is depicted on the Narmer Palette. A pair of massive ancient rock temples in the south of
this country were moved in the 1960s to prevent flooding. A 240 foot long sculpture in this country
depicts a creature with the question of a lion and head of a man. Name this country that is home to
Amarna and Giza, the location of the Great Pyramids.
ANSWER: Egypt
In 1997, sixty-two people were killed outside a museum in this country near Deir el-Bahri
(ah-DEER-el-BA-ha-ree). The temple complex of Karnak is located in this country, the home of the Coptic
Church. Two rock temples in this country were relocated in 1968 to avoid flooding from the Aswan High
Dam. Its capital, the "city of a thousand minarets," is home to Tahrir Square. For ten points, name this
country on the western side of the Sinai Peninsula in northeastern Africa.
ANSWER: Arab Republic of Egypt
This country's Mount Yashkur is site of a mosque surrounded by courtyards called "ziyadas" and which
is named for Ahmad Ibn Tulun. Its lush Philae Island contains a popular temple complex and is sometimes
called its "pearl." Its Saint Catherine's Monastery is built into the side of its most famous mountain, and
this country has temple complexes at Karnak and Luxor. This location of Mount Sinai has seen changes to
its physical geography with the construction of the Aswan High Dam. For 10 points, name this
middle-eastern country with capital at Cairo.
ANSWER: Egypt
This country is home to a resort at Sharm el-Sheikh, and one of its other coastal cities is Port Said
(sigh-EED). It runs along the southwest border of the Gaza strip. A dam in this nation forces statues
at Abu Simbel to be moved, and (*) Karnak is one archaeology site in this nation. Lake Nasser is formed
by the Aswan High Dam in this country, which owns the Sinai Peninsula. The Suez canal was built in this
country. For 10 points, name this country with capital at Cairo that is home to the Great pyramids at Giza.
ANSWER: Arab Republic of Egypt [or Jumhuriyat Misr al-Arabiyah]
Birqat Karun is a lake found in the Al Fayyum region of this country. The Ras Mohammed National park is
found at the southern tip of a peninsula belonging to this country, and the disputed Hala-ib triangle lies at
the southwest corner of this country. The Kebira Crater is located along the western border of this country
which is home to the Gilf-al-Kibr plateau. The Qatarra Depression contains several brackish oases, and
manmade features include the Great and Little Bitter Lakes as well as a large dam on the First Cataract at
Aswan that holds back Lake Nasser. Containing the cities of Luxor and Alexandria, for 10 points, identify
this country with its capital at Cairo.
ANSWER: Egypt [or Al-Masr]
The highest point in this country is on its peninsula at Mount Catherine. This country's aptly named
Western Desert features a deep basin called the Qattara Depression. The temple complex of Abu Simbel
had to be relocated in this country after its location was compromised by the building of the Aswan High
Dam. That dam in this country resulted in the creation of Lake Nasser. For 10 points, name this country
that controls the Sinai Peninsula and has the delta of the Nile River right near its capital Cairo.
ANSWER: Arab Republic of Egypt [or Jumhuriyat Misr al-Arabiyah]
This nation is home to Great Bitter Lake and Wadi Abbad. Abu Simbel and Port Said border major
waterways in this arid nation. This nation disputes ownership of the Hala-ib Triangle with its southern
neighbor, and also controls the Sinai Peninsula. Its Coptic population is centered at its city of Alexandria,
while its capital is the most populous city in Africa. For 10 points, name this northern African nation with
capital at Cairo.
ANSWER: Egypt
This international boundary is where the Ababda group lives. This line was set at the 22nd parallel
by the 1899 Condominium Agreement. To the north of the extreme eastern section of this line is the
Hala'ib Triangle, which is claimed by both countries defined by this line. As a result of historical
claims to the Triangle, neither country claims the (*) Bir Tawil to the south of this line. The similar
Wadi Halfa Salient along this border is of less concern because its villages were largely destroyed by the
creation of Lake Nasser. For 10 points, identify this international border located between Abu Simbel and
the second cataract of the Nile, which separates two former British colonies in northeastern Africa.
ANSWER: the border between Egypt and Sudan [order not important, but do not accept or prompt if only one country is given]
A luminary author claimed to eat at the restaurant in this building every day so as to be assured he
could not see it. This building was supposed to last for only twenty years, but was kept since it was found
useful in broadcasting radio communications. Luminaries in literature and the arts launched an "Artists'
Protest" against the construction of this building. Built for the 1889 World's Fair, this structure is located on
the Champ-de-Mars and was designed by Emile Nougier, Maurice Koechlin, and its namesake. For the
point, name the tallest building in Paris.
ANSWER: Eiffel Tower [or La Tour Eiffel]
In the east of this country lies the city of Perquin in Morazan department, near the site of the El Mozote,
where several hundred civilians were killed in a massacre. The west of this country is notable for its Ruta de
Flores and archaeological sites like Joya (hoya) de Ceren and Tazumal, and the neo-Gothic cathedral of the
country's second-largest city Santa Ana. This country's capital is home to the Flor Blanca stadium, where a
dirty dishrag was famously raised in place of another country's burnt flag, and the more modern Cuscutlan
Stadium. Home to cities such as San Miguel and San Vicente, for 10 points, name this Central American
country with no Caribbean coastline bordered by Guatemala and Honduras.
ANSWER: El Salvador
This mountain was climbed by NHL executive Mark Waggoner so he could put the Stanley Cup on its
summit. Partisans of this peak insist that it is higher than Mount Massive, whose proponents put stones on
its summit to boost that mountain's height. This peak is located in the San Isabel National Forest a few
miles southwest of Leadville. This mountain is named for a territorial governor who brokered an 1873
treaty with the Ute tribe that opened up parts of Colorado for mining. For ten points, name this peak, the
highest mountain in the Colorado Rockies.
ANSWER: Mount Elbert
Its original name was Latin for "pine cone," but its current name is Karachy-Balkar for "Thousand
Mountain." Glaciers on this feature feed the Baksan, Kuban, and Malka rivers. It was once climbed
simultaneously by 400 mountaineers to celebrate the surrounding province's anniversary. This
inactive volcano located in the (*) Caucasus straddles the Russian-Georgian border. For 10 points, name
this mountain, the tallest in Europe.
ANSWER: Mount Elbrus
The Minnesota Glacier separates this chain into the Heritage Range and Sentinel Range. This chain
was first spotted by Herbert Hollick-Kenyon and its namesake. Including Hammer Col and Mount
Rutford, this range's highest peak is named for a (*) Georgia Senator. They are found in an eponymous
region to the east of Marie Byrd Land, between the Bellingshausen Sea and Ronne Ice shelf. For 10 points,
name this mountain chain that includes Vinson Massif in Antarctica.
ANSWER: Ellsworth Mountains
John Jakob Raskob was instrumental in financing this structure, and Robert Wiles took a famous
photo in front of this structure in 1947. In 2010 this structure underwent $500 million dollar
renovations, and this structure was filmed for eight consecutive hours by Andy (*) Warhol in a
namesake movie. Police officers accidentally shot nine bystanders in front of this building in 2012. One part
of this structure was originally meant to be a mooring point for dirigibles, and this building was featured
prominently in the film King Kong. This building is closed off past its 86th floor, its observation deck. For
10 points, name this tallest building in New York City.
ANSWER: Empire State Building
One island in this question of water was commonly described as Europe's last feudal state until a 2008
referendum. The deepest point in this question of water is Hurd's Deep. The world's first large-scale
tidal plant was built on the estuary of the Rance River, which flows into this here. The Solent is a
smaller, parallel question of water north of this one. The Cotentin Peninsula juts into this question of water
which contains islands such as Sark, Guernsey, (*) Jersey, and the Isle of Wight. This is the largest question
of water crossed by the Eurostar train. Ports on this question of water include Cherbourg, Le Havre,
Portsmouth, and Southampton. The narrowest point in this question of water is between Pas de Calais and the
white cliffs of Dover. For 10 points, name this question of water that lies between France and the United
Kingdom.
ANSWER: English Channel [or La Manche]
Ushant and the Isles of Scilly mark the western entrance of this question of water. The Bay of Saint-Malo and
Lyme Bay lie at the ends of its widest point. The Balliwicks of Guernsey and Jersey lie within it, as does the
Isle of Wight. Folkestone and Coquelles are linked by an underground tunnel under it. Brittany lies between
this question of water and the Bay of Biscay. Connecting the Atlantic Sea and the North Sea, Calais lies near its
narrowest point, the Strait of Dover. For 10 points, name this question of water separating France and Britain.
ANSWER: English Channel or La Manche
This country's fifteen counties include each of its two biggest islands, Saaremaa and Hiiumaa. Former
names of its capital include Kolyvan, Ravel, and Lyndanisse. Minority languages in this nation include
Mulgi, Seto, and Voro, while the language Vepsian is the origin of the name of this country's longest river,
the Narva, whose source is Lake Peipsi-Pihkva and which served as the Livonian border in the Middle
Ages, when it was under the control of the Teutonic knights. Today, that river is the eastern border of the
Schengen Zone, which this country joined along with eight others in 2007, and of the EU. With its highest
point at Suur Munamagi, this is, for 10 points, what Baltic nation whose capital is Tallinn?
ANSWER: Republic of Estonia [or Eesti Vabariik]
Out of this country's 1520 islands, the two largest are Saaremaa and Hiiumaa, which are also popular
vacation spots. In the southeast of this country is its highest point, Suur Munamagi, which is roughly
translated to English as Egg Hill. Its largest lake, Lake Peipus forms much of the border between this
country and Russia, from which this country achieved independence in 1920 through the Treaty of Tartu.
This country has been the setting of a battle in the Livonian War as well as in the Great Northern War, and
that location is also the namesake for the largest river in the country. The Narva flows along its border with
Russian until it empties into the Gulf of Finland. For 10 points, name this Baltic country with capital at
Tallinn.
ANSWER: Estonia
This nation contains Lahemaa National Park and lakes in this country include Vortsjarv and Lake Pskov.
This nation's border was set at the first of the Treaties of Tartu in 1920, and a large question of water on its
eastern border was the location of the Battle of the Ice, a victory for Alexander Nevsky. Containing Lake
Peipus, this nation's northeastern border is the Narva River, and the largest islands it controls are Saaremaa,
Hiiumaa, and Muhu. Located to the northeast of the Gulf of Riga, for 10 points, identify this Baltic Nation
located on the Gulf of Finland and north of Latvia, which has its capital at Tallinn.
ANSWER: Estonia
The Bale Mountains in this nation are the source of the Shebelle River, which is revered by its Arsi
Oromo and Sidowa peoples. The settlement of Dallol in this country has the highest average
temperature for any inhabited place in the world. This nation's south is home to the Ogaden Plateau,
while its Tigray region is home to the market town of (*) Adowa. Lake Tana, the source of the Blue
Nile, is located here, and this nation lost critical territory on the Red Sea when its province of Eritrea
declared independence from it in 1993. For ten points, name this East African nation, with capital at Addis
Ababa.
ANSWER: Ethiopia
This country's highest point, located in the snowy Semien Mountains, is Ras Dejen. This nation's village of
Dikika in the Afar Depression was the site of the discovery of Selam, an A. afarensis skeleton unearthed 26
years after a similar discovery, Lucy. This nation shares Lake Turkana with its southern neighbor Kenya,
while this nation's Lake Tana is the source of the Blue Nile which flows west into Sudan. It is bordered to
the north by Eritrea and Djibouti and to the east by Somalia. For 10 points, name this landlocked Horn of
Africa nation with capital Addis Ababa.
ANSWER: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
The headquarters of the African Union is in this country's capital. A triple junction is the reason for the
Afar Depression in this country. This country's Jewish population, the Falash Mura, is in the process of
emigrating to Israel. This country contains Lake Tana, the source of the Blue Nile. This country borders
Somalia to the east and Eritrea to the north. Government business in this country is conducted in a Semitic
language, Amharic. For 10 points, name this landlocked country on the Horn of Africa, the birthplace of
Haile Selassie.
ANSWER: Ethiopia
The Choke Mountains are an important bird-watching area in this country, as is Lake Chew Bahir, which is
located near its southern border. The Danakil desert is shared by this country and its northern neighbor and
is home to the Afar people. Gonder is among its larger cities and is home to castles constructed by Iyasu II,
and its city of Adama was once called Nazareth. This country's Lake Tana is the source of the Blue Nile,
and it is involved in the dispute over the Ogaden region with its eastern neighbor Somalia. For 10 points,
name this nation which neighbors Sudan and has capital Addis Ababa.
ANSWER: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
The ancient kingdom of Damot was centered in the northern part of this present-day country. Edesius
and Frumentius introduced Christianity to another kingdom located here; that kingdom's capital is
currently located in Tigray Province. This country contains the Church of St. Mary of Zion, and is said to
be the location from which the Queen of Sheba began her journey. This modern-day country, where Axum
was located, was also the site of the Battle of Adowa, which prevented its colonization by Italy. For 10
points, name this East African country, which was ruled in the 20th century by men including Haile
Selassie.
ANSWER: Ethiopia [or Abyssinia]
One type of these trees are called "Jarrahs." A species of these trees near Koolpin Gorge is found in Kakadu
National Park. These trees are blamed for the 1991 Oakland firestorm because, when on fire, they literally
explode into flames; however, the heat actually nurtures new trees to grow in their place. The secretion of
tiny droplets of oil by these trees led to the naming of the Blue Mountains. The "scribbly" type of this tree
secretes a namesake sticky sap. The leaves of these trees provide very few nutrients, so their most notable
inhabitant sleeps 20 hours a day. Didgeridoos use the wood of, for 10 points, what "gum" trees home to
kookaburras and koalas in Australia?
ANSWER: eucalyptus trees [or gum trees before mention]
The Sajur (SAH-jurr) and Khebur (KAY-burr) are two tributaries of this river, whose course was
altered by the construction of the Hindiya (hin-DEE-yuh) Barrage during the early twentieth century.
Formed from the confluence of the Murat Su and Kara Su rivers in Turkey, it flows past the city of Kufa in
Iraq before forming the Shatt-al-Arab (SHOT ahl-ah-ROB) with an eastern neighbor. This river loosely
defines the western edge of the Fertile Crescent and Mesopotamia. For 10 points, name this Asian river that
merges with the Tigris.
ANSWER: Euphrates River
This river's excess water is sent to Lake al-Habbaniyyah and Lake al-Milh. It is formed by the Karasu and
Murat rivers and runs through the Taurus Mountains. It forms the western border of the Jazirah region, and
five canals built by the Sassanids diverted some of its water to the east. Dams on it include the Ataturk, and
it forms Lake al-Asad in Syria. It joins with another river to the east at the village of al-Qurnah to form the
Shatt al-Arab, which flows into the Persian Gulf. For 10 points, name this river of Mesopotamia, often
paired with the Tigris.
ANSWER: Euphrates River
This river's namesake dam was Soviet-built and is the center of the Tabqa Barrage Scheme. This
river's only major tributaries are the Belikh and Khabur, and it forms Lake Hammar. Its
headwaters are the Karasu and Murat rivers, and its upper portion flows through the Taurus
Mountains. This river's Hadithah Dam submerged the ancient town of Anah, and the Ataturk Dam is
also on this river. It joins another river at (*) Basra to form the Shatt al-Arab. For 10 points, name this
river that is often paired with the Tigris.
ANSWER: Euphrates River
One tributary of this river is known for its karst and spring formation at Ra's al-Ayn. The Tishrin Dam sits
on this river and forms a reservoir also fed by one of this river's tributaries, the Sajur. The Murat River
feeds into it, and wheat is heavily cultivated in the valley of this river's largest tributary, the Khabur. The(*)
Keban Dam marks the formation of this river, the southernmost of the two rivers that empty into the Shatt
al-Arab. For ten points, name this Asian river which flows through Turkey, Syria, and Iraq, the southern
border of the Fertile Crescent, often paired with the Tigris.
ANSWER: Euphrates River
Victor Montagu started a group which now opposes this organization. Non-Inscrits are members of its
governing question that aren't affiliated with a recognized political faction. Bill Cash led a "rebellion" in John
Major's government against it. Article 49 of a 1992 treaty lays out the "Copenhagen criteria" for joining
this organization. Herman van Rompuy presides over the part of this organization which a 2009 treaty tasks
with defining its "general political directions and priorities." That treaty is the Treaty of Lisbon. For 10
points, name this supranational organization headquartered in Brussels.
ANSWER: European Union [or EU; or European Economic Community or EEC before second sentence]
Two features of this mountain are the Norton and Holbein Couloirs. One method of ascending this
mountain involves climbing through the Yellow Band and the Khumbu Icefall as part of the South
Col route. Andrew Waugh was responsible for one name of this mountain, which was first
successfully climbed by an expedition led by John Hunt. That expedition started in (*) 1953 and ended
when this mountain's peak was reached by Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay. For 10 points, name this
mountain, split between China and Nepal, that is the world's tallest.
ANSWER: Mount Everest [or Sagarmatha; or Chomolungma; or Zhumulangma Feng]
The prominence of this peak is the only one measured to be its elevation above sea level. The Khumbu
Icefall can be encountered on this mountain's easiest path, the South Col. [end of sentence] Reinhold
Messner was the first person to climb this mountain solo without the aid of oxygen. In 1856, the Great
Trigonometric Survey computed the height of this peak, which is still (*) growing at a rate of 2.4 inches per
year. This mountain near the city of Lukla is called in one language "Chomolungma." Tenzing Norgay, a
Sherpa, helped Edmund Hillary climb this mountain in the Himalayas. For 10 points, name this highest
mountain in the world.
ANSWER: Mount Everest (accept Chomolungma before mention; accept Sagarmatha)
The towns of Lukla and Namche both lie in the shadow of this mountain. This mountain is almost
completely surrounded by the Pumori glacier, and it is the main source of the Kosi River. It is located
in the Mahalangur subrange, and the Rongbuk Valley lies just north of this mountain. (*) Climbing
this mountain requires maneuvering past the Geneva Spur, the Western Cwm, and the Khumbu Icefall. An
ill-fated 1924 expedition up this mountain saw both Andrew Irvine and George Mallory die. Part of it lies in
Sagarmatha National Park, and it was first climbed by Tenzing Norgay and Edmund Hillary. For ten points,
name this Himalayan mountain, the world's tallest.
ANSWER: Mount Everest
It contains the Khumbu icefalls, and one can pass through the western Cwm ("coom") to reach this location.
The Rongbuk monastery is located to the north of this geographical feature, and climbers must ascend
Lhotse's northwestern face on their way to this mountain's summit. John Krakauer criticized another
climber for going without supplemental oxygen on his rescues. The first two people to ascend this 8,000 
meter-tall mountain were Tenzing Norgay and Edmund Hillary. For 10 points, name this Himalayan
mountain, named Chomolungma in the native tongue, the highest mountain in the world.
ANSWER: Mount Everest [or Chomolungma before mention]
In March 2005, Didier Delsalle became the first person to land a helicopter atop this location. This location
features geologic formations like the Yellow Band and the Geneva Spur. This mountain is separated from
Lhotse by the South Col, which can be accessed by traversing the Valley of Silence and the Khumbu Icefall.
The discovery of George Mallory's question on this mountain did not reveal whether he had beaten Tenzing
Norgay and Edmund Hillary to its summit. For 10 points, the Himalayas are home to what highest mountain
on Earth?
ANSWER: Mount Everest [or Sagarmatha or Chomolungma]
This geographic feature was named Peak XV before given its current name. A book by Jon
Krakauer, Into Thin Air, describes how eight people died here in one day in 1996. Andrew Waugh,
the British Surveyor General of India, recommended its current name, after his (*) predecessor in the
post. It is known as Zhumulangma Feng by the locals. The first person to climb this mountain solo was
Reinhold Messner, in 1980. This peak has two main climbing routes, the northeast ridge in China, and the
southeast ridge in Nepal, which the first two people to reach its summit, Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing
Norgay, used For ten points, name this peak situated in the Himalayas, the highest above sea level.
ANSWER: Mount Everest
This mountain can be reached from the southwest through the Western Cwm [COOM] and its slopes
contain the Khumbu Icefall. This peak's southern half sits in Sagarmatha National Park, and this mountain
is called Chomolangma by some of the local sherpa population. For 10 points, name this mountain on the
border between Nepal and China, in the Himalayas, whose summit was first reached by Tenzin Gyatso and
Sir Edmund Hillary, the highest mountain in the world.
ANSWER: Mount Everest
This region was the subject of a Marjory Stoneman Douglas book which referred to it as the "river
of grass," and it contains the almost entirely uninhabited Ten Thousand Islands. The Tamiami Trail,
eventually known as "Calle (KAI-yay) Ocho," runs through it. Over twelve hundred invasive (*)
Burmese pythons have been removed from this region since 2009. Napoleon Bonaparte Broward proposed
draining it. This region is fed by the Kissimmee River, which empties directly into Lake Okeechobee. For
10 points, name this large tropical wetlands region in southern Florida.
ANSWER: Everglades
Cape Sable, separated from the mainland by Whitewater Bay, marks the southwestern end of this national
park. The area known as Ten Thousand Islands sits off its western shore, and the Harney and Shark Rivers
run west to east through it. Fed by the Kissimmee River, it acts as a watershed for the Biscayne Aquifer.
Home to the endangered Florida Panther, FTP name this large "river of grass," a national park in South
Florida.
ANSWER: Everglades National Park
This region lies east of a region known as the Ten Thousand Islands and its northern border is often
defined by the Tamiami Trail. The national park named for this region extends into Broward and
Dade counties and lies south of Big Cypress Nation Preserve, and is also responsible for supplying the
Biscayne aquifer with water. The majority of this region lies south of the Caloosahatchee and St.
Lucie Rivers although technically this system begins as far north at the Kissimee River near Orlando.
For 10 points, name this series of wetlands found in the southern portion of Florida.
ANSWER: Florida Everglades
Marjory Stoneman Douglas has been called the "Grandmother" of this location. The Shark River runs
through it, and this location has been called the "River of Grass" due to the prevalence of sawgrass.
Attempts to restore this place involved straightening the Kissimmee River. Its headwaters are located at
Lake Okeechobee, and "Alligator Alley" passes through this location. For 10 points, name this large
wetlands area located in Florida.
ANSWER: the Everglades
This geographic entity includes Whitewater Bay near its southern tip, Cape Sable, which is home to a
subspecies of Seaside Sparrow. Much of the U.S. population of the Snail Kite also lives here, as well as in
the nearby Big Cypress Swamp. The Ten Thousand Islands lie on the coast of it, and the Tamiami Trail
crosses through it. It has been depleted due to draining of Lake Okeechobee. FTP, name this slow-moving
"river of grass" in southern Florida.
ANSWER: The Everglades [accept Everglades National Park]
This city is the northern terminus of the Richardson Highway; ninety-eight miles south of this city, a
highway built under the direction of William Hoge terminates at Delta Junction. This city contains a
thirty-six-thousand-year-old mummified bison nicknamed "Blue Babe" and Growden Memorial Park, the
site of the annual "Midnight Sun" baseball game. This city was named after Theodore Roosevelt's Vice
President and, though not Juneau, was the site at which Alaska's state constitution was signed. For 10
points, name this largest city in the interior of Alaska and, after Anchorage, the second-largest in that state.
ANSWER: Fairbanks
This island chain's namesake company used its southern Lafonia region for extensive sheep farming. An
isthmus in this chain is home to Goose Green. The wreck of the ship General Belgrano lies just outside the
320-kilometer "Exclusion Zone" of this archipelago, whose two namesake islands are separated by a sound.
Its major city of Port Stanley was once home to a British air base. For 10 points, name this contested
archipelago east of Argentina.
ANSWER: Falkland Islands [or Falklands; or Las Islas Malvinas]
In 1684, sailors on the vessel Bachelour's Delight visited these islands, then partly named after Sebald de
Weert. One member of that boat trip mistakenly identified an island in this group as Pepys Island, and
Frenchmen called these islands after their hometown in Brittany, also home to Jacques Cartier. Early
settlements on these islands included Port Louis and Port Egmont. The name of commander Miguel
Quimaraez de Luna's beloved pet macaw was the source of the Jason Islands, located to the northwest of the
two main islands. Mount Usborne is the highest peak in these islands, and Berkeley Sound is to the north of
the capital city, serviced by Point Pleasant Airport and once known as Puerto Argentino. For 10 points,
name these islands with capital at Port Stanley, source of a 1980's war.
**ANSWER: Las Islas Malvinas or Falkland Islands
Whether or not this region is included in the terms of sixth article of the 1790 Nootka Sound
Convention is debated. Mount Tumbledown and the Two Sisters Ridge are high ground positions near this
region's capital. This site of Goose Green reaffirmed its status in a March 2013 referendum by nearly
unanimously declaring for the country that has administered it since 1833. One country ousted Governor
Rex Hunt when it captured Stanley, the capital of this region that is also called the Islas Malvinas. For 10
points, name this archipelago contested in a 1982 war between the United Kingdom and Argentina.
ANSWER: Falkland Islands [or Falklands; or Islas Malvinas before read]
The island of Kadavu (pronounced "Kandavu") is one of the least developed portions of this country, and,
along with Ono Island and Galoa Island, it is surrounded by the Great Astrolabe Reef. Mount Tomanivi lies
to the east of the city of Nadi ("Nandi") in this nation. Ueans and other Rotumans form an ethnic minority
in this nation, although they have more in common with the Polynesians of nearby Samoa and Tonga than
the native Melanesians of this nation. Nearly 40% of the population of this nation is made up of Indian
immigrants who were brought to this nation by the British in the 19th century. For 10 points, name this
Pacific island nation whose two major islands are Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, and which has its capital at
Suva.
ANSWER: Fiji
In 1879, the British began bringing Indian laborers to this country to produce sugar, and when it gained
independence from Britain in 1970, the Indians outnumbered the native population. This country consists of
over 800 islands and islets, such as Moala, Gau, and Kadavu, but only about 110 of them are inhabited. The
Koro Sea is enclosed by the islands of this country. This country lies just to the west of Tonga, to the east of
Vanuatu, and to the south of Tuvalu, and over 70% of its population lives on its two largest islands, Vanua
Levu and Viti Levu. For 10 points, name this South Pacific island country with capital at Suva.
ANSWER: Fiji
Several islands in this group are divided by the Kadovu Passage, while Lakemba is separated from Tuvuca
by the Lakeba Passage. The core group's northernmost point, Nambouono, is found on an island defined by
the Loa Peninsula and Natewa and Savusavu Bays, while that island is separated from this chain's only
international airport by the Bligh Water. That airport is located at Nadi, on the island featuring the Sigatoka
Sand Dunes and the widest river, the Rewa. This country is found 1100 miles north of New Zealand, in the
Koro Sea. Seventy percent of its population lives on the island Viti Levu, whose large population of Indian
origin is a source of political instability. For 10 points, name this Melanesian archipelago state near the
International Date Line, whose capital is Suva.
ANSWER: Fiji [or Fijiian Islands]
This nation's Naitasiri Province contains the Sovi Basin, and its northernmost point is the Udu Point, which
was recently hit by two earthquakes. Rewa River is the widest river in this nation and has its headwater in
Mount Tomanivi, the highest point in this nation. The Kadavu Island is the third largest island in this nation,
and its international airport is located by the Bligh Water in Nadi. The Koro Sea is located in this country
and a large portion of the population lives on its two largest islands, Vanua Levu and Viti Levu. For 10
points, name this South Pacific island nation with the capital at Suva.
ANSWER: Republic of Fiji [accept Matanitu ko Viti]
The island of Rotuma in this country is located far to the north of this country's main islands. The
town of Levuka, on Ovalau Island, was capital of this country from 1874-1882, and the Koro Sea is
located in this country. Mount Tomanivi is the highest mountain on the main island of this country,
which has an international airport at Nadi. It contains the Lau group, Vanua Levu, and Viti Levu, site of
this country's capital, Suva. For 10 points, name this Pacific island nation.
ANSWER: Fiji
Some of the lakes in this country include Orivesi, Inari, and Saimaa. This country includes the Aland
Islands and the regions of Savonia, Karelia, and Ostrobothnia. The national language has more in common
with Estonian and Hungarian than the countries it shares a land border with. Its northern section, which
includes Ranua Wildlife Park and Lainio Snow Village and is sparsely populated and known for its
reindeer, is Lapland. This country is currently headed by President Tarja Halonen and Prime Minister Mari
Kiviniemi. Name this nation between Sweden and Russia whose capital is Helsinki.
ANSWER: Finland
One island in this question of water was targeted by Operation Tanne Ost in World War II, and another was
declared the Soviet Republic of Soldiers and Fortress-Builders by Stepan Petrichenko. The islands of
Lavansari and Gogland are found within this question of water. The city of Vyborg overlooks this question of
water at its confluence with the Saimaa Canal. It receives the Narva and Neva rivers, and it is separated
from Lake Ladoga by the isthmus of Karelia. This question is used for shipping that embarks from Porkkala,
Kronstadt, and Tallinn. For 10 points, name this inlet of the Baltic Sea that has shoreline on Russia, Estonia,
and its namesake country, creating beaches at Helsinki.
ANSWER: the Gulf of Finland [or Suomen Lahti; or Finsky Zaliv]
This gulf's Vasilevsky Island is connected to the mainland by the Annunciation Bridge. Other
islands within this gulf include Lavansari, Gogland, and the home of the Plague Fort and the Naval
Cathedral, Kronstadt. The Saimaa canal terminates on this gulf near Vyborg. The Narva River flows
into this gulf, as does the (*) Neva River. Ports on this gulf include Porkkala, the Estonian capital Tallinn,
and St. Petersburg. For 10 points, name this gulf of the Baltic Sea, which is named for the country on its
north.
ANSWER: Gulf of Finland
An activist for one of these groups, Theresa Spence, engaged in a hunger strike in 2012 in support of
the Idle No More movement, which seeks to support the interests of these groups. A school under the
continuous administration of these groups was established in Blue Quills in 1971. Ovide Mercredi is a
longtime activist for these groups and participated in the 1992 Charlottetown Accord, which would have
instituted self-government and treaty review for these peoples. This term is not the preferred nomenclature
for the Metis and Inuit peoples of the country in which these peoples reside. For ten points, give this term
that refers to the Native American peoples of Canada.
ANSWER: First Nations peoples [prompt on Canadian Native Americans; prompt on Canadian Indians; prompt on other descriptive answers]
An unusual of these places, which was built to resemble a Gothic cathedral, is found in Gothenburg,
Sweden. The dominant one of these institutions in the U.K. is found on the Isle of Dogs and is called
Billingsgate. The largest one of these insitutions in the world was built following the Great Kanto
Earthquake and is known as Tsukiji; that one, in Japan, runs (*) auctions from 5:20 to 7:00 every
morning. A facility which opened in the Bronx in 2005 now houses one which formerly was a center of
Mafia activity. At the Pike Place one of these in Seattle, items are commonly tossed between employees
yelling in unison. For 10 points, identify these facilities at which seafood is sold wholesale.
ANSWER: fish markets
This region was where a wave of arguments over iconoclasm, known as the Beeldenstorm, broke out.
Thierry of Alsace brought a relic from the Second Crusade to this modern-day province's Basilica of the
Holy Blood. A poem named for this region describes how "the poppies blow, between the crosses, row on
row," is about this region's "Fields," and is by John McCrae. A city in this region was where the Germans
first used mustard gas in World War I; that city was Ypres. This province includes the city of Bruges. For
the point, name this Dutch-speaking two-province area of northern Belgium.
ANSWER: Flanders [or Vlaanderen; or Flandre]
Visitors to this city often drop a coin into a bronze bull's mouth, then rub its nose for luck. This city
celebrates the First Crusade with a festival in which a cart full of fireworks explodes. An outdoor statuary in
this city is home to Giambologna's Perseus with the Head of Medusa. Gold merchants swarm the central
bridge over this city's river. The Vasari Corridor here connects the Vecchio Palace with the Pitti Palace.
An octagonal building adjacent to this city's cathedral held a competition over the design of its doors, which
Ghiberti won. Like its neighbor Pisa, the Arno River flows through this city. For 10 points, name this home
of the Uffizi, the capital city of Tuscany, Italy.
ANSWER: Florence, Italy [or Firenze]
This state's natural high point at Britton Hill is the lowest of any U.S. state and is topped in height by
many buildings. Much of its western border is formed by the Perdido River, while another of its borders
partially tracks the Saint Mary's River, and the St. John's River runs through its largest city. Lake
Okeechobee is found here, as is the southern portion of the Okefenokee Swamp. For 10 points, name this
southern state, the site of the Everglades.
ANSWER: Florida
One lake in this state is surrounded by the Rim Canal, around which it may be easier to travel than cutting
directly through the lake. This state, along with North Dakota, has the smallest number of earthquakes in the
country. An island chain off the coast of this state has a military base on Fleming Island. The Chattahoochee
River flows through this state's panhandle. This state's largest freshwater lake is Okeechobee. The
Okefenokee Swamp is located in the north of this state, and a national park in this state features the
Kissimmee River and is home to both crocodiles and alligators. For 10 points, name this state that houses
the Everglades.
ANSWER: Florida
This state contains Singer Island and Anna Maria Island, and its Big Talbot Island is a state park.
This state's highest point is Britton Hill, and it is home to the Rim Canal and the Seven Mile Bridge.
Dry Tortugas National Park lies in this state, which shares (*) Okefenokee Swamp with its northern
neighbor and contains the Kissimmee River. This state's Cape Canaveral is home to the Kennedy Space
Center. Big Cypress Swamp, Fort Lauderdale, Tampa Bay, Epcot, and the Everglades all lie within this
state. For ten points, name this Sunshine State home to Key West, with capital at Tallahassee.
ANSWER: Florida
This state's highest point is Britton Hill, and the Chattahoochee and Flint Rivers meet in the north of this
state to drain into Apalachicola Bay, which is due east of Cape San Blas. Although it's not North Carolina,
the barrier island Sanibel is a popular tourist destination south of this state's Charlotte Harbor. The cities of
Sanford, Daytona Beach, and Winter Haven lie along its I-4 corridor. Cape Sable separates a bay named for
this state from an island group known as its namesake keys. Cape Canaveral, site of the Kennedy Space
Center, is on the east coast of this state. For ten points, name this state home to Miami and Orlando, with
capital at Tallahassee.
ANSWER: State of Florida [or Estado de Florida]
A national park in this state is named for the author of The Yearling, Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings. Part of this
state's northern border is along the St. Mary's River. Another national park in this state contains the
Western Hemisphere's largest masonry structure, Fort Jefferson. Since 1565, this state's European
settlement of Saint Augustine has been continuously occupied. This state, home to Dry Tortugas National
Park, is also home to an 885-square-mile city on its eastern coast and to a freshwater lake, Okeechobee. For
10 points, name this state home to Jacksonville, the Everglades, and Walt Disney World.
ANSWER: Florida
This U.S. state contains the entirety of the Apalachicola River, which is formed at Jim Woodruff
Dam from the Flint and Chattahoochee Rivers. Its most populous city, in Duval County, is located on
the St. John's River and was once known as Cowford, while its westernmost major city is known as
the City of the Five Flags and is located on a namesake (*) bay on the Gulf of Mexico. Also home to the
Okeefenokee Swamp and Lake Okeechobee, for 10 points, name this U.S. state whose cities include
Jacksonville and Pensacola and whose capital is Tallahassee.
ANSWER: Florida
This state has the southernmost American shad run in its longest river, the St. Johns River. The
southwestern part of this state is the location of the Ten Thousand Islands and the Caloosahatchee River. Its
Biscayne National Park contains an island off its southern coast, and this state contains Lake Okeechobee.
For 10 points, name this state that contains the Everglades, is indented by Tampa Bay, and has cities like St.
Petersburg, Orlando, and Miami.
ANSWER: Florida
In this state, Shingle Creek flows into Lake Tohopekaliga. This state contains the delta of the Apalachicola
River, which lies west of the tourist center of Panama City. Britton Hill is the highest point in this state, in
which the Gandy Bridge crosses a bay whose shores contain the city of Clearwater. The south of this state
contains the Kissimmee river, which empties into Lake Okeechobee. Islands including Largo and West
make up this state's Keys. Forming a peninsula between the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico, this is,
for ten points, which U.S. state home to the Everglades and the city of Miami?
ANSWER: Florida
Taylor Creek flows into this state's largest freshwater lake, while its highest point is the lowest state high
point. That point is Britton Hill, and this state also contains the Myakka and Peace rivers. One site in this
state commemorates a Huguenot colony led by Jean Ribault and slaughtered by Spaniards, Fort Caroline
National Memorial. The Ten Thousand Islands can be found off this state's coast, and this state contains Big
Cypress National Preserve near a question of water fed by the Kissimmee River, Lake Okeechobee. For 10
points, identify this state home to the Everglades and its namesake Keys, with capital at Tallahassee.
ANSWER: Florida
They are formed from large coral reefs which have risen above sea level, which prevents below-ground
burial since coral is so tough. Some of them are named Fat Deer, Boot and Fleming, the latter of which
cannot be visited by civilians as it houses a Navy base. Currently, they can be reached only by a single two-
lane highway which meant no one could avoid the US border inspections in 1982 despite being part of the
United States. Henry Flagler originally connected this archipelago to the rest of the country with the
Overseas Railrway, though the train itself no longer functions. Last seen in the news for the Cuban refugees
arriving at the Seven-Mile Bridge, name, for 10 points, this island chain off the southern coast of Florida.
ANSWER: The Florida Keys
The statue Christ of the Deep can be found within John Pennekamp Park in this island group. The
city of Marathon is in this archipelago, which is primarily within Monroe County. The Seven Mile
Bridge is part of the Overseas Highway, which was built in this archipelago after a deadly hurricane
here. A group of uninhabited islands in its western part is named the (*) Dry Tortugas. Largo and West
are among the islands in this group. For 10 points, name this archipelago extending off the southern end of
Florida.
ANSWER: the Florida Keys
Buildings in this complex indicate their status through a lion of statues on their roofs led by a man
riding a phoenix. This complex is guarded by a famous pair of lion statues of which the male lion guards an
orb and the female lion guards her cub. Many doors in this complex have 9 rows of 9 knobs, and this
complex as a whole has 9,999 doors for luck. The Meridian Gate leads to this complex, which contains the
Palace of Heavenly Purity. It is adjacent to Zhongnanhai, a garden that serves as the headquarters for the
Communist Party. For ten points, name this complex in Beijing that served as the Imperial Palace of the
Ming and Qing dynasties.
ANSWER: Forbidden City [or Palace Museum]
Blue tiles on the roof of one building in this place symbolically protect a library from flames; that is the
Hall of Literary Glory. Twenty-five seals are contained here in the Hall of Union, as are clocks that were a
gift from the Macartney Mission to a man who built the Palace of Tranquil Longevity after announcing his
retirement. The caisson in this location's largest palace suspends a silver mirror that was said to fall on any
non-emperor who dared to sit on the Dragon Throne. That building, the Hall of Supreme Harmony, is
across the Golden River from the Meridian Gate. For 10 points, name this palace complex behind
Tiananmen Square in Beijing.
ANSWER: Forbidden City [accept "Gugong"]
The reservation community of Teec Nos Pos is the closest inhabited area to this site, and it is maintained by
the Navajo, whose capital of Window Rock is 15 miles southwest of this site. Ozone damage has been
recorded above this site, caused by pollution from the Kayenta Coal mine nearby. The platform raised
above this site in 1912 includes the flags of the Navajo and Ute nations, along with those of the US states
joined there. FTP what is this numerically named location at which the states of Utah, Colorado, New
Mexico and Arizona meet at 90-degree angles?
ANSWER: Four Corners
The location of this monument was fixed by a 1925 Supreme Court case, although 2009 GPS reports
indicated that it may be up to three miles away from its intended location. This landmark was originally a
sandstone marker commemorating E.N. Darling's 1868 survey; the current granite and brass disk sits on the
site specified by Chandler Robbins's 1875 survey. The closest major towns to this monument are
Farmington and Durango. Maintenance of this monument is overseen by the Navajo Nation. For 10 points,
name this monument indicating the place at which one can be in the maximum possible number of U.S.
states at once.
ANSWER: Four Corners Monument
One place with this name is near the shore of Kasba Lake in Canada. Teec Nos Pos is the closet
inhabited municipality to the center of the region named for this location in the United States. This
name describes a region that contains the Totem Pole rock formation as well as the ruins located at
Hovenweep and Canyon de Chelly National Monuments. This region also contains Monument Valley
and Mesa Verde National Park, the site of Anasazi cliff dwellings, as well as the Ute Mountain and Navajo
Nation reservations. For 10 points, name this region named for the place where Colorado, Arizona, Utah
and New Mexico meet.
ANSWER: Four Corners Region
Farmers in this country use a word meaning "land" to refer to the belief that this nation's
geography and climate preclude its crops from being grown elsewhere. Bidonvilles are shanties
in this country. The postwar economy of this country grew during the "thirty glorious years," and
livestock predominates in this nation's Massif Central. The V150 train, which broke a land speed
record for locomotives in 2007, operates on the TGV rail service in this country. This country's
farmers benefit the most from the Common Agricultural Policy. About seventy-five percent of
this nation's power comes from nuclear energy, more than any other country. For 10 points,
name this second-largest economy in the European Union.
ANSWER: France [or the French Republic]
Significant languages spoken by immigrants to this country include Kayble. In its south, a
community of two million speakers uses dialects, such as Auvergnat, of the Romance language
Occitan. This country also contains half a million Arabic speakers and, though it is not Belgium,
nearly one hundred thousand Flemish speakers. The (*) Toubon Law mandates that the only language
used in public contexts here is the one this country exported to its former colonies of Congo, Algeria, and
Haiti. For 10 points, name this European country which shares the speakers of Basque with its southern
neighbor, Spain.
ANSWER: France [or French Republic; or Republique Francaise]
A group called CODOFIL is dedicated to preserving this language in the United States. Madawaska
(mah-duh-WAS-kuh) and Van Buren are U.S. cities where over seventy percent of the population speaks
this language. Both of those communities are in Maine. It is predominantly spoken in one country's
"Walloon Region" and is found in the U.S. in such dialects as "Acadian" and "Cajun." For 10 points, name
this official language of Gabon, Cote d'Ivoire (COT div-WAR), and the Canadian province of Quebec.
ANSWER: French [or Francais]
A "legal" form of this language is used for contracts on an island home to the Jerriais language. It
was once spoken in the Missouri Ozarks, whose name comes from this language. This language's
word for "yes" once distinguished it from the southern (*) Occitan language. Although not Germanic,
this language uses a guttural R sound. This language's counting system is based on the number twenty, and
its dialects include Acadian, Belgian, and Swiss. For 10 points, name this language spoken in Quebec.
ANSWER: French [or francais]
This language is regulated by the "Allgood Law," which was used to crack down on a Georgia Tech
branch campus for using English on its website. A variant of this tongue spoken by Asian servants was
called "Tay Boi," and a version in the Americas is called "Acadian." This is the predominant language in
Wallonia, and a majority of the world's speakers of it live in Africa, in such countries as Gabon. For 10
points, name this Romance language, spoken as the first language in Quebec.
ANSWER: French [or le francais]
This area's largest city lies near a prehistorical site founded by Henry de Lumley on Mount Boron called
Terra Amata. W. Somerset Maugham lived in this area's Cap Ferrat, and a country within this region is
ruled by the House of Grimaldi. One city in this region holds an annual film festival that gives out the
Golden Palm. Saint-Tropez and Cannes are cities in this area, within which Monaco lies. Also known as the
Azure Coast, its most populous city is Nice. For 10 points, give this name associated with the
Mediterranean coast of southeast France, a popular destination for wealthy tourists.
ANSWER: French Riviera [or Azure Coast or Cote d'Azur before mention]
The first foreigner to climb this mountain was diplomat Rutherford Alcock. Many people visit this peak
because of the 1960 novel Sea of Trees. The government put up signs around it reading "Your life is a
precious gift." A forest at this mountain's base is said to be the home of demons. That forest is named
Aokigahara and, like this peak, is located on Honshu Island. For 10 points, name this highest mountain in
Japan.
ANSWER: Mount Fuji
In 1966, this mountain's base was the site of the crash of the BOAC Flight 911 that killed 75 Thermo King
employees. Its base contains an exceptionally quiet forest known as the Sea of Trees, where hundreds of
people have committed suicide despite posted signs urging otherwise. This dormant volcano, which last
erupted in 1708, is near the small town of Gotemba. The symmetrical snow-topped cone of this mountain is
the subject of many woodblock prints. For 10 points, the island of Honshu is home to what Shinto holy site,
the tallest mountain in Japan?
ANSWER: Mount Fuji
In 2004, 30 scientists were held hostage in this archipelago by fisherman who demanded the right
to use more efficient fishing methods. These islands were removed from UNESCO's danger list in
2010 because of lobbying from Rafael Correa. Fernandina is the most volcanically active of these
islands, which are governed from the capital of Puerto Baquerizo Moreno on (*) San Cristobal. The
island of Isabela here, which lies on the Equator, is home to an endemic species of penguin as well as giant
tortoises and marine iguanas. Many varieties of finch are also associated with, for 10 points, what
Ecuadorean island group visited by Charles Darwin?
ANSWER: Galapagos Islands
Places like Buccaneer Cove located at this place were named in honor of the buccaneer Ambrose Crowley,
who drew the first navigation chart of this archipelago. It is believed that this archipelago was once
connected by the Cocos Ridge. This archipelago is located at the confluence of five ocean currents, and at a
triple junction of tectonic plates, although most of the islands of this archipelago lie on the Nazca Plate. For
10 points, identify this archipelago of volcanic islands west of Ecuador, famed for its vast number of
endemic species and visits from Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: Galapagos Islands [or Islas Galapagos; or Archipielago de Colon]
This region includes the Ulla, Sil, and Mino rivers, and numerous narrow bays such as the Ria de Arosa
indent its coast. An autonomous community, it includes the provinces of Lugo, Orense, Pontevedra, and La
Coruna. Its Estaca de Vares Point juts into the Cantabrian Sea, while its Cape Finisterre points into the
Atlantic Ocean. Bordered by the autonomous communities of Asturias and Castilla-Leon to the east, and
Portugal to the south, its capital is Santiago de Compostela. FTP, name this region in the northwest of
Spain, whose language is closely related to Portuguese.
ANSWER: Autonomous Region of Galicia
A nude man with a cloth draped over his left shoulder holding a staff in left hand represents this in a statue
by Bernini in the Piazza Navona. Its low elevation leads it to be slow, and nearby people distinguish
between its old and new alluvium called bhangar and khatar, respetively. The government of the country
that contains this geographic feature began a namesake action plan in 1987 to treat and develop it while
educating the public about keeping its waters free from pollution, and Kumbh Mela, a Hindu festival, is
practiced yearly in it. For 10 points, identify this longest and most holy river of India.
ANSWER: Ganges or Ganga River
This river with a tributary called Hooghly is dammed at Farakka. With two types of alluvium, bhangar and
khadar, its namesake Upper Canal diverts water at the Haridwar dam from its glacial source in the
Himalayas. This river's delta region contains a halophytic mangrove forest, the Sundarbans. Heavily
polluted from industrial waste and religious practices, it flows through Uttar Pradesh and New Delhi, before
emptying into the Bay of Bengal from a wide delta after merging with the Brahmaputra River. For 10
points, name this holy river in India.
ANSWER: Ganges River
The "stone-crushing mafia" that engages in illegal mining near this river possibly poisoned a
protester in 2011. G.D. Agrawal fasted as part of a hunger strike to protest environmental damage to
this river. Millions of people visit this river during the (+) Kumbh Mela gathering. Pilgrims wade
into this river at sites such as Varanasi, which releases millions of liters of (*) sewage into it each day.
For 10 points, name this longest river in India, which is sacred to many Hindus.
ANSWER: Ganges River [or Ganga River]
A grotto at one of these kinds of locations houses Giambologna's Bathing Venus. That location of this
kind houses a large amphitheatre and an Egyptian obelisk, is found behind the Pitti Palace, and rises
out of Boboli Hill. The "moonlight" one in Agra is perfectly aligned with the "charbagh," the location
of this type in the Taj Mahal complex. Andre Le Notre designed several of these places for Louis
XIV, most notably the ones at (*) Versailles. Another of these places is situated to the west of the
Serpentine Bridge, separating it from Hyde Park. Several of these built in accordance with Zen philosophy
include sparse bits of moss and rock. For 10 points, name these places, including the Kensington ones in
London and some fictional "hanging" ones at Babylon.
ANSWER: gardens [accept a buzz of parks until "Boboli" is mentioned]
This structure's shape was worked out by Hannskarl Bandel and is described by the hyperbolic cosine.
The tram ride to the observation deck at the top of this monument takes place inside egg-shaped
compartments. Eero Saarinen designed this catenary monument, the world's largest arch. What monument
to westward expansion is located in St. Louis?
ANSWER: Gateway Arch
These people wore a hat that resembled a beret called the "boina," and they were separated
into subgroups including the "rastreador," who traces paths, and "cantor," who was a troubadour.
This people used silver straws and carried an elaborately decorated utility knife called a facon
(fuh-CONE). In the 1800s, Martin Miguel de Guemes, the Governor of Salta Province, formed
an army of these people to fight royalists. An example of their literature is Jose Hernandez's epic
poem Martin Fierro. These people typically use bolas and wear ponchos, which can also be used
as saddle blankets. They work as hunters and as cattle herders on ranches called estancias. For
10 points, name this South American cowboy primarily found in the pampas or Patagonia.
ANSWER: gauchos
The Pierres du Niton are two prominent rocks that can be found in this city's harbor. The Jet d-Eau is
located in this city and is the world's tallest fountain. Ariana Park is the location of this city's Palace of
Nations, which serves as the headquarters of the ECE and IAEA. This city is located at the junction of the
Rhone River and its namesake lake. For 10 points, name this Swiss city that is the home of the World
Health Organization and the Red Cross.
ANSWER: Geneva
The land near the coast of this question of water is home to the famous Lavaux vineyards and its coast is
home to the Castle of Chillon, which was built by the Dukes of Savoy. There is a city that shares a
name with it in southern (*) Wisconsin, and the lake was called Lacus Lemanus in Roman times. The
stretch of coast from it's namesake city to Lausanne is called La Cote. The Rhone river flows in to and then
back out of FTP What second largest European lake, named for a Swiss city.
ANSWER: Lake Geneva
The phenomenon of water oscillating across an entire question, known as a seiche, was first studied in this
entity, whose water levels are controlled by the Seujet Dam. The Dranse and Venoge rivers are tributaries
which flow into this question of water, on whose shores are the region of Lavaux. A peninsula which contains
the village of Yvoire separates this question of water's smaller western half from its larger eastern half, which
ends at Montreux. This question of water shares its name with a small city in Wisconsin, and part of it lies in
France's Haute-Savoie departement. Lying on the path of the Rhone river, cities along it include Lausanne
and its namesake. Also known as Lake Leman, for 10 points, name this crescent-shaped lake, the largest
freshwater lake in Europe, named after the second most populous city in Switzerland.
ANSWER: Lake Geneva or Lac de Geneve (accept Lake Leman or Lac Leman before mentioned)
One county in this state contains the Sea Islands and the salt marshes of Glynn. The largest lake in this
state is named after poet Sidney Lanier. The longest river in this state is the Chattahoochee. The delta of
another river is where a settlement under James Oglethorpe was established at Savannah. For 10 points,
name this state whose capital is Atlanta.
ANSWER: Georgia
When the logging industry in this state declined, its northern town of Helen turned itself into a replica of a
Bavarian alpine town. Helen is located in White County in this state that is home to Red Top Mountain
State Park and Lake Allatoona. Known by the Cherokee as Enotah, Brasstown Bald is the highest point in
this state. Lake Lanier [luh-NEER] is created by the Buford Dam on the Chattahoochee River in this state
that is also home to Jekyll Island. The Savannah River separates South Carolina from, FTP, what U.S. state
north of Florida?
ANSWER: Georgia
Much of this state is in its Southern Rivers region, stretching to the town of Fruitland. Near Lumber City in
this state, the Oconee and Ocmulgee Rivers combine to form the Altamaha River. It includes Fort Screven
on Tybee Island, which is located near a historic city with many open squares, while the other side of the
state includes Fort Benning. Its main state university is located in Athens, and its capital and largest city
contains Hartsfield-Jackson Airport. Name this state between Alabama and South Carolina whose capital is
Atlanta.
ANSWER: Georgia
A "Rock Hawk" and "Rock Eagle" are enormous animal effigy mounds composed of quartzite in this state.
Providence Canyon is a group of massively eroded ditches in this state's southwest. The ruins of the
Dungeness mansion and a wild horse population are located on Cumberland Island off its coast. The Pine
Mountain complex in this state contains Warm Springs, where FDR's "Little White House" was located,
and this state also includes Springer Mountain, the southern head for the Appalachian Trail. A surveying
error left this state's border a mile south of the Tennessee River, which limits most of this state's water
supply to reservoirs along the Chattahoochee River. For 10 points, identify this American "Peach State,"
with capital at Atlanta.
ANSWER: Georgia
This state is home to a mountain engraved with images of Jefferson Davis, Stonewall Jackson, and
Robert E. Lee. This site of Stone Mountain has much of its western border defined by the Chattahoochee
River. This state's largest city is served by the MARTA system and is the headquarters of Coca-Cola. This
state's second largest city is Augusta, which is located along the Savannah River. For 10 points, name this
state, the home of Atlanta.
ANSWER: Georgia
This country's southwest is the autonomous province of Ajaria. The northwestern extension of this country
is another ethnic enclave called Abkhazia. The most recent area of contention in this country is a region in
its central north centered on Tshkinvali, where forces from this country fought with Russian troops in the
fall of 2008. This country, which claims control over the breakaway region of South Ossetia, is a Caucasian
state that borders Azerbaijan, Armenia, Turkey, Russia, and the Black Sea. For 10 points, name this country
that shares its name with a U.S. state.
ANSWER: Republic of Georgia [or Sakartvelos Respublika]
The ancient name of a river in this modern-day country is the origin of the word "pheasant." A person called
a tamada pronounces toasts at this country's supra dinners, during which you can eat lobiani bean bread and
sulguni cheese. Men in this country traditionally wear the Chokha. The alluvial deposits of this country's
Inguri and Rioni rivers form the Kolkhida Lowland, known to classical geographers as Colchis. This
country's biggest port is Batumi, located in the autonomous region of Adjara. This country claims a region
to the northwest governed from Sukhumi, and it is known as Sakartvelo in its native language. This country
still claims possession of two breakaway regions lost in 2008: South Ossetia and Abkhazia. For 10 points,
name this Caucasian country with capital Tbilisi.
ANSWER: Republic of Georgia [accept Sakartvelo before mention]
A meat dumpling called the khinkali originated in this country. This country's villages of Sioni and and
Sno form part of the track of its yearly Kazbegi Marathon. This country's flag features one large red cross
with four other evenly-spaced smaller red crosses. The Kura River starts in Turkey, then flows through this
country to its southern neighbor, which is Azerbaijan. Abkhazia and South Ossetia are disputed regions of
this country. For 10 points, name this country in the Caucasus region with its capital at Tbilisi.
ANSWER: Republic of Georgia [or Sakartvelo]
In Brazil, this non-Portuguese language is spoken mostly in Rio Grande do Sul. Dialects of this language
include Hutterite, and a community of speakers of this language is found in Gillespie County, Texas. Closer
to its home, this language has Ripuarian (RIP-yoo-AIR-ee-en), Franconian, and Alsatian forms. The only
African country in which it is prominent is Namibia. For 10 points, name this language, prominently
spoken by the Amish and in the largest country in Western Europe.
ANSWER: German [or Deutsch; or Dietsch]
One rare dialect of this language is spoken in the Barossa Valley in Australia. One character used in this
language occurs only after long vowels and diphthongs and is called the Eszett [ESS-set]. In its native
country, this language is separated into two main dialects; Platt, which is spoken in Hamburg, and Hoch,
spoken in Munich. For 10 points, name this most common language of Switzerland and Austria.
ANSWER: German [or Deutsch]
Radios in this country issue notices of "ghost drivers" going against the direction of traffic. Its highways
experience huge traffic jams called staus, which is the only time when drivers can pass on the right. This
country uses a circular traffic sign with 4 diagonal lines from the bottom left to top right to signify the "end
of all restrictions," meaning that there is a recommended top speed of 130 kilometers per hour, but no speed
limit. For 10 points, name this country whose highways are called autobahns.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Germany [or Bundesrepublik Deutschland]
The Ore Mountains form a border between this country and an eastern neighbor. The city of
Rostock lies in the northern part of the nation and is the largest city in the state of Mecklenburg-
Vorpommern. The longest river in this country lends its name to a state with capital at Mainz [my-nz]. 
The state of (*) Baden-Wurttemberg (vurtem-bearg) in this country is famous for its cuckoo clocks
and is home to the Black Forest. Principal cities in this country include Hamburg and Munich. For ten
points, name this European nation with the capital of Berlin.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Germany (or Bundesrepublik Deutschland)
In this country, the meadow on which which a princess was married gave rise to a local name for a
festival. A fossil quarry in this country that was probably a lake during the Eocene is where a fossil
known as "Ida" of the primate Darwinius masillae was found. The Hercynian Forest identified by
classical geographers is traditionally placed in the south of this country. This home of "Theresa's
meadow" and the Messel pit is the largest country where the (*) dirndl is traditionally worn. A
picturesque castle in this country that was opened to the public after its builder's death in 1883 inspired the
Sleeping Beauty Castle. Cuckoo clocks were first manufactured in a large forest in this country, which is
divided into federal districts called Lander. For 10 points, name this country, the home of the Black Forest
and Oktoberfest.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Germany [or Bundesrepublik Deutschland]
Five beech forests in this country were made World Heritage sites in 2011. Its northern coastline
comprises the region of East Frisia. Uplands in the center of this country merge with the Ore Mountains
near the Czech Republic border. In 1990, Checkpoint Charlie was demolished as part of the reunification of
this country. For 10 points, name the European country bordered by France and Poland which formerly was
divided into West and East parts.
ANSWER: Germany
Middle Ages trade route in this country was changed in 1950 into a 210-mile scenic drive called
the Romantic Road. This country's largest amusement park is called Europa-Park. The capital of
this country is home to Museum Island, which includes the (*) Pergamon Museum. This country was
where one of the first cuckoo clocks was made; that occurred in its Black Forest. For 10 points, name this
country that inspired Sleeping Beauty's Castle with its Bavarian Neuschwanstein (noish-VON-shtein)
Castle.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Germany [or Bundesrepublik Deutschland]
This country contains the Wadden Sea National Parks, which are named after an intertidal zone on its
northwestern border. Its administrative regions are known as Gemeinden, Landkreise, and Lander, in
increasing size. One region in this country located across a major river valley from the Vosges Mountains is
the Black Forest. One port city located in this country is Kiel, while the spa city of Aachen is located on its
western border. For 10 points, name this European country, bordered by the Oder and Rhine rivers and
divided into East and West sections for much of the 20th century, with capital at Berlin.
ANSWER: Germany
In this country, the Densu and Pra rivers drain the Akan Lowlands. Some uplands in this country
meet the Akwapim-Togo Ranges near its capital. The only natural lake is this nation is Lake
Bosumtwi, but the (*) Akosombo Dam created Lake Volta on the Volta River. This country contains the
Ashanti-Kwahu Uplands. This nation was created form the British Togoland and Gold Coast. For 10 points,
identify this nation with its capital at Accra, which has coastline on the Gulf of Guinea, borders Burkina
Faso, Togo, and the Ivory Coast, and is named for an ancient empire which ruled land to the northwest of
this nation.
ANSWER: Republic of Ghana
This country's TroTros are privately-owned minibuses acting as public transit. This country's
Mole National Park is a refuge for elephants, and its landmarks include the Elmina slave castle and
the hydroelectric Akosombo Dam, which forms Lake (*) Volta. This home of the remaining Ashanti
people is bordered to the east by Togo. For 10 points, name this African country, formerly called the Gold
Coast, that built Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Park in its capital of Accra.
ANSWER: Republic of Ghana
Landmarks in this territory include a battery named for Charles O'Hara as well as Gorham's
Cave, which may have been a last refuge for turtle-eating Neanderthals. August de la Motte's
Hanoverian troops defended this place during a three-and-a-half year "Great Siege" that attempted
to reverse the verdict of the Treaty of (*) Utrecht, which transferred control of this territory and Minorca.
Europe's only wild population of barbary macaques is found in this territory, which was the northern of two
features called the "Pillars of Hercules." For 10 points, name this British territory located opposite
Morocco across a namesake strait.
ANSWER: Gibraltar
Many of this territory's inhabitants speak Yanito, a language influenced by, among others, Hebrew
and Genoese. This newest member of UEFA is the home of Europe's only wild monkeys, whose
extinction will legendarily cause this territory's owner to lose possession of it. This territory's name is
derived from the Arabic Jabal Tariq, in honour of one conqueror of this territory. This territory's airport
runway crosses Winston Churchill Avenue. Located on the east side of the Bay of Algeciras, it is due south
of the city of La Linea. For ten points, name this British territory, one of the Pillars of Hercules, located on
a namesake straight connecting the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.
ANSWER: Gibraltar
This entity includes the villages of Catalan Bay and Sandy Bay on its east side, and to its north is the city of
La Linea de la Concepcion. Its southernmost point, Europa Point, faces Ceuta, across a namesake question of
water, and to its west is Algeciras. Barbary Macaques live atop a promontory which has been tunneled
through to allow passage from one coast to the other, and that promontory is often paired with Mount
Hacho in Africa as the Pillars of Hercules. FTP, name this British-owned "Rock" at the mouth of the
Mediterranean.
ANSWER: Gibraltar [accept Rock of Gibraltar]
The Grand Casemates Square serves as this territory's primary commercial center, and a
decommissioned Water Catchment Center is situated near the Alboran Sea on this territory's eastern
shore. Its conquest by ibn Ziyad resulted in its Arabic name, Mount Tarik. Its southernmost point,
(*) Europa Point, lies northeast of its namesake strait. This territory was known as Mons Calpe to the
Greeks and along with Mount Hacho, it forms the Pillars of Heracles. For 10 points, name this British
territory located on the Mediterranean coast of the Iberian Peninsula.
ANSWER: Gibraltar
The two-pound coins of this political entity have changed annually to depict different images of the 12
labors of Hercules. The town of La Linea de la Concepcion lies on the northern border of this political
entity, serving as the major tourist entry point to this entity's most popular tourist destination. That
landmark in this entity is home to a population of semi-wild macaques, its namesake "apes." Home to a
1400-foot limestone monolith originally considered one of the Pillars of Hercules, FTP what is this British
Overseas Possession at the southern tip of Spain known for its namesake "Rock"?
ANSWER: Gibraltar
This locale features an area called the Apes' Den, whose tailless Barbary Macaques are the only free
living primates in Europe. Llanito is spoken in this area, which is accessed by land via La Linea de la
Concepcion. Its best known features was called Mons Calpe by the Romans, and is located east of Cape
Spartel. Algeciras is found at the west of its namesake gulf, while Ceuta lies on its namesake strait. For 10
points, name this British territory located at the southern tip of Iberia.
ANSWER: Gibraltar
This region features the Ibrahim-al-Ibrahim Mosque, although most tourist locations are in Grand
Casemates Square or John Mackintosh Square. The Alboran Sea forms Catalan Bay on the eastern coast of
this region. Its southernmost tip, known as Europa Point, is mere kilometers away from Ceuta. Jebel Musa
is the southern Pillar of Hercules while this region is the northern one. This peninsula's only land border is
with Andalusia in the north, and its namesake strait separates Morocco from Europe. For 10 points, name
this small peninsula and British territory on the southern coast of Spain.
ANSWER: Gibraltar
Logan pass is located in this area, which has the highest concentration of grizzly bears anywhere in the
contiguous United States. The land is scared to the Blackfeet, particularly Chief Mountain, a solitary spur of
the Lewis Range. In 1901 George Bird Grinnell dubbed it 'the Crown of the Continent' and lobbied
Congress to have it federally protected. It borders Waterton Lake National Park, and key landmarks include
Triple Divide Peak, the site of three separate continental watersheds, Mt. Cleveland, and St. Mary Lake at
the eastern end of the Going-to-the-Sun Road. For ten points, identify this Montana national park, whose
namesake geologic features will probably melt by 2030.
ANSWER: Glacier National Park
Salvador Dali's Christ of Saint John on the Cross is housed in the Kelvingrove Art Gallery in this city.
The Treaty of Perpetual Peace was signed by one king in this city's cathedral. A building nicknamed
the "Armadillo" that was designed by Norman Foster lies on the River Clyde that runs through this
city. This city's large modern necropolis contains a large monument to John (*) Knox, and this city is
home to the Old Firm rivalry between soccer clubs Celtic and Rangers. For 10 points, name this city located
about sixty miles from Edinburgh, the largest city in Scotland.
ANSWER: Glasgow, Scotland
An example of these objects was owned by Adolf Hitler and formally called the "Columbus" example
"for State and Industry Leaders." That object was satirized when Charlie Chaplin danced with one in The
Great Dictator. The world's biggest manufacturer of these objects is the company Replogle. One of these
objects called the Hunt-Lenox possibly originated the phrase "Here be dragons." A three-story one is the
Mapparium in Boston. For ten points, give the generic term for a three-dimensional scale model of the
Earth.
ANSWER: globe [prompt on maps]
This desert is supposedly the habitat of a "death worm" that resembles a cow's intestine and spews acid.
Its northwestern portion, the Nemegt Basin, has been a source of many fossil finds and is known as the
"Valley of the Dragons." It formed the northern border of the (HESH-ee) Hexi Corridor on the Northern
Silk Road. To this desert's west is the Taklamakan Desert. For 10 points, name this desert in northern
China and southern Mongolia.
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
The only extant wild horse, Przewalski's horse, partially lives in this desert. Aurel Stein discovered
the Diamond Sutra, the oldest known printed text, in this desert, at a series of Buddhist cave
complexes known as the Mogao caves. Stone Age humans lived in the White Cave in this desert. The
(+) Silk Road crossed this desert between Yumen Guan and Hami. The southwest of this desert
encompasses the Alxa Plateau, which is partially bounded by the (*) Yellow River. This desert is
partially a result of a rain shadow due to the Himalayas. For 10 points, identify this desert found in China
and Mongolia and contrasted with the harsher Taklamakan desert.
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
An archaeological discovery in this desert by Roy Chapman Andrews confirmed the coexistence of
mammals and dinosaurs. Andrews was also tasked with capturing an olgoi-khorkhoi, a cryptid "death
worm" that supposedly lives in this desert. It is divided into five regions, including the Dzungarian Basin,
which is separated from the Taklamakan Desert by the Tien Shan Mountains and is in the Xinjiang
(SHIN-jang) Autonomous Region in northwest China. For 10 points, name this Asian desert found mostly
in Mongolia.
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
The Green Wall, a ring of planted forests, is being built to prevent this region's expansion. The
Junggar Basin is located within this desert, which also contains the Helan Mountains and the
Alashan Plateau. In its northwest, many dinosaur eggs have been found in the Nemegt Basin. It lies
northeast of the Tarim Basin and the (*) Taklamakan Desert. This desert's north is bounded by the Altai
Mountains, and the Tibetan Plateau lies to its south. For 10 points, name this desert located on the border
between China and Mongolia.
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
This desert is the only remaining home of an endangered wild donkey species, the khulan. In part of this
desert, the "White Cave" houses proto-human artifacts up to seven hundred thousand years old. The Mogao
Caves here hold a cache of Silk Road art. The southern portion of this desert comprises the Alxa (AL-shuh)
Plateau, and it is found south of the Altai Mountains. For 10 points, name this desert of northern China and
southern Mongolia.
ANSWER: Gobi desert
This desert is home to a namesake bear, the only bear species endemic to a desert region. The Khongoryn
Els are home to this desert's "singing dunes," though sand dunes are rare in its mostly rocky expanse.
Though it's arid, snow does fall here, due to this desert's situation on a plateau over 2500 meters high and
its northerly latitude. Bordered on the southwest by the Tien Shan mountains, FTP what is this desert lying
mostly in northern China and Mongolia?
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
This region's Alashan region contains the Ejin River and the Ordos Desert. Its Shanashen Trahen Osh
mountain range encloses the Yulduz Valley, lying between the Chol-tagh and Kuruk-tagh mountains. This
region contains the Greater Khingan Range, and its Nemegt Basin is a source of early mammal bones and
dinosaur eggs. Animals native to this region include the Bactrian Camel, and one city in this region is Ulan
Bator. For 10 points, name this desert that contains parts of northern China and Mongolia.
ANSWER: Gobi desert [prompt on Mongolia]
The twenty to thirty remaining Mazaalai bears inhabit this desert. In May 2011, workers unearthed
buried vineyards that this desert's sands were protecting from extreme conditions. Plans are underway to
create a 2800-mile-long "wall" of forest along the south boundary of this desert. In this desert's Flaming
Cliffs region, Roy Chapman Andrews discovered the first fossilized dinosaur eggs. The Altai Mountains lie
to the north of this desert, which expands rapidly and experiences temperatures as cold as negative forty
degrees Celsius in the winter. For 10 points, name this desert located in northern China and southern
Mongolia.
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
This region is bordered on the far northeast by the Kerulen River which empties into Hulun Lake. Parts of it
once saw the breeding of wild horses known as takhi, while even farther north in the same country is the
Selenge River and its tributary, the Orhon. This area is bordered by the Sayan mountains and the Yablonoi
to the north, while the Greater Khingan mountains lay to the east. Its southernmost region is called the Ala
Shan and the Tarim basin to its west lies across the Tien Shan mountains. Mostly composed of bare rock,
for 10 points, name this huge desert which spans southern Mongolia and northern China.
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
One mythical creature said to inhabit this desert spews forth sulfuric acid and is known as the "death
worm." Dinosaur eggs and assorted fossils can be found in the Nemegt (neh-MECHT) Basin in the
northwest part of this desert, which is widest between Lop Nor and Lake Bosten. Found between the Pamirs
and the Greater Khingan, with a western arm extending to the Tarim basin in Xingjian (SHIN-jee-ahn)
Province, this desert is north of the Tibetan plateau. For 10 points, name this desert located in Mongolia and
China.
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
This location's namesake bear is the only one of its family which lives in a desert. The tourist attraction of
Khongoryn Els, or Singing Dunes, are rare sand dunes found in this desert. The One Hundred Trees Oasis is
a rare site of water in this desert's northern section, which is east of the Altai Range. The town of Baotau
sits at this desert's southern end in the Yin Mountains, just north of the banks of the Hwang Ho, or Yellow
River. Bordered on the north by the Khangai Mountains, FTP what is this desert at the northern end of
which is Ulan Bator, a mostly rocky desert of Mongolia?
ANSWER: Gobi Desert
This structure was built in 1937 under the direction of Joseph Strauss, though Irving Morrow selected its
distinctive "International Orange" color. Its north end terminates in Marin (muh-RIN) County. A 2006
movie by Eric Steel consists of footage of this structure from 2004, including twenty-three suicides. In
1964, it was replaced as the world's longest bridge by the Verrazano-Narrows. For 10 points, name this
iconic suspension bridge that passes over a section of the San Francisco Bay.
ANSWER: Golden Gate Bridge
The Fort d-Estrees is located on this island. Raymond Mauny argued that this place's importance had
been inflated, highlighting instead the crucial role of the nearby Saint-Louis. Nelson Mandela crawled into
a prison cell during his tour of one building on this island. Boubacar Joseph Ndiaye reconstructed this
island's most famous landmark, which contains a Door of No Return. This island is two kilometers off the
coast of Dakar. For 10 points, name this island owned by Senegal famed for its supposed importance in the
slave trade.
ANSWER: Goree Island
This area is swept by friagems during the winter, although despite these cold bursts, Mennonites from
Canada have settled here. In the western part of this region, the espinal contains many varieties of the
quebracho tree. The communities of Resistencia and Formosa serve as railway hubs to transport the main
crop, cotton, and this region is drained by the Pilcomayo and Bermejo Rivers. This area experiences the
highest recorded temperatures in South America, and it is drained by tributaries of the Paraguay and Parana
Rivers. For 10 points, what is this lowland region that encompasses parts of Bolivia, Argentina, Brazil, and
Paraguay?
ANSWER: Gran Chaco
This city's Castril Palace is located in its Ajsaris district, and its gitano district houses the Sacromonte
Abbey in which Saint Caecilius was martyred. The Court of the Water Channel sits in its Generalife Palace,
and this city is located on the confluence of the Beiro, Genil, and Darro Rivers. This provincial capital sits
near the Sierra Nevada range and houses the palace of Charles V. This city's most famous feature sits in the
Assabica valley and contains the Gate of Pomegranates and the Court of the Lions, both examples of
Andalusia's Moorish influence. For 10 points, name this Spanish city, home to the Alhambra.
ANSWER: Granada
The Vishnu Basement Rocks form a low point at this site, and the border between those rocks and the Tonto
group is called the Great Unconformity. A cantilevered bridge over one site at the west end of this location
is managed by the Hualapai Tribe and is known as the Skywalk. This location also houses most of the
Kaibab ("KYE- bob") Plateau to the north, from which the Bright Angel Point Trail is accessible. Bright
Angel Lodge, however, is located on the south rim of this site's namesake feature. For 10 points, name this
US National Park, where the Colorado River formed a large ravine through layers of Arizona sandstone.
ANSWER: Grand Canyon National Park
This location was where a 1956 airliner crash, the first in the U.S. to result in more than a hundred
deaths, took place. Former Rough Rider Buckey O"Neill has a namesake cabin at this location, and the four
"Mary Jane Colter Buildings" are also here. It was named by John Wesley Powell, who led a nine-man boat
expedition through this site in 1869, and it has a "skywalk" maintained by the Hualapai tribe. The Pueblo
people regarded this location as their holy site "Ongtupqa." Now a national park, it was called "beyond
comparison" by Teddy Roosevelt. For ten points, name this 277-mile wide, mile-deep fissure carved by the
Colorado River in Arizona.
ANSWER: Grand Canyon
This geological feature has a Vishnu Group that consists of the Vishnu, Brahma, and Rama Schists. A
trail that can be followed in this site travels along the Bright Angel Fault. The Kaibab Plateau borders one
part of this geological feature known as the North Rim. In 2007, a glass skywalk was opened at this site for
public use. For 10 points, name this geological feature of northern Arizona that was created by the
Colorado River.
ANSWER: Grand Canyon
You can enter it on the Bright Angel Trail, which allows access to springs at Indian Garden. To its
north is the Kaibab national forest, named after a Native American tribe which has a nearby
reservation. Reservations that are adjacent to it are for Hualapai and Havasupai tribes, and a million
years ago it had volcanic action (*) block its western end. Its immense strata formed mostly below sea
level and its Vishnu Schist is on its inner gorge. It is believed to have been formed 5 million years ago, with
most downcutting by its river in the last 2. FTP what is this immense valley beginning in Utah which was
formed by erosion from the Colorado River?
ANSWER: the Grand Canyon
This location's lockers had a bomb planted in them by Croatian nationalists in 1976. The ceiling of its
Main Concourse features a night sky mural by Paul Helleu. An iconic four-faced clock in this location
spawned the expression "meet me under the clock". It was conferred protection after the deplorable
destruction of Penn Station. What major train terminal is located in New York City?
ANSWER: Grand Central Terminal [or Grand Central Station]
A prominent landmark in this national park can be climbed using the Owen-Spalding route or an
ascent pioneered by Glenn Exum. Cabins built elsewhere by Ben Sheffield were moved to form
Colter Bay Village in this park. A peak in this park is named for an artist who frequently painted it,
Thomas Moran. This park is located west of a mountain range mistakenly named (*) "Big Belly" by
French explorers, the Gros Ventre Range. Its landmarks include Jenny Lake and the "most photographed
barn in America". Land in an adjacent valley was added to this park after John D. Rockefeller threatened to
sell it in a letter written to Harold Ickes. This park is located north of Jackson Hole and south of
Yellowstone. For 10 points, name this national park in northwest Wyoming.
ANSWER: Grand Teton National Park
The northern end of this feature is located near Cape York Peninsula by the Torres Strait. The Dunk Island
is located in this feature, and the Willis and Coringa Islands lie to the east of it. The Whitsunday Islands are
popular tourist destinations near this feature, in which the Lizard Island National Park is located. Cities such
as Ayr, Cairns, and Mackay are located near this feature. For 10 points, name this large organic formation
located in the Coral Sea off the coast of Queensland, the largest reef system in the world.
ANSWER: Great Barrier Reef
A structure similar to this one dried up in the Devonian period and today makes up the Napier and
Ningbing Ranges in The Kimberly. Cairns, Townsville, and Macay are three cities near this geographic
feature. Fringe areas of this region include the Whitsunday Islands and Princess Charlotte Bay. Lizard
Island National Park is within this region, which is administered by a namesake Park Act and its
country's Biodiversity Action Plan. For 10 points, name this large organic formation, located in the Coral
Sea off Queensland in northern Australia.
ANSWER: the Great Barrier Reef
Great Palm Island and Orpheus National Park are located between this structure and the mainland. A lab
on Heron Island is the center of scientific work on this structure, which began forming during the Miocene
Epoch. Its characteristic colors have been reduced by half since 1985 as a result of bleaching and the
introduction of the predatory crown-of-thorns starfish. For 10 points, the Trunk, Dingo, and Kangaroo are
components of what 1600-mile mass in the Coral Sea off the coast of Australia?
ANSWER: the Great Barrier Reef
It receives about four to eleven inches of snowfall each year which accounts for most of its annual
precipitation. Most of its plant life consists of sage brush although plant life is impossible in some locations
because of the high salt concentration in the soil, a consequence of its endorheic watershed. It encompasses
locations such as the gold and gypsum-rich Black Rock Desert, Diamond Valley, Pyramid Lake, and the
Great Salt Lake. It is bordered by the Sierra and Cascade Mountains on the West and the Rocky Mountains
on the East. Unlike most other types of this geographic feature, it is generally cold due to its northerly
location and high altitude. FTP, name this largest desert area in North America, which does not drain into
the Atlantic, Pacific, or Arctic Oceans.
ANSWER: Great Basin
This lake was once the site of Fort Confidence, used in the 1840s by explorers searching for the
missing Sir John Franklin. It has a mining area near Port Radium, which was part of the Eldorado
Mine settlement. The mine on this lake prompted a lawsuit from (*) First Nations workers citing
discrimination. Its only community is the sparsely populated Deline, which is about 300 miles northwest of
Yellowknife. It is the largest lake in its country, edging out the Great Slave Lake. For 10 points, name this
largest lake entirely within Canada.
ANSWER: Great Bear Lake
This region's western edge is marked by its namesake "terrace," also known as the Pamlico Formation.
One of the last non-Arkansas habitats of the ivory-billed woodpecker, it was named by William Byrd and
later surveyed by George Washington. The canal named for this geographic feature connects the
Pasquotank River and Albemarle Sound to the Deep Creek and thus Chesapeake Bay. This formation
surrounds Lake Drummond and extends from Elizabeth to Norfolk. For 10 points, identify this marshland
region on the Atlantic coast of North Carolina and Virginia.
ANSWER: the Great Dismal Swamp
Escaped slaves living in this area inspired Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel Dred. This area contains
the larger of only two natural lakes in its state, Lake Drummond. George Washington surveyed it
and suggested building a canal connecting the Albemarle Sound with the (*) Chesapeake Bay. This
marsh's current borders touch Camden County in the south and the cities of Chesapeake and Suffolk in the
north. For 10 points, name this swamp in southeast Virginia and northeast North Carolina.
ANSWER: Great Dismal Swamp
William Byrd named this area during a larger survey, and it contains Lake Drummond, the subject of a
poem by Thomas Moore. It is the setting and subtitle of the novel Dred by Harriet Beecher Stowe, about a
slave who escapes to this area, as many real-life slaves did. For 10 points, name this area, once partially
mapped by George Washington, which extends from Norfolk to Elizabeth City across the Virginia-North
Carolina border.
ANSWER: Great Dismal Swamp
The Carnarvon Range is a plateau region of this larger mountain range that reaches its
northernmost point on the Cape York Peninsula. The Lachlan and Darling rivers flow down this
range's western slope before joining the (*) Murray River, and this range contains Mount Kosciusko.
This range terminates at Grampians in Victoria prior to reemerging across the Bass Strait in Tasmania. For
10 points, name this mountain range containing the Australian Alps that is located along the eastern coast
of Australia.
ANSWER: Great Dividing Range [or Great Divide; or Eastern Highlands; or Eastern Cordillera]
Shepherds in this region made use of the moplike Puli dog. Cities in this region include
(CATCH-kem-et) Kecskemet and (DEB-retz-en) Debrecen. It is the larger of two areas that cover what was
once the Pannonian Sea. The "Little" counterpart of this region is separated from it by the Transdanubians.
It is split into two parts by the Tisza, and the Danube is found in its west. This region is bounded by the
Carpathians and Balkans. For 10 points, name this large Hungarian plain known as the Alfold.
ANSWER: Great Hungarian Plain [or Great Alfold before it is read; or Nagy Magyar Alfold before it is read; reverse prompt on Northern Great Hungarian Plain; prompt on Hungary]
This region's Albertine subregion contains Lake Albert and Lake Kivu. The northern portion of this region
contains active volcanoes such as Erta Ale, which lies near a tectonic triple-junction in the Afar Depression.
Its southern region, named for Gregory, includes the Ngorongoro Crater. This region contains the
stratovolcano Mount (*) Kilimanjaro, and the part of this region between the African and Arabian plates
may have formed the Red Sea. Stretching from the Middle East to southeastern Africa, for ten points, name
this large rift zone splitting the African plate.
ANSWER: Great Rift Valley (accept East African Rift)
This lake contains two state parks, with one located on its largest island, Antelope Island. A railroad
that cuts this lake in half from east to west is called the Lucin (loose-in) Cutoff. This lake receives its water
from the Jordan, Bear, and Weber (WEE-bur) Rivers. This lake is the largest remnant of the prehistoric
Lake Bonneville. A nearby capital city was named for this lake when that city was created in 1847 by
Brigham Young. For 10 points, name this saline lake that is located in northern Utah.
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake [prompt "Salt Lake"]
Mine waste near this lake is contained in the Kennecott Tailings Pond. The southwest part of this lake has
Stansbury Island, which is now connected to the mainland, while to the north it contains Spring Bay and
Willard Bay. Its largest tributary is the Bear River, and its largest island is Antelope Island. It sometimes is
approached through the towns of Magna or Layton, and it is the largest remnant of Lake Bonneville. The
biggest cities near it are Ogden and a namesake city that serves as a state capital. Name this American lake
located in Utah.
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake
The Hogup Mountains lie northwest of this question of water. Rivers originating in the Uinta Mountains flow
into this question of water. Crude oil has been extracted from Rozel Point at the north of this question. The Spiral
Jetty was built by Robert Smithson in this endorheic lake. Gunnison Bay is separated from the rest of this
question of water by Lucin Cutoff, which was built across this question of water to replace a railroad line passing
through Promontory Point. Farmington Bay and Antelope Island are features within this question west of the
Wasatch front. For 10 points, name this remnant of the ancient Lake Bonneville bordered to the southeast
by a namesake state capital of Utah.
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake
A tributary of this lake is where the Soo'nkahni Village site was discovered. Howard Stansbury led an
expedition to survey this question of water. This question of water is where a Chilean flamingo named Pink Floyd
stayed for the winter of 2005. A tributary of this question of water is the longest river in North America that
doesn't reach the sea. The Jordan and Bear Rivers are tributaries of this question of water. This lake's Rozel
Point is the location of Robert Smithson's Spiral Jetty. This lake is known as "America's Dead Sea" and is
the largest remnant of the prehistoric Lake Bonneville. For ten points, name this lake in northern Utah.
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake
This question of water was the site of the 1944 Bagley train wreck, which occurred on a bridge that is part of
the Lucin Cutoff. This lake's Gunnison Island is a breeding ground for the American White Pelican.
"Castle Rock" overlooks its second largest island, Stansbury, which is connected to the mainland by a path.
The largest island in this lake is home to a bison herd but is named for its population of pronghorns. This
site of Antelope Island is fed by the Bear and Jordan Rivers and is the remnant of the prehistoric Lake
Bonneville. For 10 points, name this lake which supports nothing larger than a brine shrimp, the largest
lake in Utah.
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake
Antelope and Stansbury Islands are the largest islands in this question of water and the Lucin Cutoff
runs across it. The three major rivers that feed this question of water are the Bear, Jordan, and Weber
Rivers, which all originate in the (*) Uinta Mountain range. A desert with the same name as this question of
water was formed from Lake Bonneville deposits. This lake's namesake Valley is surrounded by parts of
the Wasatch Range. Large cities near this lake include Orem and Provo. For ten points, name this large lake
in Utah located near its namesake city.
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake (prompt on "Salt Lake")
This question of water was surveyed by Howard Stansbury in the 1850s, who names an island located
in it. Another island in this question of water is noted for its large bison population and is called
Antelope Island, while its northwest arm is home to the Robert Smithson sculpture (+) Spiral Jetty.
The largest remnant of the prehistoric Lake Bonneville, this lake is east of the (*) Bonneville Salt Flats
and its northern part is home to Promontory Point. For 10 points, name this question of water in Utah dubbed
"America's Dead Sea."
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake
A Chilean flamingo named Pink Floyd once lived at this lake. Its largest island is named for an
animal shot by explorers Kit Carson and John C. Fremont when visiting it. This lake is where Robert
Smithson's artwork (*) Spiral Jetty is located, and it is where Antelope Island can be found. It is the
remnant of Lake Bonneville, and it lends its name to a city founded by Brigham Young. For 10 points,
name this lake in Utah known as "America's Dead Sea."
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake
This question of water is crossed by the railroad line Lucin Cutoff. One island in this question of water
contains one of the largest and oldest publicly owned bison herds in the United States. That island is
Antelope Island. This question of water is the largest remnant of the prehistoric Lake Bonneville, and
other islands in it include the Fremont. This lake is fed by the (*) Jordan, Weber and Bear rivers. For 10
points, identify this large lake in Utah noted for its high saline content.
ANSWER: Great Salt lake
The Oquirrh (oh-quer) Mountain Range runs beneath this question of water at its southeastern shore, and
submerged peaks create its Fremont and Antelope Islands. The Cache (ca-shay) National Forest runs near
the eastern shore of this lake, while Interstate 80 runs along its southern shore. A few miles inland from its
northeastern shore is the city of Ogden. A remnant of the prehistoric Lake Bonneville, which produced the
namesake salt flats northwest of this question of water, FTP what is this large lake in which Robert Smithson
built a spiral jetty, the largest lake in Utah?
ANSWER: Great Salt Lake
In 1873, Peter Warburton became the first European to cross this region. The Canning Stock Route runs
through the southeast of this region, which is located east of the Pilbara region. It is home to the Telfer gold
mine as well as the town of Yulara, which is eighteen kilometers by road from Uluru, or Ayers Rock, which
is found in the far southeast of this region, near where it meets the Tanami and Gibson deserts. It coincides
roughly with the Canning Basin, and its vegetation consists mainly of spinifex. For 10 points, name this
desert in Western Australia, which is the second-largest in Australia, after the Great Victoria Desert.
ANSWER: Great Sandy Desert
This lake's north arm is separated from Marian Lake by the Frank Channel, where the towns of Rae and
Edzo are located. This lake was the site of a trading rivalry between Cuthbert Grant and Laurent Leroux,
who founded Fort Providence and Fort Resolution here. The Hay River discharges into this lake and is the
namesake of a town on its shores. The first European to cross this lake was Samuel Hearne, who did so on
his way to the Coppermine River. This lake is drained by the Mackenzie River, and the capital of the
Northwest Territories, Yellowknife, lies on its shores. For ten points, identify this second-largest lake in
Canada, behind the Great Bear Lake.
ANSWER: Great Slave Lake
This national park maintains the four-pen barn and saddlebag cabin with running water of Bud Ogle. By
taking the Roaring Forks Motor Nature Trail, visitors to this national park can visit the Place of a Thousand
Drips. Hiking from this national park's Cades Cove can take visitors all the way to Thunderhead Mountain,
which includes a part called Rocky Top. Entrances to this most-visited national park in the US can be found
in Cherokee and Gatlinburg. For 10 points, identify this national park named for a section of the Blue
Ridge Mountains, and which is located on the border between North Carolina and Tennessee.
ANSWER: Great Smoky Mountains National Park
Beech gaps occur only in this mountain range, which is home to a narrow valley called Cades Cove.
Roaring Fork and Grotto Falls are two waterfalls located in this range. The town of Gatlinburg is called the
gateway to these mountains. The peak of a mountain sometimes called the tallest in this range, Mount Le
Conte, is lower than Mount Guyot and this range's highest point, Clingman's Dome. The most visited
national park in the U.S. is named for this range. For ten points, name this mountain range, a subset of the
Appalachians in eastern Tennessee.
ANSWER: Great Smoky Mountains [or the Smoky Mountains; or the Smokies; prompt on th Appalachians until it is read]
A cab driver from this country stabbed the English football mascot Robert Sebbage. Chalcidice is a
peninsula in this country that is home to the Pindus Mountains. This country is home to the active volcano
Santorini located in the Aegean Sea. This country, currently led by George Papandreou, recently received
bailouts to help the Euro recover. The Corinth Channel separates the mainland of this country from the
Peloponnese Peninsula. This country's highest point is Mount Olympus. For 10 points, name this country
with capital at Athens.
ANSWER: Greece [accept The Hellenic Republic]
One of the islands belonging to this country, Icaria, is nicknamed Red Rock because of its residents-
support of Communism, and an archipelago belonging to this country is known as the Saronic Islands. Its
capital includes a museum of Cycladic Art. Cities near its center include Lamia and Larissa, and this
country extends east to the island of Rhodes and west to the island of Corfu. Its largest island is Crete.
Name this European country located between the Ionian and Aegean Seas whose capital is Athens.
ANSWER: Greece (or Hellas or Hellenic Republic)
The border between this country and a northern neighbor includes the Rhodope Mountains. The
Meteora are six monasteries built on sandstone pillars in this nation's Pindus Mountains. The
Euripus Strait separates this country from its island of Euboea [yoo-BEE-uh]. This country also
contains the Dodecanese islands, which include Rhodes. This country's northern region of Macedonia
includes Thessaloniki. This country also contains Zante, Corfu, and Ithaca as part of its Ionian
Islands. The mainland of this nation, located between the Ionian Sea and Aegean Sea, includes the
Erechtheion [uh-REK-thee-ahn] and Parthenon on top of the Acropolis. Name this country whose
capital is Athens.
ANSWER: Greece [or Hellenic Republic or Hellas]
The oldest long-distance trail in the United States travels by this range's Mount Wilson. The
second-tallest peak of these mountains and a thousand acres of land were presented to Mortimer Proctor as
a birthday present in 1910. This mountain range is home to the Killington Ski Resort, which is on this
range's second-highest peak. The Long Trail passes by this mountain range, which includes the Camel's
Hump and Pico Peak as well as "The Resting Lion." In Massachusetts, these mountains are known as the
Berkshires. For ten points, name this mountain range in Vermont that includes Mount Mansfield.
ANSWER: Green Mountains [prompt on Berkshires until it is read]
This country's northernmost point is a cape named after the philanthropist Morris Jesup. The
capital of this country was originally known as "Godt-Haab." It is home to the world's largest
national park, and its northern peninsula is named "Peary Land" after the explorer Robert (*) Peary.
This island's name was supposedly given by Erik the Red as a way to attract settlers. For 10 points, name
this largest island in the world, which despite greater autonomy, is still controlled by Denmark.
ANSWER: Greenland [or Kalaallit Nunaat]
An island off this island's coast, Uunartoq Qeqertoq, was discovered in 2007. Peary Land, the extreme
north of this island, is too dry to maintain an ice sheet, and Cape Farewell is the only forested area on this
island. Summit Camp is a year-round research station found on this island, located in the world's largest
national park in the northeast of this island. Possessing the world's second largest ice sheet, for 10 points,
identify this territory with capital at Nuuk that belongs to Denmark, the largest island in the world.
ANSWER: Greenland or Kalaallit Nunaat
Around Disko Bay, archaeologists in this location have found ruins of the Saqqaq culture, and this place is
also home to the ruins of the Dorset and Independence II cultures. Nord, a military outpost and research
station, is located at the very northeastern tip of this polity. Queen Elizabeth Island lies to the northwest of
this country, and Svalbard Island lies to the northeast. From north to south, this western boundary of this
country is bordered by Baffin Bay, the David Strait, and the Labrador Sea. For 10 points, name this least
densely populated polity in the world and largest non-continental island, officially part of the Kingdom of
Denmark.
ANSWER: Greenland
This region is separated from an island to the northwest by the Nares Strait, which has its northern end at
the Lincoln Sea. Extremes for this region include Cape Farewell in the South and Cape Morris Jessup in the
North, and the US Air Force maintains Thule Base here. Granted home rule in 1979, this region is bounded
on the west by the Davis Strait. It is separated from an island to the south by the Strait of Denmark, and is
located to the west of Ellesmere and Baffin Island. For 10 points, identify this region with capital at Nuuk, a
Denmark-controlled landmass in the Arctic Ocean which is the largest island in the world.
ANSWER: Greenland [or Kalaallit Nunaat]
Albert Speer considered escaping to this location, which was occupied by the United States from 1941
to 1945 to keep the Nazis away. The Peary Land peninsula at the extreme north of this landmass is free of
ice caps. This landmass is divided into four municipalities surrounding the capital of Nuuk. Erik the Red
founded the first Norse settlements on this landmass, which changed hands from Norway to Denmark. For
the point, name this world's largest island, which is very cold despite its name.
ANSWER: Greenland [or Kalaallit Nunaat]
Nunaoil is the state-owned petroleum company of this polity that has its highest point at Gunnbjorn Fjeld
[Gun-byorn F-yeld]. Although the United States failed to purchase this island from its owner after World
War II, the United States continues to maintain the Thule Air Base on this island's northwest coast. The
world's largest (*) national park and the second largest municipality in the world, Sermersooq, are located
on this island that has its capital at Nuuk. Kalaalisut is the official language, but Danish is also used in, for
10 points, what second largest island of the world, ironically named because the majority of it covered in
ice?
ANSWER: Greenland
Some of the world's largest shrimp beds lie in Disko Bay off the western coast of this islandl. The Nares
Strait off the northwest coast of this island stretches from the Smith Sound near Cape Perry to the Robeson
Channel and the Lincoln Sea. Scoresby Sund, the world's largest fjord system, is located on the eastern
portion of this island, which includes various areas named after Knud Rasmussen, King Frederik the Eighth,
and King Christian the Ninth. The Davis Strait and Denmark Strait form other important water boundaries
of this island. This island's capital, Nuuk, was previously known as Godthab, and eighty-one percent of this
island is covered in ice. For 10 points, name this largest island in the world, which in 2008 voted for
autonomy from Denmark.
ANSWER: Greenland [or Kalaallit Nunaat]
In 1999, a powerful north-facing green laser was added to this building. In 1894 it was nearly
bombed by French anarchist Martial Bourdin, who inspired the character of Stevie in Conrad's The
Secret Agent. This building was often called the Flamsteed House, and was built by (*) Christopher
Wren in 1685. It is the namesake of a time system that is equivalent to Coordinated Universal Time. For 10
points, name this historical residence of the Astronomer Royal, a building whose location is the basis for
the Prime Meridian.
ANSWER: Greenwich Observatory [or Royal Observatory, Greenwich]
These people often received hand-woven blankets as tokens of thanks. They often played a twenty-one
stringed lute known as a kora. Several of these people prefer the term "jali," meaning "blood," instead of
this word, which is derived from the French transliteration of a Portuguese word meaning servant. The
Kouyate line of these people traces back to Balla Faseke, who was ceremonially offered by a king to his
son. Alex Haley visited one of these people in 1966 in the process of researching his novel Roots. The Epic
of Sundiata was preserved by generations of these people. For ten points, name these West African
storytellers and bards.
ANSWER: griots [pronounced "gree-OHs," but phonetic answers should obviously be taken]
This city's downtown area was rocked by 1992 explosions resulting from gasoline leaks into the city's
sewer system. A sculptor excavated a nearly-complete skeleton of a mammoth, the crown jewel of the
regional museum in this city. After Frankfurt, the second-largest book fair in the world takes place in this
city. In this city, a large hospital complex known as the Hospicio Cabanas houses many frescoes by Jose
Clemente Orozco. This "Silicon Valley of Mexico" was the birthplace of mariachi music. For ten points,
name this capital of Jalisco (ha LEE sko), the second most populous city in Mexico.
ANSWER: Guadalajara
In retaking this island during World War Two, the Allies sprung an invasion from Apra Harbor. The Cabras
and Cocos Islands lie directly off the coast of this area. Home to the Andersen Air Force Base, natives of
this island speak Chamorro, which borrows heavily from Spanish. Its capital is Hagatna, and this is the
largest Mariana Island. Name this US Territory lying north of Micronesia in the Pacific Ocean.
ANSWER: Territory of Guam (accept Guahan)
Babe Island and Cocos Island lie to the southwest of this one, which also contains the Fena Valley
Reservoir. It has a natural harbor at Apra, and its mountains include Mt. Sasalaguan and its tallest, Mt.
Lamlam. Andersen Air Force Base is on this island, as is the War in the Pacific National Historic Park, and
villages here include Yigo, Dededo, and its capital of Hagatna. Locals on this island speak the Chamorro
language, and its motto in English is "Where America's day begins". For 10 points, name this westernmost
territory of the United States.
ANSWER: Guam
The capital of this province was the location of the Peasant Movement Training Institute, and this
province's Huaisheng Mosque is considered to be its country's oldest. This province's Lingyang Gorge is
located near its city of Zhaoqing. The growth of the city of Shenzhen in this province has made its name
synonymous with speed, and Hong Kong is bordered by this province to the north. This province's capital
lies at the head of the Pearl River Delta and is Guangzhou. For ten points, name this province that is the
southernmost of the mainland provinces and is the most populous province in the People's Republic of
China.
ANSWER: Guangdong [or Kuang-tung; or Kwangtung]
This city's CITIC Plaza is the tallest concrete building in the world. Its Haizhu Bridge has twice been
blown up. Chen Clan Academy and Nansha Wetland Park are among its "Eight Sights," while its former
name of Panyu came from two nearby mountains. The Baiyun Mountain is called this city's
"lung." Sun Yat-sen was born near this city. Cities near it include Shenzhen and Dongguan, which are also
in the Pearl River Basin. This third-largest city in China was called Canton by Westerners. For 10 points,
name this largest city of southern China, located in Guangdong Province.
ANSWER: Guangzhou [or Canton before mention]
John Bulkeley used a desalination plant to supply fresh water to this location during the 1960's. It is
separated from the rest of the country by the "Cactus Curtain." Australian citizen David Hicks claimed he
was beaten and sexually assaulted while living in this location. The now-closed Camp X-Ray is at this
location, which Dick Cheney compared to "living in the tropics" in a 2005 interview. It is where Khalid
Sheikh Mohammed currently lives. This is the oldest overseas U.S. Naval base and currently houses a
detention of camp of various enemy combatants. For ten points, name this United States Naval Station
located at Cuba.
ANSWER: United States Naval Station Guantanamo Bay [or Gitmo]
German explorer Alexander von Humboldt described this country's highland Lake Atitlan as the "most
beautiful lake in the world," and in his 1934 book Beyond the Mexique Bay Aldous Huxley compared it to
Lake Como and said it is "really too much of a good thing." The new capital of this country was destroyed
in 1773 by a devastating earthquake, and is now known as the popular town of la Antigua, a tourist favorite.
Although the Garifuna culture is centered in this country's port of Livingston, the largest port here is Puerto
Barrios. This country's largest department, Peten, lies in its mountainous north. The pyramids of Tikal are
found in this country, home to large numbers of ethnic Mayans. For 10 points, identify this Central
American bordered to the north by Mexico and to the northeast by Belize.
ANSWER: Guatemala
This country's city of Panajachel lies on the volcano-surrounded Lake Atitlan, and its city of
Quirigua lies along its Motagua River. This nation's largest lake is Lake Izabal, and it contains a
series of volcanoes in San Marcos which includes Tajumulco and Tacana. Much of this country's
land lies in the Peten province, and itss cities include Puerto Barrios and Quetzaltenango in addition to
containing the ruins at Tikal. Comprising the Yucutan Peninsula along with Belize and Mexico, for 10
points, name this central American nation west of Honduras with a namesake capital.
ANSWER: Guatemala
This country hosts the Valhalla Experimental Station, which plants macadamia trees to restore
local agribusiness. This country claims territory between the Hondo and Sibun Rivers, but it agreed
to a "Line of Adjacency" in 2000. This country's northernmost department, Peten, has its capital at
Flores. In colonial times, this country was governed from the city of Antigua. The world's first Mixed
Cultural and Natural World Heritage Site, (*) Tikal, is located in this country, whose currency, the
quetzal, is named for a bird sacred to one of its indigenous peoples, the Quiche Maya. For 10 points, name
this Central American country embroiled in a border dispute with Belize, which also borders Honduras and
Mexico.
ANSWER: Republic of Guatemala [or Republica de Guatemala]
This nation's highest point is the Tajumulco Volcano. Ancient cities such as Nakbe and Xulnal
(SHOOL-nawl) are prominent in this nation's Mirador Basin. This country's postal system was built
by the United Fruit Company. Its northerneastern neighbor was once called British Honduras, but is
now known as (*) Belize. This country also borders regular Honduras, as well as El Salvador. For 10
points, name this country found to the southeast of Mexico.
ANSWER: Republic of Guatemala [or Republica de Guatemala]
In this country, the city of Puerto Barrios lies on its only eastern coast access to the sea at the Gulf of
Honduras. Lake Atitlan and Izabal sit low in its generally hilly terrain. One of its most famous leaders is
Justo Rufino Barrios, and for the two decades beginning the twentieth century Manual Cabrera ruled it with
aid from the United Fruit Company. In 2008 Alvaro Caballeros was elected president of, FTP, what Central
American Nation bordering Belize and Mexico?
ANSWER: Guatemala
The cities San Juan and Panajachel are located in the western highlands of this country and surround Lake
Atitlan. The archaeological site Holmul is located in this country's north, which houses the Peten basin, and
this country contains the highest peak in Central America, Volcan Tajumulco. The Polochic and Dulce
Rivers flow into this country's Lake Izabal. Puerto Barrios is located on the eastern coast of this country
within the Gulf of Honduras. Flores and Santa Elena are cities in the north of this country near the ancient
ruins of Tikal. For 10 points, identify this Central American nation bordered by Honduras, Belize, El
Salvador, and Mexico.
ANSWER: Republic of Guatemala [or Republica de Guatemala]
The Tower of the Reformer in this city honors the reformist politician Justo Rufino Barrios. It became
the capital of its country after the 1773 Santa Marta earthquake. This city contains a shopping complex
called the Tikal Futura. It is near the active volcano Pacaya, and contains a cultural center named for author
Miguel Asturias. Much of this city is built on the ancient city of Kaminaljuyu, an ancient Mayan city. For
the point, name this most populous Central American city, the capital of a country, which with Belize,
borders Mexico to the south.
ANSWER: Guatemala City [or La Nueva Guatemala de la Asuncion]
Major cities in this country include Kankan and Labe, while the Iles de Los islands lie next to this country's
capital. The mountainous Fouta Djalon region, home of the Fula ethnic group, lies in the interior, and Mont
Nimba sits in the Nzekore province in the southeastern part of this country. This country is roughly
bisected by the Niger river, and it also contains the sources of the Gambia and the Senegal. Bordered by
Sierra Leone and Liberia to the south, it has a similar name to its Portuguese-speaking neighbor to the west.
For 10 points, name this West African country whose capital is at Conakry, not Bissau.
ANSWER: Guinea-Conakry
This question of water is the endpoint of a river that empties into it in a delta also known as the Oil Rivers. One
country that shares its name with this question of water owns the two Elobeys, Corisco, Annobon, and Bioko,
five islands located within it. The Bight of Bonny and the Bight of Benin are part of the coastline of this
gulf, which counts Sao Tome and Principe among its Cameroon Line of volcanic islands and is the gulf into
which the Niger River flows. This gulf contains the intersection between the prime meridian and the
equator. For 10 points, name this gulf on Africa's west coast that shares its name with a country that also
contains "Bissau" in its name.
ANSWER: Gulf of Guinea [accept Equatorial Guinea; accept Guinea-Bissau at the end]
Most subtropical cyclones form along the margins of this natural phenomenon that marks Nantucket
Island as a marine biodiversity boundary. Lemon trees can grow in Devonshire, England because of
this phenomenon's effect on climate, which also keeps the coast of Norway ice-free through the winter.
First mapped by Ben Franklin, it explains why ships take less time to sail from North America to
Europe than the reverse trip. It is formed by the convergence of the Antilles and Caribbean currents.
Name this large, warm-water current that flows up the east coast of the US and across the North
Atlantic.
ANSWER: Gulf Stream [prompt on oceanic currents]
This geographic feature lies immediately west of Alice Town and Barley Town, and located within it
are the Blake Plateau, Cape Lookout Slide, and Pourtales Terrace. To the south of this geographic
feature lies the Worthington gyre. Its namesake rings are classified into warm-core and cold-core,
which form isotherm domes. The North Atlantic Drift forms one end of it, while the [*] Sargasso Sea
lies east of it. Beginning with the Strait of Florida, this feature leaves the continental shelf off Cape Hatteras
on its way to Europe. For 10 points, name this warm boundary current that flows north from the Caribbean
along the United States- east coast.
ANSWER: Gulf Stream current [prompt on "North Atlantic Ocean" until "Worthington"]
Bauxite mining in this country's northeast white salt belt is mostly done at Linden on the Demerara River or
at Kwakwani on the Berbice River, The Kanuku Mountains splits the Rupunini Savannah, grassland that is
representative of its interior highlands. The Pakaraima Mountains contains the nation's highest peak, Mount
Roraima, which is north of the Kaieteur Plateau that is drained by its major river. That river has tributaries
that include the Mazaruni and Cuyuni and it originates in the Acarai Mountains on its southern border. For
10 points, name this South American country that is bordered by Brazil on the south and Venezuela on the
west with capital at Georgetown.
ANSWER: Co-operative Republic of Guyana
This country's longtime prime minister Forbes Burnham declared it a Cooperative Republic in 1970 and
nationalized its Canadian and American-owned bauxite mines. The Courantyne River forms this country's
eastern border, and this country is the location of the Iwokrama rain forest preserve. The capital of this
country is located at the mouth of the Demerara River on the Atlantic Ocean. This country's airstrip at Port
Kaituma was the location of the murder of Congressman Leo Ryan. For ten points, name this South
American country with capital at Georgetown that was site of the mass suicide of over nine hundred
members of People's Temple at the behest of cult leader Jim Jones.
ANSWER: Guyana
In 2010, gang-related issues forced this city to ban Snoop Dogg from its free open-air concert,
Parkpop. The Algiers Accords were negotiated through the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal,
which was convened in this city. Germany's invasion of Belgium defied a convention established in
this city, where the Binnenhof is located. The Mauritshuis is located in city, which is often grouped in
the same urban area as (*) Rotterdam, and is the next-biggest city to it in South Holland. For 10 points,
name this location of the International Criminal Court and seat of the Dutch government.
ANSWER: The Hague [or Den Haag]
Many Syrian and Lebanese businessmen in this country live in the suburb Petionville [pet-yohn-veel]
or the port Les Cayes [lay kay]. This country's largest lake, located near a different country's Lake
Enriquillo [en-ree-KEE-yoh], is Etang Saumatre [ay-tawn saw-mat-ruh]. This country includes Tortuga
Island, which was used by many pirates. The western part of this country is on the Gulf of
Gonave. Jamaica is west of this country, and the Windward Passage separates it from Cuba. This
country's town of Leogane [lay-oh-gahn] was the site of a major 2010 earthquake. This country
takes up the western part of Hispaniola, sharing a border with the Dominican Republic. Name this
French-speaking country whose capital is Port-au-Prince.
ANSWER: (Republic of) Haiti [or (Republique d-)Haiti]
The border between these countries is supervised by consulates such as the one at [WAN-a-mint]
Ouanaminthe, which is less than a kilometer from a common crossing point at Dajabon. These two
countries' border is visible on a physical map due to the total deforestation on the west side, which stops
abruptly at the border. The Border of Lights movement memorializes an event that took place at these
countries' border, after which bodies were dumped into the Massacre River; that event involved soldiers
asking suspects immigrants to pronounce (per-uh-HEEL) "perejil," the Spanish word for parsley. For 10
points, name these countries which saw a migration after a 2010 earthquake and share the island of
Hispaniola.
ANSWER: Haiti and the Dominican Republic [order not important]
The border between these two nations joins the cities of Dajabon (DA-HA-BONE) and Ouanaminthe
(OOH-AWN-A-MINTH). The Cul-de-Sac Depression and Artibonite River are found in these two
countries. The Pico Duarte is found in the larger of these countries, and they share a mountain range called
either the Cordillera Central or the Massif du Nord. 20,000 people were killed in October 1937 during the
Parsley Massacre, on the border between these two countries. In 2010, an earthquake striking these two
countries led to an outbreak of cholera, as the smaller of these nations is the poorest in the Western
Hemisphere. For 10 points, name these nations which share the island of Hispaniola.
ANSWER: Republic of Haiti and the Dominican Republic [accept DR or Republica Dominicana for th Dominican Republic; accept answers in either order]
Known in the natives- language as Chebucto, it was founded below a drumlin on what was to become
known as Citadel Hill. Between the World Wars, the United States would have opened war with
Britain by invading this city after a poison gas attack. Even that might have been less of a
catastrophe than the collisions of the Ino and Mont Blanc, which took place in this city's harbor in 1917.
For ten points, name this Canadian city, home of Dalhousie University and capital of Nova Scotia.
ANSWER: Halifax
This city is home to two articifial lakes formed by the river Alster. Situated between Lower Saxony and
Schleswig-Holstein, it is a federated state in its own right. Its port on the river Elbe is the fourth-largest in
Europe. For 10 points, name this second-largest city in Germany.
ANSWER: Hamburg
Archbishop Ansgar's missions to northern Europe were based in this city, whose Reeperbahn nightclubs
hosted many important concerts due to its direct transport links to Liverpool. In this city, the Alster River is
dammed to form two lakes, the Aussenalster and the Binnenalster. This city, whose alliance with Lubeck
was the nucleus for the Hanseatic League, is located on the Elbe River. For ten points, name this
second-largest city in Germany, which lends its name to a beef patty sandwich.
ANSWER: Hamburg, Germany
Joost van Vollenhoven resided here from 1914 till 1915 as main colonial administrator, as did Paul Doumer
from 1897 till 1902; a bridge in this city is still named for him. This city recently expanded to cover the
entire Ha Tay province, and parts of the dikes which help prevent flooding of the Red, Duong [doo-ong],
Nhue, and Day rivers now serve as traffic roads in this city. Located in this city are the country's first
university and first Western style university, the Confucian Temple of Literature of 1070 and the former
Indochina Medical College established in 1902 , respectively. The country's first and largest technical
university was established in this city in 1954 following the takeover by the Communist Party. FTP, name
this North Vietnamese city which serves as the nation's capital.
ANSWER: Hanoi
This city's Old Quarter is located around Hoam Kiem Lake. An old university is found in this city's
Temple of Literature. The Thang Long is a prominent water puppet theater located in this city. A museum
for the Hoa Lo Prison is located in this city, which is home to the Temple of the Trung Sisters. Haiphong
serves as this city's chief port. This city is located about eighty-five miles inland from the South China Sea
on the Red River. For 10 points, name this city that is the capital of Vietnam.
ANSWER: Hanoi
The National Seashore with this name was the first one to be created and stretches southwards to the
Ocracoke Inlet. Its namesake island is almost fifty miles long in coastline and contains the only
original U.S. Weather Bureau station that was set up in 1901 to be preserved in its antiquated form.
Radio pioneer Reginald Fessenden transmitted a 127-word voice message from the most notable
feature of this name in 1902. That feature also names the tallest lighthouse in the U.S., a brick
structure that was moved in 1999 due to a receding shoreline. To the east of that feature of this name
lies the Diamond Shoals, a treacherous area for navigators found at the confluence of the (*) Labrador
Current and the Gulf Stream. For 10 points, give this name of a point in the Outer Banks in North Carolina,
a cape that protrudes to the southeast.
ANSWER: Cape Hatteras
This island contains a cattle ranch named for John Palmer Parker. It contains the Hilina Slump, a chunk
of land gradually sliding into the ocean, and the Great Crack, a fissure in the Kau district. This island
celebrates the "Merrie Monarch Festival" and is home to a corporation that is one of the world's top
producers of macadamia nuts. It has a center named for deceased NASA astronaut Ellison Onizuka. A
district on this island is the namesake of a specialty coffee and is called Kona. Its highest point is the
dormant volcano Mauna Kea. For 10 points, name this island, also known as the "Big Island."
ANSWER: Hawaii [or the Big Island until it is read]
When writing this language, letters such as "tsade" and "khaf" have special "sofit" forms which only
appear at the ends of words.An early artifact in this language may be the Gezer calendar. The Soviet Union
banned this language as "reactionary," and it was secretly taught there by the "Refuseniks." Increased
interest in its study occurred during the Haskalah period. A dialect of it is named for the religious text
called the Mishnah. For 10 points, name this language, which along with Arabic, is the official language of
Israel.
ANSWER: Hebrew [or Ivrit; do not accept "Yiddish"]
A rare character in this language is the "inverted nun." A revival of it occurred during the period
known as the "Haskalah," and a symbol in this language that refers to God is known by the Greek
word "tetragrammaton." Magazines published in this language included Hameassef, which was
published in Konigsberg, and (*) HaZvi, which was edited by Eliezer Ben-Yehuda. The Torah was
written in this language. For 10 points, name this language, which, with Arabic, is an official language of
Israel.
ANSWER: Hebrew [or Modern Hebrew; or Classical Hebrew, do not accept "Yiddish"]
A custom called penkkarit evolved because of the location of this city's university, and this city's Winter
Gardens are at the north end of Toolonlahti. This city also includes eight islands, among them
Kustaanmiekka, Lonna, and Pikku Mustasaari, on which is an eighteenth-century naval fortress that used to
be called Viapori. The Tallberg Building and the Ritarihuone are located on a street named for Alexander I,
and this city's longest street runs past the Eduskuntatalo and is named after its country's sixth president,
Carl Mannerheim. The National Theatre in this city is directly behind a statue of Aleksis Kivi, and adjacent
to a railway station designed by Eliel Saarinen. For 10 points, name this capital of Finland.
ANSWER: Helsinki [also accept Helsingfors]
A massive renovation of this building took place under a man who was such a huge fan of the
Glyptothek and Alte Pinatothek in Munich that he sought out the architect of those two buildings, Leo von
Klenze. Giacomo Quarenghi designed a semicircular private auditorium for this building, as well as its
Raphael Loggias. In 1985, an insane man rushed into this building and threw acid all over Rembrandt's
Danae. The contents of this building were shipped on two trains hundreds of miles away to Sverdlovsk
during a Nazi siege. This museum is part of the Palace Embankment along with the Winter Palace. For the
point, name this art museum in St. Petersburg.
ANSWER: Hermitage Museum
The Doon Valley lies in this range's Shivalik (SHEE-vuh-leek) Hills, which are home to Gujjar (GOO-jur)
tribes in the Mohan Pass. This range's largest lake is the brackish Pangong, situated just below Changla
(SHONG-lah) Pass, and this range is the origin of the Irrawaddy (ERR-uh-wah-dee) River. Much of this
range is populated by Sherpa tribes. It contains the peaks Lhotse (LOTE-seh) and Kangchenjunga
(KAN-chen-JOON-guh) as well as K2. For 10 points, name this mountain range, which is the longest in
Asia
and contains Mount Everest.
ANSWER: the Himalayas [or Himalayan Range]
This mountain system includes the Tethys range. Darjeeling is a city in this system's Siwalik range. In
Kashmir, this mountain system begins at the mountain Nanga Parbat. In the northwest these mountains run
into the Karakorum range. These mountains are the source of the Brahmaputra river. They run through Uttar
Pradesh, and the city Kathmandu is found in them. The Ganges runs to the south of these mountains, which
cover Bhutan and Nepal. For 10 points, name this group of mountain ranges in Tibet and India that includes
Mount Everest.
ANSWER: Himalayas [or Himalayan mountains]
In this mountain range, the notoriously dangerous Gasherbrum crevasses are prominent on the Broad Peak.
Another part of this range is home to the "Polish Line," which is home to some of the world's most
dangerous landslides. One expedition in this range was almost abandoned due to the lack of oxygen at the
Pumori Glacier. In this mountain range, sherpas like Tenzing Norgay assist climbers. It runs through the
nations of China, India, and Nepal. For 10 points, name this mountain range that contains K2 and Mount
Everest.
ANSWER: Himalayas Range [accept word forms]
One peak in this range is home to the Larkya La glacial saddle while another range is known as the
"Shining Wall"; these are Manaslu and Gasherbrum. A natural Shiva lingam of ice can be found in
their Amarnath caves, while this range's Jelepla Pass leads to the northern Chumbi Valley and the
Baltoro glacier runs through a subrange of these mountains knowns as the (*) Karakorams. Rivers
that have their source here include the Tarim, Irrawaddy and the Ganges. Formed when the Indian
Subcontinent converged with the Eurasian plate, FTP, identify this range containing K2 and Mount Everest;
the highest mountain range in the world.
ANSWER: The Himalayan Mountains or The Himalayas
The eastern extent of this mountain range is marked by Rakaposhi Peak, while its other peaks include Koyo
Zom and Nowshak. It is traversed by the Baroghil, Khavak, and Dorah passes. This range is located east of
the Paropamisus range, while the Helmand River flows from its westernmost region. Containing Mir Samir
and its highest peak, Tirich Mir, it lies just south of the Wakhan corridor and crosses the Northwest Frontier
Province before joining the Karakoram Range in Jammu. This range is the also the source of the Konar,
Amu Darya, and Kabul Rivers. For 10 points, identify this mountain range south of the Pamirs in Pakistan
and Afghanistan that is the site of the Khyber Pass.
ANSWER: Hindu Kush
A 1982 fire in a tunnel in this range's Salang Pass may have killed over 200. Other major passes
through it include the Khawak and the Unai, which connects Bamiyan to another major city in this
range. Tirich Mir, this range's highest peak, is located in the Chitral district, part of the (*)
Northwest Frontier Province of a country that contains much of this range, a province that contains
Peshawar. For 10 points, name this extension of the Pamirs, found in Afghanistan and Pakistan and home to
the Khyber Pass.
ANSWER: Hindu Kush
To this island's east is the Mona Passage. Pico Duarte is the highest peak of this island's Cordillera Central.
In the southwest is the mountainous Tiburon Peninsula, which extends far beyond the rest of the island. The
island's original inhabitants were five tribes, led by Cacique chieftains, of Tainos. This island east of the
Windward Passage has a line visible from the air to the west of which nearly all trees are deforested. For 10
points, name the second-largest island in the Caribbean which contains Port-au-Prince and Santo Domingo,
owing to its division between Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
ANSWER: Hispaniola
This island's Neiba Valley lies between Sierra de Neiba and Sierra de Bahoruco, also called the
Massif de la Selle. The Cul-de-Sac Plain contains this island's largest lake, Saumre lake, while this
island's Cordillera contains La Pelona, La Rucilla, Pico Yaque, and Pico Duarte, the highest point in
the (*) Caribbean. The Mona and Windward Passages lie off the east and west tips of this island, while La
Navidad and La Isabela were settlements founded on this island by Christopher Columbus. The second-
largest of the Greater Antilles, for 10 points, name this Caribbean island which contains the nations of Haiti
and the Dominican Republic.
ANSWER: Hispaniola
Navassa Island lies west of this island and Mona Passage to its east. This island surrounds three
quarters of the smaller Gonave Island. Pico Duarte is the highest point in this island's mountain
chain Cordillera Central. The Windward Passage separates this member of the Greater Antilles
from (*) Cuba. An earthquake in 2010 heavily damaged this island's city of Port-au-Prince. After leaving
the Azores, Christopher Columbus made landfall on this island in his first voyage. For 10 points, name this
Caribbean island occupied by Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
ANSWER: Hispaniola
This island's Cibao Region contains the Samana Peninsula. The Tiburon Peninsula is a part of this
island, which contains Lake Enriquillo in its Cul-de-Sac Depression. The Mona Passage lies to this
island's east, while the Windward Passage lies to its west. The Gulf of Gonave lies on the western
coast of this island, and its highest point is Pico Duarte. Along with (*) Puerto Rico, Jamaica, and Cuba,
this island forms the Greater Antilles, and it contains the cities of Santo Domingo and Port-au-Prince. For
ten points, name this Caribbean island shared between Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
ANSWER: Hispaniola
The westernmost point of this island is on the Tiburon Peninsula, and its Yuna River empties into the
Samana Bay from Vega Real (ray-ALL). In 1937, this island was home to a linguistic purge known as the
Parsley Massacre. This island was once home to the Taino group of Arawak Indians, who were nearly
exterminated by Christopher Columbus. Santo Domingo and Port au Prince are found on, for 10 points,
what Caribbean island, that is split between Haiti and the Dominican Republic?
ANSWER: Hispaniola
The southwest part of this island is formed by the Tiburon Peninsula, north of which one can find
Gonave Island in a namesake gulf bordering this island's western coast. Bordered to the east by the
Mona Passage, it is home to Lake Enriquillo and Pico Duarte, this island's highest point. Seperated
from its western neighbors by the (*) Windward Passage, this island was home to North America's first
permanent European settlement as well as a revolution led by Jean-Jacques Dessalines and Toussaint
L-Ouverture. For 10 points, identify this Caribbean island containing the cities of Port-au-Prince and Santo
Domingo as the capitals of Haiti and Dominican Republic.
ANSWER: Hispaniola [do not accept "Haiti" or "Dominican Republic"]
These people developed a marriage ritual in which a bride's family received a quantity of silver, which
was acquired from traders in exchange for cultivated opium. These people speak a namesake Miao-Yao
language, and about ten percent of them have emigrated, mainly to the United States. These people became
Communists in Thailand but opposed the Communist government of Laos, leading to their persecution. For
the point, identify this upland population of Southeast Asia, which has engaged in massive resettlement in
Sacramento and St. Paul.
ANSWER: Hmong
The La Perouse Strait separates this island from its northern neighbor. Cities on this island include Date,
Mombetsu, and Muroran. The Ishikari River runs its course through Asahikawa and is considered the third
longest river in its country. It is connected to the other islands in its country by the Seikan Tunnel
underneath the Tsuguru Strait. Iturup, Sikotan, and Kunasir Island will become part of its prefecture, if a
peace treaty transfers these islands from Russia. The island's largest city of Sapporo was the host city for
the 1972Winter Olympics. This is, for 10 points, what island, the northernmost of Japan?
ANSWER: Hokkaido
This island is home to the institute which designed three "Melody Roads" for its country. Wakkanai is
the northernmost city on this island, which was named by the Maiji government based on its Ainu name.
The city of Hakodate is in the southernmost prefecture on this island. The Seikan Tunnel is used to bring
traffic across the Tsugaru Strait to this island for occasions such as the annual Snow Festival, or
Yuki-Matsuri, which is held in this island's town of Sapporo. For 10 points, name this northernmost of the
four main islands of Japan.
ANSWER: Hokkaido
This island's Lake Akan is famous for its moss balls. The country that controls this island claims that
some nearby islands such as Iturup and Kunashir fall under this island's Nemuro subprefecture. This
island is the largest of its country's 47 prefectures. This island was the site of the (*) 1972 Winter
Olympics, which was held in a city that is much larger than its second and third largest cities; those other
cities here are Asahikawa, which is in its centre and Hakodate, which is in its south. The Strait of La
Perouse separates this island from Sakhalin Island in the north, and the Seikan Tunnel traverses the Sugaru
Strait, which separates this island on which the Ainu live from Honshu in the south. For 10 points, name this
northernmost of the four main islands of Japan.
ANSWER: Hokkaido [or Ezo]
Before 1869, it was named Yezo, and William Clark led a 19th-century Christian movement in this
location. Mount Meakan is a volcano in this island's Akan National Park, and cities on this island
include Nemuro and [*] Hakodate. The Seikan Tunnel, the world's longest underwater tunnel, connects
this island to the rest of its country. The Ainu is a major ethnic group on this island, with capital at Sapporo.
For 10 points, name this northernmost island of Japan.
ANSWER: Hokkaido [do not prompt "Japan" at any point]
This island's foxes are infected with echinococcus parasite, which has since infected virtually all its
streams and made water unsafe to drink. This island's four administrative divisions are called Circuits, and
its largest city is home to temporary sculptures at a yearly "snow festival." This island is home to a caldera
lake in its Akan National Park, and it lies south of the La Perouse strait. The south of this island is reached
by the extremely long Seikan tunnel, which runs under the Tsugaru Strait. For 10 points, name this island
whose largest city is Sapporo, the northernmost large island of Japan.
ANSWER: Hokkaido
Located just north of the Blakiston zoological line, this island's major river was reduced by 100 miles in
length by channelization projects and passes through a large valley formed from volcanic tuff called
Sounkyo. Also including the large wetland of Kushiro Shitsugen, this island includes the Shiretoko
peninsula as well as a large caldera lake at Akan next to the triple-crated Mount Akaen. The south of this
island contains the Hidaka Mountains, home to unique brown bear populations. Formerly known as Enzoki,
this island contains major brewing facilities in its capital of Sapporo. This home of the Ainu is connected to
its southern neighbor by the Seikan tunnel underneath the Tsugaru Strait. Located south of the Sea of
Okhotsk, for 10 points, identify this northernmost of Japan's four great islands.
ANSWER: Hokkaido [accept Enzoki before mention]
Of its country's 47 prefectures, it is the largest and the only one designated as a "circuit" type. This
region's city of Hakodate is one terminus of the long Seikan Tunnel under the Tsugaru Strait. The La
Perouse Strait separates Sakhalin Island from this region that is the primary home of the Ainu people. This
island has held annual snow festivals and the 1972 Olympic Games in its capital city of Sapporo. For 10
points, name this second largest and most northerly of the main islands of Japan.
ANSWER: Hokkaido Prefecture [or Hokkaido Island; or Northern Sea Circuit]
Ulysses Grant dispatched Horace Capron to establish an agricultural system on this island, the birthplace of
Koshamain, which is home to its country's first musical road. The islands of of Rebun and Rishiri lie off the
coast of this land mass, while to its North the La Perouse Strait separates it from the Kuril islands, Sakhalin,
and the Sea of Okhotsk. Reached from its larger Southern neighbor via the massive Seikan Tunnel across
the Tsugaru Strait, for 10 points, name this traditional home of the Ainu people with capital at Sapporo, a
Japanese island to the North of Honshu.
ANSWER: Hokkaido [or Yezo]
The Stone of Unction is located inside of this building. A tradition holds that this building stands at the
location where Adam's skull was buried. Outside this building, there is a ladder made of cedar wood which
may not be moved unless all six Christian ecumenical orders agree to it. The Catholicon of this building is
the site of an omphalos. The Aedicule of this building is the location of the Angel Stone, as well as a piece
of stone with a crack in it. This building stands on what's thought to be Golgotha. For ten points, name this
church in the Old City of Jerusalem which contains Jesus's tomb.
ANSWER: Church of the Holy Sepulchre [or the Basilica of the Holy Sepulcher; or the Church of th Resurrection]
This nation's southern border is defined by the Coco River. The Swan Islands of this country are
approximately 95 miles north of its coast, and 500 miles from New Orleans. The Caratasca Lagoon is
located in the northeastern part of this country, and the La Mosquitia region of this country contains the Rio
Platano Biosphere Reserve. This country that borders the Pacific Ocean through the Gulf of Fonseca is also
home to the Islas de la Bahia. For 10 points, name this Central American country borderd by Nicaragua, El
Salvador, and Guatemala with capital at Tegucigalpa.
ANSWER: Honduras
Its border with its southern neighbor is formed by the Rio Coco, and its western Amapala
municipality is located on the volcanic island El Tigre. Rivers in this nation include the Patuca and
Sico. Bay Island is found in this country's namesake gulf, and the western part of this country
contains the Sierra Madres. The Caratasca Lagoon is in the southeastern portion of this country, cities in
which include Comayaqua and Danli. This country borders Guatemala to the north, El Salvador to the west,
and Nicaragua to the south. For 10 points, name this Central American country with capitol at Tegucigalpa.
ANSWER: Honduras
In this nation, calcite reflections onto skeletons in the Talgua Cave gave it its nickname, the Cave of
Glowing Skulls. Its Caribbean coast extends as far east as Cape Gracias a Dios. The Cayos Cochinos
owned by this country are known for their undisturbed reefs and are part of the Islas de la Bahia. Its capital
is located in the department of Francisco Morazan, named for a national hero of this country. Its cities
include La Ceiba, Puerto Cortes, and San Pedro Sula. This nation lies between a namesake gulf and the
Gulf of Fonseca. For 10 points, name this Central American country east of Guatemala whose capital is
Tegucigalpa.
ANSWER: Republic of Honduras
Roatan is the capital of this country's Islas de la Bahia department, a Protestant centre in this
country, and the Coco River forms part of its southern border. A 2013 study found that this
country's second-largest city, San Pedro Sula, is home to the world's highest murder rate. The Copan
River in this country was diverted to protect a Maya site of the same name. The Coluteca River flows
through this nation's capital, and into the Gulf of Fonseca, which this country borders. Hurricane Mitch
made landfall in this country, where it caused extensive damage. For 10 points, name this Central American
country with capital at Tegucigalpa.
ANSWER: Republic of Honduras [or Republica de Honduras]
If this city were a nation, it would have the world's longest life expectancy. This city, with the most
skyscrapers in the world, is home to the Central Plaza building. This city is bordered by the city of
Shenzhen ["Shen-jen"] on the north. The (*) Kowloon Peninsula and this city's namesake island are
separated by Victoria Harbour. This city is a constituent of the Pearl River Delta megalopolis along with
Guangzhou ["gwang-joe"] and Macau, and Britain transferred control of this former colony in 1997. For 10
points, name this Special Administrative Region located in southern China.
ANSWER: Hong Kong
This region's flag displays a bauhinia flower with five petals, each with a star in the middle, against a red
background. Its tourist attractions include the view from Victoria Peak and rides on the Star Ferry, which
travels to Kowloon. This region's constitution, or Basic Law, allows it to maintain its capitalist system until
2047 under the "one country, two systems" policy. For 10 points, name this Special Administrative Region
on the south coast of China, which was ceded to the PRC in 1997.
ANSWER: Hong Kong, China
One of the earliest settlements in this city was Tuen Mun, in which Emperor Xuanzong established a town
for coastal defense, and the International Commerce Center is located in its Union Square project. Its Sai
Kung Peninsula remains mostly unurbanized, and its harbors include Aberdeen and Victoria. Parts of this
region include the New Territories and Kowloon, and a bay separating this city from Macau is formed by
the Pearl River. For 10 points, name this special administrative region of China, ceded by the British after a
99-year lease.
ANSWER: Hong Kong
The upright section of the army headquarters building in this city tapers down to meet the rest of the
building. Octopus Cards, the Star Ferry, and Stonecutter's Bridge are key to the transportation of
this city formerly governed by positive non-interventionism. A former fort in this city was the site of
a lawless walled city that was torn down in 1994. The now-closed Kai Tak Airport was the home
airport of (*) Cathay Pacific, which is based here. This city, home to Victoria Peak, is south of Shenzhen
and lies on the Pearl River Delta. The Special Administrative Zone containing this city includes the New
Territories, Kowloon, and its namesake island. For 10 points, name this Chinese city that was returned in
1997 by the British.
ANSWER: Hong Kong Special Administrative Region [or Xiang Gang; or HKSAR; antiprompt o Kowloon before mention]
The only remnant of the original railway in this region is a granite-and-red-brick clock tower at Tsim
Sha Tsui. Its Wan Chai district houses most of this area's Filipino minority. A giant Buddha made
of bronze lies on this region's Lantau Island. This region contains Victoria Peak and a revitalized
housing development project on the Kowloon Peninsula. The Admiralty extension of this region's
business district has been the site of protests in 2014. This region is flanked to the north by the
Shenzhen, and is situated on the Pearl River Delta across from Macau [muh-"COW"]. Name this
concession to the British in the Treaty of Nanking, which was returned to China in 1997.
ANSWER: Hong Kong (Special Administrative Region) [or Xianggang [shee-ahng gahng] (Tebi Xingzhengqu)]
This area once contained Gin Drinker's Bay, which was located in its Rambler Channel. Stonecutter's Island
and many of this region's "new towns" are now peninsulas. Its most densely-populated area was separated
by Boundary Street from the New Territories, and this city's many harbors include Aberdeen and Victoria.
A large bronze Buddha is located on this city's Lantau Island, and its highest point is Tai Mo Shan. Its
airport at Chek Lap Kok was built after land reclamation, and it contains Victoria Peak along with the
Kowloon Peninsula. For 10 points, name this "fragrant harbor" on the Pearl River Delta, a British
concession returned to China in 1997.
ANSWER: Hong Kong
The present international airport of this city is located at Chep Lak Kok on Lantau Island, but previously
airlines had to make a harrowing descent through skyscrapers to reach Kai Tak Airport. The total
population is estimated at over 7 million, but vast parts of the New Territories in the North are uninhabited.
Walt Disney opened its newest edition of Disneyland here in 2005, but so far, critics have slammed it as an
overpriced failure, while the equestrian events at the 2008 Olympics were staged here. FTP, name this
Chinese Special Administrative Region, located east of Macau, which was handed back to China by the
British in 1997.
ANSWER: Hong Kong
Similarly to the blue whale on display in New York, this city's Bishop Museum features an actual
sperm whale skeleton suspended from a ceiling. Found at the foot of the Koolau Mountains, it is the
site of a legislative building with a three-layer nested design and conical meeting chambers. This
home to Chaminade (SHAH-meh-nahd) University is also the location of (*) Iolani (EYE-oh-lah-nee)
Palace, one of the few American buildings at which a monarch sat. For 10 points, name this city which
dominates the island of Oahu and is the capital of Hawaii.
ANSWER: Honolulu
This island's Minami Alps and Akaishi Mountain Range are found within the Chudu region, which is
bounded to the north by the Kiso and Hido Mountain Ranges. The island's Shiga ken prefecture is
the location of Lake Biwa. This island is bounded to the north by the (*) Tsugaru Strait. The MisakaTenshu Range contains Lake Yamanaka, Lake Sai, and three other lakes that surround Mount Fuji, which is
located on this island. For 10 points, Osaka and Hiroshima as well as the capital, Tokyo, are located on
which island, the largest of Japan's four main islands?
ANSWER: Honshu
This island contains such rivers as the Tone and Shinano, the longest in its country. Islands lying off it
include the Oki Islands, Izu Islands, and Sado Island, and its largest lake is Biwa. The Kii Channel separates
it from an island to its southwest, while the Tsugaru Strait separates it from an island to the north which is
now the only home of the Ainu. The Inland Sea, once a noted pirate haven, lies between this island and
Shikoku, and its cities include Kobe, Osaka, and Yokohama. FTP, name this largest Japanese island which
contains Mt. Fuji and Tokyo.
ANSWER: Honshu
Mount Hokata is the tallest of the Hida Mountains on this island. The Sanyo Main Line runs along this
island's long coastline with the Seto Sea. This island is connected to Awaji Island by the Akashi-Kaikyo
Bridge, which runs to the city of Kobe, located in its Kansai region. The northernmost part of this island is
the Tohoku Region, which contains Fukushima Prefecture, and Chiba and Yokohama are located in this
island's most populous area of Kanto. For 10 points, name this largest and most populous island of Japan,
containing Osaka and Tokyo.
ANSWER: Honshu
The town that shares a name with this island is located near Lake Suwa, and the largest lake on this island is
Biwa. It is north of the Inland Sea and northeast of the Kanmon Strait. This island includes the Hida, Kiso,
and Akaishi Mountains, the last of which includes Mount Kita, and its northern tip is the Shimokita
Peninsula. A stretch from the Ibaraki Prefecture to the Fukuoka Prefecture includes the Taiheiyo Belt,
which includes the cities of Nagoya, Osaka, Kyoto, Kobe, and Hiroshima. Name this island that includes
Tokyo, the main island of Japan.
ANSWER: Honshu (do not accept "Japan")
A notable physical feature on this island is the Fossa Magna, great rift lowland that crosses its central
portion. It contains the former Tango Province and is separated in the south by the Kanmon Straits. Farther
south, this island's largest lake, Biwa, is drained by the Yodo River into the Inland Sea. This island contains
over three quarters of its country's prefectures, called ken. It is located in one of the most geologically
unstable areas on Earth, and as such it experiences frequent earthquakes and occasional volcanic eruptions.
Notable mountain ranges on this island include the Akaishi and Hida ranges, but among the peaks without a
range is Mount Fuji. FTP, name this largest island of Japan that includes the major metropolitan areas of
Osaka and Tokyo.
ANSWER: Honshu Island, Japan
This island contains a base at Camp Zama. One lake on this island is named for a lute-like instrument
favored by a version of the goddess Saraswati. One city on this island contains a suspension bridge whose
white towers are illuminated in rainbow colors at night. The Kanto plain occupies the central part of this
island, the location of Lake Biwa. For 10 points, name this island that contains Osaka and other cities in the
extended Tokyo Metropolitan Area, the largest of the four main islands of Japan.
ANSWER: Honshu
A local legend about this mountain tells how Saghalie transformed Wy-east into it as a punishment for
defying him. Lakes near this mountain include Burnt Lake, Trillium Lake and Lost Lake. One of the ways to
climb this mountain is by using the dangerous Muddy Forks trail. Points of interest at this mountain include
Ramona Falls, which flows into Sandy Creek, and the Eliot Creek. This mountain's passes include Zigzag
Canyon and it is located nearby the polis of Parkdale. Iit was named by William Broughton, a member of
George Vancouver's expedition. For 10 points, name this extinct volcano that has caused multiple climbing
accidents in Oregon, its highest point.
ANSWER: Mount Hood
Harold Ickes suggested naming this structure, which was originally to be constructed at Black Canyon,
after Hiram Johnson. This arch-gravity structure is made up of columns interspersed with pipes that carry
cooling water to prevent concrete cracking. Like the Grand Coulee, this structure was designed by John
Savage. Bypassed by the Mike O-Callaghan-Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge, this structure holds back Lake
Meade on the Arizona-Colorado border. For ten points, name this dam on the Colorado River, which was
renamed for the president when its construction was started.
ANSWER: Hoover Dam [or Boulder Dam]
This location underwent a temporary name change in 1933 on order of Secretary of the Interior Harold
Ickes as a way of spiting Republicans. It is traversed by the Mike O'Callaghan-Pat Tillman Memorial
Bridge. This dam impounds the largest reservoir by volume in the United States, Lake Mead, and is located
about twenty-five miles southeast of Las Vegas. For 10 points, identify this dam on the Colorado River,
once named Boulder Dam and now named after a former president.
ANSWER: Hoover Dam [or Boulder Dam until it is read]
In the north is Qeshm Island, a free trade zone, 21 miles away to the south is the territorial exclave of
Musandam, and it is mentioned but left unnamed in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. In following
with a Traffic Separation Scheme, the traffic lane is only 6 miles wide, consisting of 2-mile inbound
and outbound lanes with a 2-mile buffer zone in between. Some 35 percent of the world's and 75
percent (*) of Japan's oil supply pass through this strategic passage, which was the location of the 19841987 Iran-Iraq Tanker War. FTP, name this opening to the Persian Gulf.
ANSWER: Strait of Hormuz
This region includes much of the district of Oromia, whose Bale Mountains contain a population of Simien
Wolves. This region also contains the Ogaden Plateau, which has been a site of breakaway insurgents in
recent years. The easternmost tip of this region is Cape Guardafui and its easternmost section is the region
of Puntland. Off its coast lies the Socotra archipelago. To the north of this area are the Bab al-Mandeb and
the Gulf of Aden, while to its south is the Indian Ocean. For 10 points, name this region of Africa
containing Somalia and Ethiopia.
ANSWER: Horn of Africa [accept Ethiopia or Abyssinia until "Cape"]
This region was home to the Warsangali Sultanate and the state of Ajuuraan, which used this region's
Shebelle and Jubba rivers for trade. A 2007 raid on an oil field on this peninsula took place in its town of
Abole. A coastal plain on this peninsula has the name Guban, meaning "burnt," and from that plain rises the
Galgodon Highlands. A capital city and port on this peninsula sit on the Gulf of Tadjoura, and it includes
the Ogaden Basin. For ten points, identify this peninsula that is named for its shape and holds the countries
Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti, and Somalia.
ANSWER: Horn of Africa
This city's symphony orchestra plays in the Jesse Jones Hall, and the White Oak, Braes, Sims, and
Buffalo Bayous pass through this city. Baytown and Sugar Land are some of this city's suburbs. Barnett
Newman's sculpture Broken Obelisk is located outside of this city's Rothko Chapel. Its namesake ship canal
links it to the Gulf Intercoastal Waterway in Galveston. This city is the home of Rice University and the
Johnson Space Center. For 10 points, name this large city in Southeast Texas.
ANSWER: Houston
This city's tallest building is the tallest five-sided building in the world, and is connected by an underground
tunnel system to the Philip Johnson-designed Bank of America Center. Westheimer Road connects its
downtown with George Bush Park to the west. Preacher Joel Olsteen is based at this city's Lakewood
megachurch. This city's Menil Collection is home to the Rothko Chapel. The Mission Control Center for
the U.S. space program is located at this city's Johnson Space Center. For 10 points, Rice University is
located in what most populous city in Texas?
ANSWER: Houston, Texas
The southeastern border of this question of water is theorized to be a remnant of a crater and is called the
Nastapoka Arc. Located west of the Ungava Peninsula, this question of water is home to the Belcher Islands
and is known for its low salinity. One city located on this question of water is called the "Polar Bear Capital of
the World," and the Arctic Bridge is a proposed sea route linking Russia and that city of Churchill. It
contains an offshoot called James Bay and is surrounded by the Canadian Shield. For 10 points, identify this
large question of water bordered by Quebec, Ontario, and Manitoba which takes its name from the English
explorer Henry.
ANSWER: Hudson Bay
The removal of the Fort Edward dam in 1973 released contaminated sediment into this river. Once
known as the Mauritius, this river possesses a "Wind Gate" formed by Storm King Mountain and
Breakneck Ridge, and the Appalachian Trail crosses it on the Bear Mountain Bridge. Its official source is
located on Mount Marcy at Lake Tear-of-the-Clouds while the Mohawk is a major tributary. This river
widens at Tappan Zee where it is flanked by the Palisades. Crossed by the Holland Tunnel, for 10 points,
identify this river that flows through Albany and New York City.
ANSWER: Hudson River
An island in this river is named for army surplus magnate Francis Bannerman. The widest portion
of this river is known as the Tappan Zee. Early colonists referred to this question of water as the "North
River" and the Delaware as the (+) "South River." This river's highest source is Lake Tear of the
Clouds, which is on the southwest slope of Mount Marcy. The world's busiest motor vehicle bridge,
the (*) George Washington, spans this river. For 10 points, name this river, which rises in the Adirondack
Mountains and forms the border between New York City and New Jersey.
ANSWER: Hudson River [or Great Mohegan; or North River until mentioned]
This country was known as Pannonia by the ancient Romans, and it is populated by the
descendants of a Khazar group. Its capital once consisted of two separate cities separated by the
Danube, the names of which combined to form its new name. This nation is northeast of (*) Croatia,
south of Slovakia, and northwest of Romania. For 10 points, name this Central European country, once part
of the Dual Monarchy with Austria, with capital at Budapest.
ANSWER: Hungary
This country's Szeleta Cave was inhabited in prehistoric times. That cave is located in the Bukk Mountains,
and this country's highest peak is located in the Matra Mountains. The largest lake in this country, fed by
the Zala River and next to the town of Siofok, is Lake Balaton. In 2010 elections, the Fidesz Party gained
political control. This country's southwestern border is formed by the Drava River, which separates this
country from Croatia, and this country includes the Tisza River between Ukraine and Serbia. Its capital,
which includes Heroes- Square, used to be two different cities on opposite sides of the Danube River. Name
this country south of Slovakia and west of Romania whose capital is Budapest.
ANSWER: Republic of Hungary [or Magyarorszag; or Magyar Koztarsasag]
Lake Heviz, the largest thermal lake in the world and a tourist destination noted for its curative properties,
is located in this country. Its highest point is Kekes in the Matra range, but most of the country consists of
plains and hills. The largest lake of central Europe, Lake Balaton, is located in this country. The Ipoly River
flows along this country's border with Slovakia, and the Drava River forms most of its border with Croatia.
However, its largest river is the Danube, which flows through its capital. This is, for ten points, what
Eastern European country with capital at Budapest?
ANSWER: Hungary
This country's Bakony Mountains lie in its west near the town of Tapolca, where visitors can explore
a subterranean lake known as Cave Lake. A large, continuous grassland region called Hortobagy is
located in this country, whose Baranya region borders its southern neighbor at the Drava River. The
"Great" and "Little" Alfolds, or plains, make up most of this country, which is bisected by the Tisza
River in the east. Its highest point of Kekes is located in the Matra Range, and this country is also
home to Lake Heviz, the largest thermal lake in Europe. Lying entirely on the Pannonian Plain, it is
also home to Lake (*) Balaton and is bisected by the Danube River, upon which its capital sits. Also
containing such cities as Pecs and Debrecen, this is, for 10 points, what landlocked European nation with its
capital at Budapest?
ANSWER: Republic of Hungary [or Magyar Koztarsasag]
This country is home to Lake Heviz, the second largest thermal lake in the world, and shares the
Baranya region with its southern neighbor. The Tisza river forms part of this country's northern
border before flowing south to bisect this country. This country contains Lake Balaton and is located
entirely on the Pannonian plain. This country's capital is built on two sides of the Danube and was once two
cities. For 10 points, name this eastern European country with capital at Budapest.
ANSWER: Hungary [accept Magyarorszag]
The Zala River flows into this country's largest lake, Balaton. Due to hyperinflation in the mid-twentieth
century, this country replaced the pengo with a new monetary unit, the forint. This country had to cede
two-thirds of its inhabitants and land as a result of the Treaty of Trianon after World War I. It is bordered to
the north by Slovakia, to the east by Romania, and to the west by Austria. For 10 points, name this country
with a capital located at Budapest.
ANSWER: Republic of Hungary [or Magyar Koztarsasag]
Cities along this lake's shore include Cheboygan, Alpena, and Bay City, the last of which is on its
extension, Saginaw Bay. The Bruce Peninsula juts into this lake, separating it from its large extension,
Georgian Bay. An island in this lake, the largest freshwater island in the world, is Manitoulan Island. This
lake is connected to another lake to the west by the Straits of Mackinac; for that reason, it is sometimes
considered to be part of a larger lake with Lake Michigan. For 10 points, name this Great Lake south of
Lake Superior, named after a Native American tribe.
ANSWER: Lake Huron
The Bruce Peninsula extends into this question of water, which experienced its namesake "hurricane"
in September, 1996. Thunder Bay can be found on its western shore, and it drains into the St. Clair
River in its south. Islands in it include the historic Mackinac (MACK-in-AW) Island and (*)
Manitoulin Island, which bounds this lake's Georgian Bay and is the largest freshwater island in the world.
Connected also to Lake Michigan, this is, for 10 points, what third largest Great Lake, located to the east of
Michigan?
ANSWER: Lake Huron [prompt on Georgian Bay until "hurricane" is read]
On this peninsula, Mulhacen is the highest point on the continental portion of one of this peninsula's
countries. That peak is located in the Sierra Nevada Mountains in the southern portion of this peninsula.
Llanito ["Yanito"], a native language mixed with English, is the vernacular spoken in one territory on this
peninsula. At Valladolid [Vaa-ya-doh-lid] on this peninsula, the Pisuerga River joins the (*) Duoro which
has its mouth at Porto. The longest and second-longest rivers on this peninsula are the Tagus and Ebro,
respectively. For 10 points, name this large European peninsula upon which Portugal and Spain are located.
ANSWER: Iberian Peninsula
The Asture and Vascone people were early inhabitants of this peninsula, a large portion of which is
dominated by the Meseta Plateau. The site of Aneto and Mulhacen Peaks, this peninsula is home to a
polity that was known in ancient times as Lusitania. Off the eastern shores of this peninsula one can
find the islands of Formentera and (*) Ibiza, and its southernmost point is located just north of Tangiers
not far from the city of Cadiz. Home to the Ebro and Tagus rivers, it is located south of the Bay of Biscay
and is home to Bilbao, a major center for the Basques. For 10 points, identify this European peninsula
separated from the mainland by the Pyrenees.
ANSWER: Iberian Peninsula
The Guadalquivir River runs through this peninsula through two of the largest cities in its Andalusian
plains. One of those cities, Cordoba, was the capital of a namesake caliphate when this peninsula was under
Muslim control. This peninsula's longest river, the Tagus, empties in the Atlantic at Lisbon. For ten points,
name this peninsula containing Portugal and Spain.
ANSWER: Iberian Peninsula
Putrefied shark is part of this country's traditional cuisine served as part of thorramatur. Dalvik is
located on a gulf on this nation that is also the site of its second-largest urban area, Akureyri.
Grimsey is north of this country while Heimaey and Surtsey are to its south. One feature in this
nation is the namesake of the word (*) "geyser". Glaciers cover about 11 percent of the land, and the
largest glacier here is Vatnajokull [vat-nah-YOH-kull]. The Faroe Islands lie to the southeast of this island,
while it lies south of the Denmark Strait and east of the Norwegian Sea. For 10 points, name this island
south of the Arctic Circle which includes the city of Reykjavik [RAKE-yah-vik].
ANSWER: Iceland
This country is home to the largest waterfall in Europe, Dettifoss. The largest national park in Europe
contains the former Skaftafell National Park in this country. Its largest airport is named Keflavik, and its
second largest city is Akureyi. With its source at Hofsjokull, Thjorsa is this country's longest river. Eight
percent of this country is covered by Vatnajokull, the largest glacier in Europe. This island nation is located
on the Mid Atlantic Ridge, and the island of Surtsey is its southernmost point. For 10 points, identify this
Scandinavian nation with capital at Reykjavik.
ANSWER: Republic of Iceland [accept Lydveldid Island]
This location's "Book of Settlements" details its possible discovery by monks called papar. This
country's mountain of Hengill lies near Thingvellir, the original site of its Althing parliament. The
Grimsvotn volcano and the Dettifoss waterfall can be found on its Vatnajokull glacier. For 10 points, name
this European island nation situated on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, with capital at Reykjavik.
ANSWER: Republic of Iceland [or Lydveldid Island]
This country's highest point is in Skaftafell National Park. Bodies of water in this nation include the Sog
River and Lake Thorisvatn [thorris-vot-un]. A volcanic explosion in the 1960s created this nation's island of
Surtsey, and it is home to the oldest parliament in the world, the Althing. This nation also sees eruptions
from Eyjafjallajokull [eya-fyalla-yokle], including a series of them in 2010. For 10 points, name this
northernmost European nation, with capital at Reykjavik.
ANSWER: Iceland
Two tourist routes in this nation are the Golden and Diamond Circles, the latter of which leads to the
powerful Dettifoss Waterfall. In an annual ceremony in this country, children release hundreds of puffins
from the Westmann Islands. This nation's strict hygiene rules apply at its Blue Lagoon, a geothermal spa. A
1967 volcanic eruption off the coast of this nation created the island of Surtsey. The Faroe Islands are
located east of this island, whose inhabitants wrote the Poetic and Prose Edda. Flights across Europe were
affected after the 2010 eruption of a volcano on this island. For 10 points, name this glacial island with
capital Reykjavik.
ANSWER: Republic of Iceland
The aggressive deforestation of this country's native birch trees in the Middle Ages, combined with
its lack of sufficient agricultural reproduction, led Jared Diamond to examine it in Collapse. It has
more land covered by (*) glaciers than the rest of Europe combined. This country's Pingvellir Natural Park
includes an amphitheatre that hosted its first parliament, the Althing. Sitting atop the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, it
gained the newly formed volcanic island of Surtsey in 1963. For 10 points, name this nation with capital at
Reykjavik.
ANSWER: Iceland
American chess player Willard Fiske sent supplies and bequeathed money in his will to this nation's island
of Grimsey. Faxa Bay indents into its southwestern portion. A volcanic eruption in 1963 created its island
of Surtsey near the Westman Islands. A mine for calcite used in Nicol prisms was found in this country at
Helgustadir; that material is known as this nation's "spar". About two-thirds of its population lives in the
metro area of its capital, which is served by the Keflavik Airport. This country's prime minister is the first
openly gay head of government, Johanna Sigurdardottir, and the 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallajokull occurred
in this country. For 10 points, name this island European nation with capital at Reykjavik.
ANSWER: Republic of Iceland [or Lylveldith Island]
This island's Whispering Cliffs are irregularly-angled basalt columns accessible via the Diamond Circle
route. On this island, where fermented shark is a delicacy, the Glera River enters this island's longest bay at
Akureyri. This island's Dettifoss waterfall is its continent's largest by volume, and it lies north of Surtsey,
an island formed in 1963. This island's highest-per-capita use of geothermal energy, its geysers like
Strokkur, and its volcanoes like Grimsvotn are all due to its position atop the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It lies
between the Faroe Islands and Greenland. For 10 points, name this Nordic-settled island with capital
Reykjavik.
ANSWER: Iceland [or Island]
The world's largest factory for barrel cheese is located in this state, in the city of Gooding. The highest
peak in this state contains a portion named the "Chickenout Ridge" and is located in the Lost River Range.
One story about this state's name says that it was coined by a lobbyist named George Willing, who claimed
it to be a Shoshone word. This state saw the first ever chairlift at a ski resort, installed at the Sun Valley
resort. That resort is near a city where Ernest Hemingway shot himself, Ketchum. This state is home to
Borah Peak and its capital may have been named by a Frenchman's exuberant exclamation "The woods!
The woods!" For 10 points, name this "Gem State" with capital at Boise.
ANSWER: Idaho
This state is one of the two places in the world where star garnets can be found. It was supposedly named
after a phrase meaning "The sun coming down the mountain", though the name was probably originated as a
hoax. It is divided into two time zones, with the area to the south of the Salmon River located in the
Mountain Time Zone. With an exception of Coeur d'Alene [da-LANE], most of this state's major cities,
including its capital and Twin Falls, are located along the Snake River. FTP, name this northwestern state
with capital at Boise.
ANSWER: Idaho
Bodies of water in this state include Dworshak Reservoir, near Orofino, and Priest Lake in the north, and
the Clearwater and Salmon River Mountains are found in the center of this state. Castle Peak is located in
this state's Sawtooth National Recreation Area. This state's highest point is Borah Peak, and features in its
southwest include the Fort Hall Indian Reservation, Craters of the Moon National Monument, and
American Falls. Its cities of Caldwell, Nampa and Twin Falls can be found along the Snake River. For 10
points, name this state whose other cities include Pocatello, Coeur d'Alene, and Boise.
ANSWER: Idaho
This state's capital lies at the eastern end of Treasure Valley and forms a metropolitan area with Nampa.
Its city of Coeur d'Alene was the site of a deadly 1892 mining strike. Its northern cities of Moscow and
Lewiston are in its panhandle. The Bitterroot Mountains forms part of its eastern border, while part of its
western border is formed by the Snake River, which flows through Twin Falls and Pocatello. For 10 points,
name this northwestern state which is the namesake of America's most popular cultivar of potato.
ANSWER: Idaho
This state's southwestern county was named for three Hawaiian explorers who disappeared on an
expedition led by Donald Mackenzie. Protected lands in this state include fossil beds with many
Hagerman horse fossils, a spring called Big Springs that is the source of part of Henrys Fork, and a
basalt lava field known as the Craters of the Moon. Shoshone Falls on this state's largest river is part
of a canyon system carved by the Bonneville Flood; that river's tributaries include the (*) Clearwater
and one that rises in the Sawtooth Valley, the Salmon. This state, which contains Coeur d'Alene and lies
west of the Bitterroot Range, is home to Lewiston in its panhandle and Pocatello near the Snake River. For
10 points, name this Gem State, whose capital is Boise.
ANSWER: Idaho
This state's last Democratic senator won in 1974, Frank Church, and this state's ski resort of Sun
Valley featured the world's first chairlift. This state features the Silver Valley, out of which flows the
Coeur d'Alene River, which, after it passes through its namesake lake, becomes the (*) Spokane,
which mostly flows through another state. Governed by Butch Otter, this state features Nez Perce County,
whose county seat, Lewiston, is the furthest inland seaport in the Western United States and sits at the
confluence of the Clearwater and Snake. For 10 points, name this forty-third state, a potato producer with
capital Boise.
ANSWER: Idaho
The dried lava fields of Craters of the Moon are located in the southeastern corner of this state, which is
also the home of the Payette and Salmon Rivers. Those rivers- headwaters form in this state's Sawtooth
Range, considered the birthplace of Sacajawea. Both the Treasure and Magic Valleys are features of its
landscape, along with the Snake River Canyon with nearby Shoshone Falls. French names adorn both its
capital and the populous city of Coeur d-Alene, located in this state's northern panhandle. FTP, bordered by
Wyoming and Montana to its east, what is this state with capital at Boise?
ANSWER: Idaho
The Sawtooth Mountains are found in the central part of this state, and the namesake of the fourth largest
city in this state, the seat of Bannock County, gave up part of the Fort Hall Indian Reservation. Eagle and
Meridian are suburbs of this state's largest city, and this state contains the deepest gorge in the United
States. Only Utah has a greater percentage of Mormons than this state, and Priest Lake and the city of Coeur
d-Alene are in this state's northern panhandle. Home to the cities of Lewiston and Pocatello and bordered to
the west by Washington and Oregon, for 10 points, name this state whose capital is Boise.
ANSWER: Idaho
The chief god in this people's mythology is Chukwu. This ethnic group comprised the Kingdom of Nri
and originated the vessel drum known as the udu. The yam, not the cassava, is a staple crop of this people.
The fictional village of Umuofia is inhabited by this ethnic group in Things Fall Apart, a novel by Chinua
Achebe. They were one of the main ethnic groups exploited by the Atlantic slave trade, during which time
their numbers included Olaudah Equiano. Under Odumegwu Ojukwu, this ethnic group broke away from a
parent state to form Biafra. For 10 points, identify this ethnic group found mostly in Nigeria.
ANSWER: Igbo [or Ibo; or Eboe]
The Sunderbans are located in the eastern portion of this country, while the Thar Desert is located
on the northwestern border. One city in this country, Darjeeling, is internationally known for its
production of tea, while another city on the Vindhya Mountains was the site of the Bhopal Disaster.
This country's Eastern and Western (*) Ghats are located on either side of the Deccan plateau, while its
Nicobar and Andaman Islands both lie in the Bay of Bengal. The Palk Strait separates this country from Sri
Lanka, while the Brahmaputra River flows in its northeast. For ten points, name this country containing
cities like Kolkata and Mumbai, with capital at New Delhi.
ANSWER: Republic of India
This country's territories include the Laccadive Islands, while its western portion is largely covered by
the Thar Desert. It is separated from its southeast neighbor by the Palk Strait, and its states of Kerala and
Tamil Nadu are south of the Deccan Plateau. The Bay of Bengal borders the southeast side of this country,
whose longest river is the Ganges. For 10 points, name this country that borders Pakistan to the east and has
cities such as Calcutta and Mumbai.
ANSWER: Republic of India [or Bharat Ganarajya]
The isolationist (EYE-so-lay-shun-ist) Sentinelese (sen-tin-ul-eez) people live in this country. The
majority of the population of Mauritius (Mo-ri-shus) consists of people originally from this country, which
is home to the Cochin (Co-shin) Jews and the St. Thomas Christians. Another religious group in this
country is known as the Parsis (Par-sees). This country historically has persecuted the Dalits (Da-leets),
some of whom live in the state of Karnataka (CARN-na-tak-uh). The software revolution in this country
predominantly affected the cities of Bangalore (BAN-guh-lore) and Mumbai (MOOM-bye). For 10 points,
name this central country of an Asian subcontinent.
ANSWER: Republic of India [or Bharat Ganarajya]
John II sent Portuguese explorer Pero da Cavilha on a trip to this country's city of Cannanore, now
Kannur. The Andaman Islands are owned by this nation, which is home to two mountain ranges called the
Ghats that surround its Deccan Plateau. This nation's largest city is home to a burgeoning film industry
commonly called Bollywood. For 10 points, name this populous South Asian nation with capital at New
Delhi.
ANSWER: Republic of India [or Bharatiya Ganarajya]
In 2003, this country saw the debut of the Blank Noise Project, a women's movement designed to
counteract the widespread sexual harassment known as "eve-teasing." It is engaged in a longtime dispute
over the Aksai Chin region with the country on its northeast border, which is separated by the Line of
Actual Control. In this country's northwest, the border runs through the Thar Desert and the Rann of
Kutch, which cover territory in the states of Haryana and Rajasthan. For 10 points, name this larger of the
two countries which were partitioned in 1947, the southern neighbor of Pakistan.
ANSWER: Republic of India [or Bharat]
This country contains the mouth of the Mahanad River in its Orissa state. Port Blair is the capital of the
Andaman Islands in this country. This country contains the Thar desert. Although it does not have a Muslim
majority, this nation has the largest Muslim population in the world, and even more Muslims lived in this
country before it was partitioned. That partition has led to a conflict over whether it or Pakistan controls
Kashmir. For 10 points, name this country in which the Ganges runs through Calcutta, whose other
countries include New Delhi and Bombay.
ANSWER: Republic of India [or Bharat]
This country's capital contains an ancient, non-rusting iron pillar. 68 million years ago, lava-spewing in
this country's Western Ghats created the namesake "traps" on its Deccan Plateau. This country's Telugu
people live north of Chennai, which in 1996 changed its name from Madras. For 10 points, name this
nation that controls the south of Kashmir and the Taj Mahal.
ANSWER: Republic of India [or Bharat Ganarayja]
It's not Israel, but an ethnic group from this country is the Cochin Jews, who speak JudeoMalayalam. Mostly living in this nation's state of Orissa, the Oriya people built the Konark Sun
Temple. The origin of the Romani people, or "gypsies," is theorized to be in this country. The
Marathi are an ethnic group in the west of this nation, while its indigenous people, including the
isolated Andaman islanders, are classified as [*] Adivasis. The Kannadigas and Telugus are two major
groups of this country's Dravidian people. For 10 points, name this multiethnic south Asian country, home
to Aryan speakers of the official language Hindi, with population of over 1.1 billion.
ANSWER: Republic of India [or Bharat Ganarajya]
For centuries, gold was mined in this country's Kolar Gold Fields. The Tapti and Narmada rivers empty
into the Gulf of Khambhat on the western coast of this country. The Ten Degree Channel separates the
Andaman and Nicobar islands in this country, while its largest lake is Sambhar. Kanchenjunga, its highest
point, is the third-tallest mountain in the world. Its northwestern area is dominated by the Thar Desert, while
its south contains the large Deccan Plateau. This country is located just north of the Palk Strait from Sri
Lanka. For 10 points, name this country in which one can find the Ganges River.
ANSWER: India
This country's city of Pune (poo-nay) is the site of a Tata Motors manufacturing plant and is the second
largest city in this country's state of Maharashtra. The Eastern and Western Ghats mountain ranges are
separated by the Deccan Plateau in this country. The Palk Strait separates this country's state of Tamil Nadu
from Sri Lanka. Bangladesh borders this country's state of West Bengal, whose largest city is Kolkata.
Surrounded by the Bay of Bengal and its namesake ocean, for 10 points, name this Asian country with
capital at New Delhi.
ANSWER: Republic of India
A newer way to cross this boundary is at Aman Setu, though it is traditionally crossed at the location of
a nightly joint flag-lowering ceremony, Wagah. Ambiguities in the Simla Agreement mean that where this
boundary nears the Siachen Glacier, it is dictated by the location of troops at the Actual Ground Position
Line. It was breached in Operation Gibraltar and again in 1999 during the Kargil War. This boundary is
based on the Radcliffe Line of 1947 and forms the Line of Control when it passes through the northwest of
Jammu and Kashmir. For 10 points, identify this international boundary created as the result of partition
when the British left South Asia.
ANSWER: the border between India and Pakistan [or obvious equivalents; accept Line of Control until it is read]
On the border between these two countries, guards exchange a high-step kick ritual before
simultaneously lowering their flags at sunset in the Beating Retreat. The Radcliffe Line divided these two
countries. The Wagah border is between these two countries, and they also dispute the Siachen glacier. The
Line of Control divides their territorial claims. The Zero Point separates the states of Gujarat and Sindh
between these two countries. For ten points, name these South Asian countries that fought a 1999 war over
Kashmir.
ANSWER: Republic of India and Islamic Republic of Pakistan [either order acceptable, but do not accept or prompt if only one answer is given]
This question's Kerguelen islands were the site of a seal-hunting feud. Settlements in this question of water
dominate the trade in "bourbon vanilla" beans. This question of water contains the Agulhas current and the
Rodrigues triple junction under its surface. Contested islands in this question of water include Mayotte. In
2009, a national cabinet met underwater in this question of water to draw attention to climate change. The
southern end of the Lombok strait is in this question of water, which contains Pemba and the French overseas
possession of Reunion. Island nations in this question of water include Comoros and Seychelles. For 10 points,
name this ocean east of Madagascar.
ANSWER: Indian Ocean
Three major crustal plates converge in this ocean at the Rodrigues Triple Point. Deep spots in it include
the Diamantina and Sunda Trenches. Major chokepoints on it include the Palk Strait and the Strait of
Hormuz. It is officially delineated by the 20 degree east meridian and 146 degree 55 minutes east meridian.
Seas in it include the Gulf of Aden, Great Australian Bight and the Mozambique Channel. For 10 points,
name the youngest and third-largest ocean.
ANSWER: Indian Ocean
One of the Chagos Islands in this question of water contains joint US and UK military bases. The
west edge of this question of water is home to the Merina people. Diego Garcia is found here, as are
Mayotte and Reunion, two overseas departments of France. Twenty-six atolls in this ocean contain
the 1190 islands of the (*) lowest country in the world, the Maldives. The eastern part of this ocean was
devastated by a 2004 earthquake and tsunami. For 10 points, name this third-largest ocean.
ANSWER: Indian Ocean
The Pigeon and Little Pigeon rivers empty into the river that marks its southern boundary, and Brookville
Lake and Hamilton Lake are located along this state's eastern border. The Wyandotte caves are located in
the Harrison-Crawford State Forest at its southeast. This state's town of Bedford calls itself the "limestone
capital of the world" and one can visit the Dan Quayle Vice-Presidential Museum in the city of Huntington.
The Wabash River forms part of its western border with Illinois, and other notable cities include Evansville,
Terre Haute, and South Bend. For 10 points, identify this state home to the Hoosier National Forest.
ANSWER: Indiana [accept Ohio River until "southern boundary"]
The northwestern corner of this state is home to this state's namesake dunes, and the White River flows
through this state's capitol city. The northeastern part of this state features several natural lakes, the largest
of which used to be called Turkey Lake but now goes by Lake Wawasee. A visitor to the southern part of
this state could go spelunking in caves such as Marengo Cave and Squire Boone's Caverns, or go skiing in
nearby Paoli. Towns such as Vincennes, Logansport, and West Lafayette are found along the Wabash River
in this state. For 10 points, name this state that includes Hoosier National Forest, is bordered by the Ohio
River to the south, and is home to cities such as Evansville, Fort Wayne, and Gary.
ANSWER: Indiana
This state's capital is home to the Madame C.J. Walker Building. Some areas in this state switched from
Central Standard Time to Eastern Standard Time in 2005. Part of this states western border is formed by the
Wabash River, which separates its northern half from its southern half. Its city of Gary is encompassed by
the Chicago metropolitan area. For 10 points, name this state with capital at Indianapolis.
ANSWER: Indiana
This nation owns most of the Sunda Islands, and is the site of the Lake Toba. Its more well-known
islands include the site of the volcano Tambora, and it controls Sulawesi. This nation shares (*)
Kalimantan with Brunei and Malaysia, an island which is also known as Borneo, and this site of Krakatoa is
also the owner of the most populous island on the planet. Sumatra and Java are located in, for ten points,
which large Southeast Asian country with capital at Jakarta?
ANSWER: Indonesia
One sacred site in this nation constructed upon a massive rock in the ocean is guarded by sea snakes
while another temple was said to be formed when Indra slew a demon; these temples are Tanah Lot
and Tirta Empul. One cultural activity is the wayang kulit shadow puppet theatre and a metallic
percussion ensemble known as the (*) gamelan. This nation occupies most of an island it shares with
Malaysia and Brunei and another island of this nation is shared with Papua New Guinea. FTP, identify this
Asian archipelagic nation that holds the islands of Borneo, Bali and Java and has its capital at Jakarta.
ANSWER: Indonesia
Foreign visitors are often told that this country operates on "rubber time," illustrating the
relaxed approach to day-to-day activities. This country is home to a form of shadow puppet theater
known as wayang kulit and a traditional musical ensemble known as gamelan. This country is home
to the Borobudur stupa. This most populous (*) Muslim majority country includes the "spice islands," or
Moluccas, as well as Bali and Sumatra. For 10 points, name this country, most of whose inhabitants live on
the island of Java.
ANSWER: Republic of Indonesia [or Republik Indonesia]
The anoa and babirusa are endemic to this country. This country borders the Banda Sea and Makassar
Strait, and Bandung and Surabaya are this country's third and second largest cities respectively. The
Wallace Line runs through this country, and a separatist insurgency in the province of Aceh finally ended in
2005. Puncak Jaya is the country's highest mountain. For 10 points, name this archipelagic country that
includes the islands of Sulawesi, Sumatra, and Java, and whose capital is Jakarta.
ANSWER: Indonesia
This country is home to the Dayak ethnic group, who live in this country's Kalimantan
(KAH-lee-mon-TAHN) area. Among the areas controlled by this country are the Moluccas, formerly known
as the Spice Islands. This country contains the Sunda Strait, in which one can find the large volcano
Krakatoa. This country controls the western half of Papua as well as the island of Celebes (SEH-luh-beez).
More Muslims live in this country than any other. For 10 points, name this country, which includes the
islands of Bali and Java, the latter of which is home to this country's capital, Jakarta.
ANSWER: Republic of Indonesia [or Republik Indonesia]
One part of this country has a name referring to its Lake Matano iron mines. This nation controls
the Lesser Sunda Islands along with an island home to separatist region of Aceh (AH-chuh). Another
island of this nation lies south of the Strait of (*) Malacca and is home to rare species of orangutans and
tigers. This nation's province of Irian Jaya is on the western half of the island of New Guinea. This nation
also controls the southern portion of Borneo. For 10 points, name this Asian nation whose islands include
Sumatra and Java.
ANSWER: Republic of Indonesia
This country is home to the Mentawai Islands, as well as to a volcano which in 1815 had the largest
eruption of modern times and led to the "Year Without a Summer." Major cities in this home of Mount
Tambora include Medan, Surabaya, and Bandung. The Kalimantan provinces of this country are bordered
by the Celebes Sea. This country controls both the Sunda and Madura straits. This country's Banda Aceh
region was the site of an earthquake on Boxing Day in 2004, which created a massive tsunami. For 10
points, name this most populous Muslim country, whose islands include Sumatra and Java.
ANSWER: Indonesia
This country is the site of the world-renowned surfing location G-Land. This country's state philosophy
is the Pancasila, and its music is traditionally played on the gamelan. This country contains prominent
temples at Prambanan (prahm-BAH-nahn) and Borobudur (BOR-oh-buh-door), as well as the extinct
volcano Krakatoa. It has more Muslim residents than any other country in the world. For 10 points, name
this Southeast Asian country that is made up of islands such as Bali, Sumatra, and Java.
ANSWER: Republic of Indonesia [or Republik Indonesia]
The Doberai Peninsula is in this nation's easternmost province, and the city of Pontianak in its
province of West Kalimantan lies on an island shared by two other countries. The Lombok and
Sunda Straits are major shipping lanes in the south of this country, and (*) Bali is a major resort island
here. Including the islands of Sumatra and Java, for 10 points, name this primarily Muslim archipelagic
nation with capital Jakarta.
ANSWER: Indonesia
This nation is home to the Buddhist monuments of Borobudur and Prambanan. This country also shares
an island with a nation with capital at Dili, Timor, and controls the islands which were the destination of
Ferdinand Magellan, the Moluccas, or Spice Islands. This nation is also home to a volcano whose eruption
created the Year Without a Summer, Mount Krakatoa. Its western province of Aceh was devastated by a
tsunami in 2004. For 10 points, name this nation which includes the islands of Java, Sumatra, and Borneo
with capital at Jakarta.
ANSWER: Indonesia
Sites associated with this entity include one at Pothohar and another at Mardan. In the Rigveda, it is
the only entity of its type that is masculine. Its "submarine fan" is the second largest sediment
deposit in the world, and [*] it is spanned by the Ayub bridge. It is especially susceptible to changes due
to melting glaciers due to its origin in the Tibetan Plateau. Central to a namesake Bronze Age civilization,
is, for 10 points, what major river of Pakistan that empties into the Indian Ocean?
ANSWER: Indus River
In prehistoric times, this river's delta was located in the Katawa Basin, and its namesake blind dolphin
species is also known as the Bhulan. The capital of Baltistan, Skardu, lies at the confluence of the Shigar
River with this question of water, which along with the Jhelum and Sarasvati formed part of the Seven Rivers
of the Sindh Province. After flowing from Tibet, this river empties into the sea near Karachi after passing
the ancient sites of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. For 10 points, name this chief river of Pakistan which was
the site of one of the earliest civilizations.
ANSWER: Indus River [or Sindhu; or Harahauvati; or Abasin; or Nilou; or Sengge Zanbo]
Like China's Yangtze and another river in its own country, this river is home to a namesake species of
dolphin, Platanista minor, with a long beak. It receives the five tributaries that define the Punjab and flows
past Rawalpindi and Hyderabad. Seals depicting animals were representative of ancient cities on this river,
such as Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro. For 10 points, identify this namesake of a "valley civilization" in the
ancient subcontinent.
ANSWER: Indus River
Like the Seine, this river exhibits a tidal bore. Its headwaters, notably near those of the Yarlung Zangbo and
one of its own tributaries, are around Lake Manasarovar and Mount Kailash. The water resources of this
river and five of its tributaries were split between two countries in a 1960 treaty named for it. Those five
tributaries, the namesake rivers of the Punjab region, include the Sutlej, Chenab, Ravi, Beas, and Jhelum. It
is the primary source of water for both residential and industrial use in one of those countries, and its river
valley once hosted Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro. FTP, name this chief river of Pakistan and the namesake of
India.
ANSWER: Indus River
One tributary of this river, the Skardu, is depleted because of the melting of the Baltoro Glacier in
Baltistan. In May 2010, a city at the confluence of two other tributaries, the Hunza and the Gilgit,
had to be evacuated because of a water surge. A 1960 treaty governing water use on this river was
necessary because it flows through Ladakh before entering the country with which it is (*) most
associated, but some criticize that treaty for increasing desertification in the Thar Desert. The Kabul River
flows into this river, which flows through the Sindh and Punjab Provinces before emptying into the Arabian
Sea. Mohenjo Daro lies on the flood plain of, for 10 points, what central river of Pakistan, whose valley was
once home to a namesake Bronze Age civilization?
ANSWER: Indus River
This river passes through the Thal and Thar deserts, and the Khyber Pass runs parallel to one of its
tributaries. It is fed by the confluence of the Chenab and Sutlej rivers, and, along with the
Brahmaputra, it flows from Mount Kailash. The city of Hyderabad lies near this river's delta on the
(*) Arabian Sea. It is spanned by the Tarbela Dam near Islamabad and passes through the Punjab plain and
Kashmir. For 10 points, name this river that originates in Tibet and flows through Pakistan, the
namesake of the earliest known civilization of the Indian subcontinent.
ANSWER: Indus River [or Sindhu; or Abasin; or Nilou; or Sengge Chu; or Yindu He]
This region's east is marked by the Greater Khingan mountains. A much-publicized ghost town
outside its city of Ordos was supposed to house a million people, but very few people have moved
there. The world's largest rare earth metal mine is at Bayan Obo west of this region's megacity of
Baotou. This region's capital is Hohhot, and a national government is planting trees and reclaiming
farms for a "Great Green (*) Wall" in this region. The Yellow River reaches its northernmost point in
this region, where the Gobi desert's rapid expansion is displacing yurt-dwelling nomads. For 10 points,
name this Chinese autonomous region that remained part of China after the independence of a country
centered at Ulaanbaatar.
ANSWER: Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region [or Nei Menggu Zizhiqu]
This American city was where Edward Backus pushed for the building of a hydroelectric dam at
Koochiching Falls. It is the major city near Voyageurs National Park. In 2008, this city obtained an official
patent for its slogan, defeating longtime rival, Fraser, Colorado, for that right. This city has a nickname in
which the first word in its name is replaced with "Frostbite," referencing the fact it is likely the inspiration
for Rocky and Bullwinkle's hometown. It is located on the Rainy River directly across from Ontario's Fort
Frances. For ten points, name this Minnesota city known as the "Icebox of the Nation" for its extremely
cold temperatures.
ANSWER: International Falls
This state's city of Bettendorf lies across the Mississippi, west another state's cities of Moline and Rock
Island, and is one of the two Quad Cities located in this state. This state's namesake writer's workshop is in
a city that also contains the Hoover Presidential Library. One major university in this state is in Ames. For
10 points, name this midwestern state that is home to the first caucuses of the Presidential election cycle.
ANSWER: Iowa
A legend from this country claims that Arash the Archer shot an arrow to determine the extent of
its borders. The Dasht-e Kavir and Dasht-e Lut deserts are found near its center. It contains Mount
Damavand within the Alborz Mountains in its north, and the (*) Zagros Mountains cut through its
western part. Tabriz is found in its province of East Azerbaijan. For 10 points, name this country on the
south of the Caspian Sea, found west of Afghanistan and east of Iraq.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Iran
The eighteenth-largest country in the world, this nation of over 70 million inhabitants is bordered by
Armenia, Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan to the north. Before Islam arrived in the seventh century, two ruling
empires here included the Parthians and the Sassanids. Notable tourist attractions here include the cities of
Isfahan, Qom, Shiraz and Tabriz. The US does not currently operate an embassy, following a 1979
revolution in this nation. Formerly known as Persia, FTP, name this Middle Eastern country, whose
supreme leader is Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and whose president is Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
ANSWER: Iran
Two salt deserts lie in an eastern plateau in this nation, which contains Lake Urima, the third largest salt
lake in the world. Its western boundaries terminate at the Shatt-al-arab. The Khuzestan plain forms a
lowland portion here, while its major mountain ranges include the Zagros and Albroz. This nation's highest
point is Mount Damavand, and the littorals of the Gulf of Oman form a large portion of its southern coast. It
borders Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan to the north, as well as the Caspian Sea. For 10 points, name this
western neighbor of Afghanistan and Pakistan with capital at Tehran.
ANSWER: Iran
The town of Rayan in this country is promoting itself as a replacement for a popular tourist destination
destroyed. In the southwest, the Tomb of Daniel and Chogha-e Zanbil are notable sites, while the town of
Tus is the location of the tomb of this country's most famous writer. Gonbad-e Kavus is a noted minaret,
and sites like Kharanaq, Chak Chak, and Meybod are excellent places to meet girls if you're tired of the
Amir Chakmakh Complex in Yazd. Home to ancient sites such as Naqsh-e Rostam, Behistun, Ecbatana,
Pasargadae, and Persepolis, for 10 points, name this country whose largest cities include Mashhad, Esfahan,
Tabriz, and Tehran.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Iran, Jomhuri-ye Islami-ye Iran
This country is involved in a territorial dispute over possession of the Greater and Lesser Tunb Islands, and
the Dasht-e Lut and the Dasht-e Kavir are two deserts in this country's namesake plateau. Lake Urmia is
located in this country close to the Turkish border. The Zagros Mountains form the spine of this country,
and the cities of Qum, Tabriz, and Esfahan are located in this nation. For 10 points, name this country
located in modern day Persia that has its capital at Tehran.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Iran or Jomhuri-ye Eslami-ye Iran
The Karun river is the smallest navigable channel in this country, which is also home to the
Zayandeh River. The home to the Khuzestan Plain, its deserts include the Lut. On the northeastern
border of this country, one can find the Atrak River and the Kpet Dag mountain chain. The Sefid
river cuts through this country's (*) Alborz mountains, which are located north of the Kavir desert. The
southwestern border of this country is formed by the Shatt-al-Arab channel, and the largest mountain chain
here is the Zagros. This country is north of the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf. For 10 points, name this
Middle Eastern nation with capital at Tehran.
ANSWER: Iran
The city of Zahedan in this country is a common destination for refugees, making it one of the fastest
growing cities in the world. The imprisonment for religious reasons of two women in this country's second
most populous city, Mashhad, sparked international outrage in October 2010. Its city of Qom is particularly
known for its conservatism. A recent electoral controversy centered on this country's city of Tabriz, where
the incumbent won a majority of the votes despite that city's Azeri majority. Large cities in the central part
of this country include Shiraz and Esfahan. For 10 points, identify this largest predominantly Shi-a country
in the world, with capital Tehran.
ANSWER: Iran
This country is by far the world's largest producer of pistachios and saffron. People in this country use the
seven ceremonial dishes of the Haft Sin to celebrate the New Year Nowruz. Mount Damavand is the tallest
mountain in this country. Its population is clustered in its two main mountain ranges, the Alborz in the north
and the Zagros in the west. Most of this country's Arabic speakers live in its Khuzestan region. This country
lies across from the Omani exclave of Musandam on the Strait of Hormuz, and it occupies the entire
northern shore of the Persian Gulf. For 10 points, name this country home to the majority of the world's
Shi-a Muslims, with capital Tehran.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Iran [or Jomhuri-ye Eslami-ye Iran]
The eastern portion of this country contains the Dasht-e-Kavir and Dasht-e-Lut deserts. This country
contains the Khuzestan Plain, and Mt. Damavand is found in its Alborz Mountains. Its city of
Bandar-e-Abbas lies on a strait that transports a third of the world's seaborne oil shipments. The (*)
Zagros Mountains are located in this country which was home to the ancient cities of Ecbatana and
Persepolis. Modern-day cities in this country include Tabriz and Esfahan, and, like Oman, it abuts the Strait
of Hormuz. This country is bordered by the Caspian Sea to the north and the Persian Gulf to the south. For
ten points, name this large Islamic republic with capital at Tehran.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Iran
This country's Orumieh Lake is in danger of drying up, while the nearby Anzali Lagoon in the Gilan region
is also ecologically threatened. Cities in this country include Mashhad, a holy city in its Razavi Khorasan
Province. A mountain range here is home to Mt. Dena and Zard Kuh, the Zagros Mountains. One strait
south of this country has 40% of all oil shipments go through it. That strait, the Strait of Hormuz, is shared
with Oman and the UAE. For 10 points, name this country with major cities such as Esfahan and Tehran.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Iran
This island's northernmost point is Malin Head, on the Inishowen Peninsula.The Aran Islands lie off its west
coast, near Connemara. Its largest lake is Lough Neagh, near Antrim, and its rivers include the Liffey, the
Suir, which runs through Waterford, and the Shannon. Its traditional divisions are Connacht, Leinster,
Munster, and Ulster, much of which now is held by a foreign country. A namesake sea separates, FTP, this
island from England, home to Limerick, Cork, and Dublin.
ANSWER: Ireland
The tallest structures in this nation are found at its largest power plant at Moneypoint. The Luas is
a light rail system found in this nation's largest city. Igneous intrusions in this country include the (+)
Little Sugar Loaf and Great Sugar Loaf, and Lugnaquillia Mountain is the highest peak in this
nation's Wicklow Mountains. Clare, Kildare, and (*) Galway are among the counties in this nation,
whose cities include Limerick and Cork. For 10 points, name this island nation with capital at Dublin.
ANSWER: Ireland [or Eire, do not accept or prompt on "Northern Ireland"]
To the northwest of this Island is the smaller island of Achill. This island's Siur, Nore and Barrow Rivers
constitute its Three Sisters and its largest city lies on the River Liffey. This island's highest mountain is
Carruntoohil and it is bisected by the River Shannon. The Lough Neagh is a large lake in this island's
northeast, and its second most populous city is Cork. Munster and Ulster are two of the four provinces of,
for 10 points, what island including Belfast and Dublin, called the Emerald Isle?
ANSWER: Ireland [accept Eire]
This country is home to the highest sea cliffs in Europe, Slieve League, and also contains the Cliffs of
Moher. Neaghe is the largest lake in this nation. The hill of Tara in this country used to be the site of
coronations, and amusingly-named castles include Bunratty, Tullynally, and Ballynahinch. This nation's
main river is the Shannon. The town of Ennis in this county hosts an annual folk festival in County Clare,
while horse races are held frequently in Galway. Counties in this country include Sligo, Donegal, and Mayo.
For 10 points, name this country with capital at Dublin.
ANSWER: Republic of Ireland
Subdivisions of these units of land were once called cantreds, but that term was superseded by divisions of
them known as baronies. The Chief Herald of the nation in which these divisions of land lie has granted
many of them coats of armor since 1943, including a seal that depicts Patrick Sarsfield outstretching his
hand. Naas is the seat of government of one of these units. The King's and Queen's examples of these units
were established during the British Plantations movement in their home country, and those ones are today
known as Offaly and Laois. These units are subdivisions of larger provinces like Leinster, Munster, and
Connacht. For 10 points, name these divisions of land that include Limerick, Tipperary, and Cork, and are
located on the Emerald Isle.
ANSWER: the counties of Ireland
One stretch of this river flows through a volcanic region called the Singu Plateau. A series of seven
controversial dams are planned for construction on this river, the largest of which is the Myitsone dam. The
Taping and Chindwin are tributaries of this river which is formed by the confluence of the Mali and N-mai
rivers. This river is also home to and names a certain type of beakless dolphin that shares many physical
features with the beluga whale. The delta of the Salween River lies about one hundred miles east of the
delta of this river, which flows into the Andaman Sea. Yangon lies in the delta of this river, while the
largest city on it is Mandalay. For 10 points, name this longest river in Myanmar.
ANSWER: Irrawaddy River [or Ayeyarwaddy River]
The Ava Bridge crosses this river at Sagaing, while other bridges cross at Dedaye and Chauk. Its
westernmost distributary passes through the city of Pathein. The Myitsone Dam is under construction on
this river two miles downstream from the confluence of the Mali and N-mai Rivers in Kachin State, whose
cities of Myitkyina and Bhamo lie along this river. The Chindwin is the chief tributary of this river, which
lies between the Arakan Mountains to its west and the Salween River to its east. Home to a namesake
beakless dolphin, this river rises in the Himalayas and flows into the Andaman Sea after passing by
Mandalay. For 10 points, identify this river which flows through Myanmar.
ANSWER: Irrawaddy River
The first bridge to span this river was constructed in 1934 near the town of Ava. In 2011,
construction was suspended on a project that plans to build the Myitsone Dam on this river. A blunt,
rounded head is characteristic of the dolphin native to, and named for, this river. The Chindwin and
the Mu are two important tributaries of this river, which is the longest and most commercially vital
river in a country that also contains the mouth of the Salween. The banks of this river are home to
the city of (*) Pagan. This river takes from a Rudyard Kipling poem its nickname of "The Road to
Mandalay." The delta of this river is on the Andaman Sea just west of Yangon, the former Rangoon. For 10
points, name this principle river of the country alternately known as Myanmar or Burma.
ANSWER: Irrawaddy River [or Ayeyarwady River]
The main crossing of this river is the Ava Bridge, its delta is bordered by the Arakan Mountains to
the west and the Pegu Mountains to the east, and it rises in the Languela glacier. This river empties
into the Andaman Sea and it is formed by the confluence of the Nmai(*) and Mali rivers. This river's
main tributary is the Chindwin River, the port of Mandalay lies on this river, and the Rangoon River is one
of its distributaries. For 10 points, name this major river of Burma.
ANSWER: Irrawaddy River [or Ayeyarwady]
This river's namesake dolphin, Orcaella brevirostris, was first described by Richard Owen based on a
specimen found in Visakhapatnam. The Mu and Shweli are two notable tributaries of this river. This
river may previously have discharged into the Gulf of Martaban through the current Sittaung river,
but nowadays its lower course flows between the Rakhine and Pegu Yoma mountains. This river
originates in the (*) Kachin State from the confluence of the N'mai and Mali Rivers, and it is the site of the
controversial Myitsone Dam. The streams that eventually form this river originally come from mountains
near the Tibetan border. A Rudyard Kipling poem popularized its nickname "The Road to Mandalay." For
10 points, name this major river of Myanmar.
ANSWER: Irrawaddy River
One legend about this river concerns the god Suriya, whose affairs with a Naga from this river
produced three eggs. Near Kabwet, this river suddenly flows westward due to the Singu Plateau, and
eventually forms a confluence with the Chindwin River. The Myitsone Dam on this river has been
criticized for potential environmental damage. Its namesake dolphin, which has a small dorsal fin and a
small beak, is threatened. Formed in Kachin State from the confluence of the N'Mai and Mali Rivers, this
waterway is sometimes called the "Road to Mandalay." It flows into the Andaman Sea. For 10 points, name
this major river of Myanmar.
ANSWER: Irrawaddy River
This was the religion of the "Yellow Queen" and other monarchs of the Pattani Kingdom which once
ruled southern Thailand. Currently, movements such as the Four Star PULO agitate for this religion in
Thailand, and it is also practiced by the Rohingya people of Burma and the Moro ethnicity of the
Philippines. For 10 points, name this religion which is the majority in the Southeast Asian countries of
Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei.
ANSWER: Sunni Islam [or Muslims]
Aurangzeb constructed the Bari Imam shrine, now a pilgrimage site in this city. Pir Sohawa is a resort in
the Margalla Hills, located directly north of this metropolis. A mosque designed like a Bedouin tent in this
city was named for Saudi Arabia's King Faisal, who sponsored the project. This city is often paired with
Rawalpindi, which is less than ten miles away from it. Ayub Khan insisted on the construction of this city,
which is located in the Potohar Plateau, until it was finished in 1966. Mamnoon Hussain and Nawaz Sharif
live in this city. For ten points, name this city located directly south of Srinagar, the capital city of Pakistan.
ANSWER: Islamabad, Pakistan
The legislature of this island, composed of the "Legislative Council" and the "House of Keys," is called
the "Tynwald." A prestigious motorcycling event called the Tourist Trophy Race, or "the TT," takes place
here annually. This island's flag depicts three bent legs joined together at their thighs and pointing in
different directions. This island is the namesake of a breed of cat with a nearly-imperceptible stub of a tail.
For 10 points, name this possession of the British crown, an island in between Great Britain and Ireland.
ANSWER: the Isle of Man
This nation's city of Arad in the southeastern part of this nation is home to Mount Kina as well this
nation's National Trail. The highest point in this nation's internationally recognized boundaries is
Mount Meron, while this nation claims that Mount Hermon is its highest point. This nation's city of
(*) Beersheba is known as the "capital of the Negev". Adjacent to Jordan's sole port, Aqaba, lies the city of
Eilat, the only domestic destination of Ben Gurion Airport located in this nation's capital city. For 10 points,
name this Jewish nation on the east coast of the Mediterranean Sea.
ANSWER: State of Israel
A species of painted frog in this country was thought to be extinct until Lake Hula was drained. Along with
its eastern neighbor, this country is encroached by the Aravah Region. This country controls the offshore
Tamar Gas Field, where natural petroleum was first discovered within it. It is home to a plateau ancient city
where many sicarri took their own lives, Masada. Much of this country is covered by the Negev Desert. Its
larger cities include Hebron and Beersheba. This country borders the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the
east and Lebanon to its north. For 10 points, name this country whose cities include Tel Aviv and
Jerusalem.
ANSWER: Israel
A species of painted frog long thought extinct was rediscovered in 2011 in this nation's Lake Hula. One
source of controversy in this nation is over the pollution of the Kishon River. This nation's southernmost
city, which is on the Gulf of Aqaba, is Eilat. The National Water Carrier distributes water to cities from this
nation's largest freshwater lake, the Sea of Galilee. The south of this nation is dominated by the Negev
Desert, and this nation shares the Dead Sea with Jordan. For 10 points, name this Middle Eastern nation
with capital at Jerusalem.
ANSWER: State of Israel [or Medinat Yisra-el]
One national park in this nation is an oasis called the Ein Gedi, and one of the highest peaks in this country
is Mount Meron. An erosion-produced crater in this nation is Makhtesh Ramon, which sits in this country's
Negev desert, located north of its resort town of Eilat. The largest city in the north of this country is situated
near Mount Carmel and is called Haifa, and this nation's west contains the lowest dry-land point in the
world. It lays claim to the Golan Heights and is bounded on the right by the Jordan River. For 10 points,
name this nation that boasts the Dead Sea and has its capital at Jerusalem.
ANSWER: Israel
The Neoclassical Endurun Library is found at this city's Seraglio Point. In this city, several Medusa
heads adorn the bases of pillars in a massive sunken cistern located underground. Another structure in this
city was nicknamed for the colored ceramic tiles on its interior. This home of the Topkapi Palace and Blue
Mosque is the site of a building with a dome on pendentives, inlaid with gigantic Islamic calligraphy. For
10 points, name this city where one can visit the Hagia Sophia.
ANSWER: Istanbul [or Constantinople; or Byzantium]
250,000 people visit this city's Grand Bazaar every day. The Serpent Column and an Egyptian obelisk
created by Thutmose III can be found in this city's Hippodrome. The Galata Bridge crosses this city's
harbor, the Golden Horn. This city, whose name may be Greek for "to the city," also contains a former
Christian basilica to which minarets were added when it became a mosque. Home to the Hagia Sophia, it is
divided across two continents by the Bosphorus. For 10 points, name this largest city in Turkey, which was
formerly known as Constantinople.
ANSWER: Istanbul [or Constantinople before it is read; or Byzantium]
This city's Taksim Square was the site of a 1977 massacre of socialists on Labor Day, and its Galatasaray
soccer team was once associated with socialist causes. This city's Dolmabahce [dol-ma-bah-je] Palace
imitated Versailles because its earlier palace wasn-t massive enough. European expatriates in this town once
clustered along Istiklal Street in Pera, a district now known as Beyoglu [bay-oh-lu], which is located north
of the Golden Horn. This city is home to the masterpiece of Mimar Sinan, the Suleiman Mosque, as well as
the Blue Mosque and the Topkapi Palace. For 10 points, name this city that spans the Bosporus.
ANSWER: Istanbul
This city's Walls of Galata were demolished to accommodate its. growth in the 1870s. The historic core
of this city is south of the natural harbor known as the Golden Horn. Architectural landmarks in this city
include Topkapi Palace and a museum originally built as an Orthodox basilica, the Hagia Sophia. This city
sits north of the Sea of Marmara and spans two continents, Europe and Asia. For 10 points, name this
Turkish city on the Bosporous Strait whose previous names include Byzantium and Constantinople.
ANSWER: Istanbul [prompt on Byzantium or Constantinople before mention]
This city's Galata Bridge spans the Golden Horn, an inlet of the Bosporus that passes by the Topkapi
Palace. The Sea of Marmara splits this city into Thracian and Anatolian regions in Europe and Asia,
respectively, and religious buildings in this city include the (*) Hagia Sophia and the Blue Mosque. For
10 points, name this city once known as Byzantium and Constantinople, the largest city in Turkey.
ANSWER: Istanbul
One of these geographical features connects the Malay Peninsula with the mainland of Asia and is named
Kra. Madison, Wisconsin and Seattle, Washington are both built on this geographic feature and the Karelian
one is between Lake Ladoga and the Gulf of Finland and connects Finland to Russia. In 1914, a canal was
built through one of these to provide a passage from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean through the
country of Panama. For 10 points, name this geographic feature, a small strip of land that connects two
larger bodies of land.
ANSWER: isthmus
This formation on Bruny Island of Tasmania is home to Truganini Lookout and is a breeding site for Fairy
Penguins. The Sea of Azov borders one of these named Kerekop, and Thailand sits on the east with
Myanmar on the west in a South Asian example of this geographic feature that was named after the city of
Kra Buri. The one of these named for Corinth connects the Peloponnese with the rest of Greece. Coming
from the Greek word for neck, this landform's sea counterpart is the strait. FTP, name this geographic term
for a narrow strip of land that connects two larger land masses, perhaps most famously "of Panama."
ANSWER: isthmus
This country lies at the southern end of the Brenner Pass and contains the Aosta Valley. Lakes Garda
and Como are located in this country, and the Adige flows through its province of South Tyrol. One
of this country's island possessions lies south of the Tyrrhenian Sea, while another lies across the
Strait of Bonifacio from (*) Corsica. Taranto and Trieste are cities in this country, which contains the
Dolomites and Apennines and shares Mont Blanc with France. Its Po River flows into the Adriatic Sea,
while its Arno River flows past Florence and Pisa. For ten points, name this country which contains cities
like Naples, Venice, and Rome.
ANSWER: Italy (or Italian Republic)
One mountain range in the north of this country is the Dolomite range. Its largest lake lies in the extreme
north and is called Lake Garda. To the south of this country lies the Ionian Sea, which includes the Gulf of
Taranto. The longest river in this country is the Po, and the Tiber River flows past its capital. The Apennine
Mountains are known as the "backbone" of this country, which controls an island home to Mt. Etna and the
city of Palermo. For 10 points, name this boot-like country which surrounds the mini-states of San Marino
and the Vatican.
ANSWER: Italy [or Italian Republic; or Repubblica Italiana]
The northeast part of this nation is home to hundreds of thousands of cave drawings within the Camonica
Valley. The easternmost point in this nation is located on the Salentine Peninsula, which lies west of the
Strait of Otranto. Traveling south through the Brenner Pass grants access to this nation, the backbone of
which is formed by the Apennine Mountains. The nation of San Marino is located entirely within this
country, which contains Mount Etna on the island of Sicily. For 10 points, name this European nation whose
capital is Rome.
ANSWER: Italy [also accept Italian Republic or Repubblica Italiana]
Seven seismologists in this nation are facing manslaughter charges for failing to predict a May 2009
earthquake. This nation's northern industrial regions lie at the south of what many call the "Blue Banana" of
industry and include the Po River Valley, while the Apennine Mountains run through this nation which is
also home to the Romagna region home to the cities of Parma and Ferrara. This nation controls the
southeastern slopes of Mount Blanc and its capital lies on the Tiber River. FTP name this country with
capital at Rome.
ANSWER: Italy
The Cavally River forms the bottom of this nation's western border, and the Sassandra River runs
throughout this country. This country's only mountain range literally translates as the "Eighteen
Mountains," which include Mont Nimba. This nation's Baoule people are part of the Kwa language
group-speaking Akan. This nation's longest river, the Bandama, was dammed to create the artificial
Lake Kossou, and both the Bandama and Sassandra flow into the Gulf of (*) Guinea. This nation's
president Felix Houphouet-Boigny moved the capital to his hometown in 1983. For 10 points, name this
former French colony between Ghana and Liberia on the Gulf of Guinea, with capital at Yamoussoukro.
ANSWER: Ivory Coast (accept Cote d-Ivoire)
This city's Blount Island was the planned site of a dry dock for building floating nuclear power plants. A
1960 civil rights protest in this city led to "Ax Handle Saturday." This city contains the mouth of the St.
Johns River. In 1968 this city voted to consolidate its government with that of Duval County, making it the
largest city by area in the forty-eight contiguous states. For 10 points, what most populous city in Florida is
named after the seventh U.S. President?
ANSWER: Jacksonville
The Betawi people are descended from residents of this city, which is home to a mosque named
after the Arabic word for "independence," Istiqlal. The government of this city also administers the
Thousand Islands. The streets of this city are home to a fried rice dish called Nasi Goreng. The (*)
Dutch East India company operated out of this city when it was called Batavia. This city is the most
populous in Southeast Asia. For 10 points, name this largest city on Java, the capital of Indonesia.
ANSWER: Jakarta
Old growth vegetation on this island is confined mainly to the Cockpit Country, a rugged karst region in the
west of the island. The northern coast is very rugged while the majority of the population lives on its
southern coastal plain. The rivers of this island include the Great and the Minho as well as the Black, which
flows through the south. Also in the west of this island is Negril Point, while at its southern end is Portland
Point, which lies between Long Bay and Old Harbour Bay. At the eastern end of this island are Sir John's
Peak and Blue Mountain Peak, its highest point. Montego Bay in the north and Port Royal in the south are,
FTP, on what Caribbean island with the capital at Kingston.
ANSWER: Jamaica
Awaji, a small island in this nation, is known for the fine quality of its onions. One island in this country
contains Lake Biwa, which is drained by the Yodo River into the Inland Sea; that island is also home to the
Hida and Akaishi mountain ranges. This country has recently suffered a devastating earthquake and tsunami
near its Fukushima region, nearly causing a nuclear disaster. For 10 points, the Kanto plain is located in this
land of the rising sun whose four main islands are Shikoku, Kyushu, Hokkaido, and Honshu.
ANSWER: Japan
Known as the Hinomaru, it was first made official by Proclamation No. 57 in 1870.
During times of war it is traditional for a soldier's loved ones to sign it and give it to him
as a good luck charm. Initially proportioned at 7:10 ["seven to ten"] it was changed to 2:3
["two to three"] in 1999. The original version used by the military included 16 rays, though
the modern military variant consists of only eight rays. Officially the circle makes up threefifths
of the hoist length and the shade of red is not codified. Consisting of a red circle on a
white field, this is for ten points, the flag of an East Asian island nation?
ANSWER: National Flag of Japan (accept equivalents)
One of these locations called Earth Cure started a "No Foreigners" policy in response to the rowdiness
of Russian sailors. That prompted a lawsuit filed by American born professor Debito Arudo. These sites
can be found near places like Mount Aso, and the one at Gero is found on the bank of the Hida River. In a
novel, Shimamura has an affair with Komako at a tourist site featuring one of these locations. That novel is
Yasunari Kawabata's Snow Country. For 10 points, name these Japanese sites traditionally used as tourist
and public bathing places, which feature geothermally warmed groundwater.
ANSWER: Japanese hot springs [or onsen; prompt on baths; accept anything that suggests a heated question of water]
Liancourt Rocks, the Oki islands, and Ulleung island are located in this question of
water, which is bounded by the straits of Tartary, Le Perouse, Kanmon, Tsugaru,
Korea, and Tshushima. This question of water has almost no tides, because it is nearly
landlocked. Both North and South Korea have appealed to the United Nations to help rename
this question of water, which they refer to as the East Sea. Bounded by the Korean Peninsula and
Russia, this is for ten points what question of water north of Japan?
ANSWER: Sea of Japan
This question of water buried several cryptomeria trees 1500 to 2000 years ago, so there is now a
submerged forest at the town of Uozu. A warm current of this question splits into three currents before
flowing out the Soya, or Tsurgaru, straits, while the cold Liman Current runs through Mamiya Strait.
Cheju-do and Tsushima are islands in the Korea Strait that separate this sea from the Yellow Sea
and the Pacific Ocean. The island of Sakhalin separates this question of water from the Sea of Okhotsk.
This question is often called the East Sea by the Chinese but the Inland Sea by people of its namesake
country. Name this sea that borders Russia and the Korean Peninsula.
ANSWER: Sea of Japan [prompt on East Sea or Inland Sea before each is mentioned; accept Toyom Bay before "Tsurgaru"]
The Pararaton is a record of kings who ruled on this island, on which Raden Patah found a kingdom
based in the present day city of Demak. Its western part, largely covered by the Parahyangan highlands,
includes the province of Banten, which has its capital at Serang. This island's namesake rhinoceros is the
rarest kind in the world and is confined to Ujung Kulon National Park. Mount Lawu lies near the source of
its longest river, the Solo, on which many hominids have been found. Mount Merapi is on this island, found
between Sumatra and Bali, which is the most populous island on Earth. For 10 points, name this Indonesian
island on which Jakarta is located.
ANSWER: Java
An acidic lake is located in this island's Ijen Plateau, which also has coffee plantations. The Madurese and
creole Betawi are minorities to its two major ethnic groups. Mount Semeru is the highest mountain on this
island, which also contains the most active volcano in its country. The Sahul and Sunda shelves meet under
this island, forming Mount Tambora. This island contains the city of Bandung and is separated from
Sumatra by the Sunda Strait. The most populated island in the world, it is south of Borneo and north of
Christmas Island. For 10 points, name this second largest island in Indonesia, with a capital at Jakarta, that
also names a type of coffee.
ANSWER: Java
This island's cultural exports include cloth on which a tjap is used to apply hot wax against indigo and
brown dye, called batik. Its central Kedu plain features a spiraling stone temple complex called Borobudur.
Madura, found to this island's northeast, is co-administered with it. This island's many volcanoes include its
tallest, Semeru, and Mount Merapi. Southeast of the Sunda strait, this island's large cities include Bandung
and Surabaya, and its Ijen plateau is a growing site for Arabica beans. For 10 points, name this most
populous island in the world, where administrators in the city of Jakarta run Indonesia.
ANSWER: Java [or Jawa]
The Ijen Crater on the eastern end of this island is an important site for sulfur mining, and the Ujung
Kulon National Park is found on this island's western tip. The Madiun and Brantas are tributaries of
its longest river, which flows through the Sewu Mountains in Banten province. In this island's center,
the Borobudur (*) temple is an important pilgrimage site, while the Prambanan temple is located just east
of Yogyakarta. More famous perhaps are this island's volcanoes, which include Mount Semeru and Mount
Merapi. Located northeast of Christmas Island, south of Borneo, and east of Krakatoa, FTP, name this
Indonesian island which includes the capital, Jakarta, and lies between Bali and Sumatra, also famous for its
coffee production.
ANSWER: Java
This island is the site of a Mahayana monument consisting of many stupas and Buddha statues, known
as Borobudur. Its former Dutch colonizers built the city of Batavia here. This Muslim-majority island is the
most populated island in the world. For 10 points, name this island, the home of Jakarta, which is the
largest island in Indonesia.
ANSWER: Java
Mountains in this city include Mount Scopus and the Mount of Offence, as well as Mount Moriah, which is
in the Haram ash-Sharif. The Kidron Valley is in the east of this city, near the Dung Gate. Another gate, St.
Stephen's Gate, was, according to legend, built by Suleiman the Magnificent to avoid being consumed by
lions, and other gates include the Damascus and the Jaffa, which is just north of the Citadel in the Armenian
Quarter. Containing an Old City with four quarters, this city is also home to the Knesset and the Western
Wall. FTP, name this Israeli capital city on the border with the West Bank.
ANSWER: Jerusalem
A new art gallery in this city is in the shape of an ellipse and surrounded by aluminum panels that
allow outsiders to see into the building; it is called Circa on Jellicoe. This city's Sandton district
includes the curved Alice Lane, or Norton Rose, Towers. This city also contains Carlton Centre, the
tallest building in Africa, and Hillbrow Tower, the tallest man-made structure in Africa. Its soccer
stadium, nicknamed the Calabash, is actually First National Bank Stadium and was the site of the
2010 World Cup Finals. Name this city, which is not one of the three capitals of, but is the most
populous city in, South Africa.
ANSWER: Johannesburg, South Africa
This building was redesigned to avoid casting a shadow on the Trinity Church. Early in its construction,
this building was forced to use plywood to replace many of its 500 pound glass windows, which were being
dislodged by wind and falling to the street below. This structure is the tallest in Boston. What tower is
named for the first signer of the Declaration of Independence?
ANSWER: John Hancock Tower
A huge wetland known as Azraq used to exist in the central-eastern portion of this nation but it was
overtapped for water and is now mostly dry. Nearby, a number of frescoes depicting hunting scenes and
bawdy women may be seen in the UNESCO Heritage Site of Qasr Amra, a desert palace for Ummayad
Rulers. One of its most popular tourist destinations is Wadi Rum where much of Lawrence of Arabia was
filmed but this nation may be best known for a site that harbors the remnants of the Nabatean civilization.
FTP, identify this Hashemite Kingdom where, via the Siq, one may visit the Monastary and the Treasury at
Petra located south of the capital, Amman.
ANSWER: The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
In this country, the Ata'ta people live within the Dana Biosphere Reserve, and artificial springs have
been built in order to entice birds back to the dried-up Azraq Wetland Reserve. This country's Wadi Mujib
is found between the Madaba and Kerak Mountains, which overlook the Hammamat Ma'in hot springs.
This country's fifty-two "nahias" include Salt, Aljun, and Aqaba, and it has been ruled in recent decades by
the Hashemite kings Hussein and Abdullah II. For ten points, name this country that controlled the West
Bank prior to the Six-Day War with Israel and, on independence, dropped the prefix "Trans" from its name.
ANSWER: Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan [or Al Mamlakah al Urduniyah al Hashimiyah]
This country's Dana Biosphere Reserve is home to the Atata tribe. The village of Salt lies in the Balqa
highlands of this country, whose northwestern portion contains the fertile Hauran plateau. Nabataean
petroglyphs can be found at Wadi Rum in the south of this country. A large castle is found at Kerak in this
country, whose Zaatari refugee camp provides shelter to people fleeing a northern neighbor's civil war. This
country is home to the rock-cut city of Petra and the city of Aqaba, the namesake of a gulf on the Red Sea.
For 10 points, name this "Hashemite Kingdom" that controls the East Bank of its namesake river from its
capital at Amman.
ANSWER: Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan [or al-Mamlakah al-Urduniyah al-Hashimiyah]
The northeast part of this country, including the desert castle Kharaneh and the ancient ruins at
Umm el-Jimal, is Mafraq, which is one of this country's twelve governorates. The rift valley which
shares its name with this country and forms much of its western border includes the Arabah, and
the northwest corner of this country is near the question of water known as Lake Tiberias or the Sea of
Galilee. Its southwest corner is on the Gulf of Aqaba, which is not far from this country's ancient city
of Petra. Name this country bordering Syria, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Israel, whose capital is Amman.
ANSWER: (Hashemite Kingdom of) Jordan
This river's valley was the subject of the Johnston Unified Water Plan, which involved using Lake
Tiberias as a reservoir. It is formed from the confluence of the Hasbani, Dan, and Banyas; a secret project
attempted to divert the Hasbani and Banyas to the Yarmuk River instead. Use of this river is a point of
contention between Israel and the country named for this major source of the Dead Sea. For 10 points, name
this river which is mentioned in many gospel songs because, in the Bible, it is where Jesus is baptized.
ANSWER: Jordan River
The Dan River flows into this river in the Hulah Valley, and the Yarmouk River connects the Hauran
Plateau to this river's watershed. A main source of this river is melting snow from Mount Hermon, and this
river flows just west of the Golan Heights. This river plunges below sea level before reaching the Sea of
Galilee and forming the border of the West Bank. For 10 points, name this river that flows into the Dead
Sea, which separates Israel and a nation of this river's name.
ANSWER: Jordan River
This river drops into the Hula Valley after the Hasbaya, Baniyas, and Hasbani Rivers rise and converge
from Mount Hermon. Its two largest tributaries are the Zarqa and Yarmouk rivers. Degania, the oldest
kibbutz in the world, is located on the shores of this river, which flows into the Sea of Galilee and ends at
the Dead Sea. Saint John the Baptist baptized Jesus at the site of this river. This river rises from the SyriaLebanon border to form a border between a namesake country and Israel, for 10 points, name this Middle
Eastern river which shares a name with both a country whose capital is located at Amman and a former
Chicago Bulls basketball player.
ANSWER: Jordan River [or Nahr Al-Urdun; or Ha-Yarden]
Natalia Lafourcade was one of four artists to give a concert in this city's Monumento a la Mexicanidad.
The mayors Carlos Villareal and Rene Mascarenas Miranda were two of the men who helped to develop
this city, which includes a tourist area called the PRONAF zone. This city's first school for higher
education, the Escuela Particular de Agricultura, was founded by the Escobar brothers. In 2012, Carlos
Salas reported on the murder of women in this city that has been going on since 1993. This city in
Chihuahua is the sister city of El Paso. For ten points, name this city named for the first indigenous president
of Mexico.
ANSWER: Ciudad Juarez [or El Paso del Norte]
Notable landmarks in this city include the Perseverance Theater, the Red Dog Saloon, and St. Nicholas
Russian Orthodox church. Originally known as Rockwell, this town lies just west of the Taku River and
north of Admiralty Bay National Monument. Located on the Gastineau Channel and first explored by
Joseph Whidbey, this city is larger than Delaware in land area. It is located downhill from the Tongass
National Forest and Mendenhall Glacier, and sits below its namesake mountain. This city lies 75 miles
north of Sitka, and has no road access to Anchorage. For 10 points, name this town, home to a Governor's
Mansion where Sean Parnell currently resides after replacing Sarah Palin, the capital of Alaska.
ANSWER: Juneau, Alaska
This mountain is the tallest one accessible via the town of Skardu. This mountain rises near the
Shaksgam River and the Baltoro Glacier lies between it and the Masherbrum Mountains. The
Abruzzi Spur is the most frequent route up this mountain in Gilgit-Baltistan, which was first
summited by the Italians Achille Compagnoni and Lino Lacedelli. Once called Mount (*)
Godwin-Austen, this Kashmiri peak, the tallest in the Karakoram Range, is nicknamed "Savage Mountain."
Lying on the China-Pakistan border, it is usually known by its surveyor's mark. Deadlier per capita and 237
meters shorter than Mt. Everest, this is, for 10 points, what tersely named second-tallest mountain in the
world?
ANSWER: K2 [or Qogir Feng; or Kechu; or Ketu; or Qiaogeli Feng; or Ch-iao-ke-li Feng; or Chogori; or Dapsang; or Qogri; accept "Mount Godwin-Austen" until mentioned; prompt on "Karakoram 2" or "Karakorum 2" until "Karakoram"]
In 1902, occultist Aleister Crowley and colleague Oscar Eckenstein unsuccessfully tried to climb this
mountain and came down with malaria. Most ascents of this peak occur on the Abruzzi Spur, which
contains the Black Pyramid and the Bottleneck. Count Ardito Desio led the first expedition to successfully
ascend it, but a more famous expedition occurred in 1953, was led by Charles Houston, and saw the
participants create a makeshift stretcher to aid member Art Gilkey. This peak received its name from
surveyor Thomas George Montgomerie who could not find a local name for it. Known as the "Savage
Mountain" for its high fatality rate, it is sometimes named after Henry Godwin-Austen. For 10 points, name
this peak in the Karakorum Range, the second-highest mountain on Earth.
ANSWER: K2 [accept Mount Godwin-Austen until mentioned, accept Chogori or Qogir, prompt on "Savage Mountain" until mentioned]
In 2008, while climbing this mountain, Gerard McDonnell and Rolf Bae, along with nine others, died.
The Abruzzi Spur is the most popular path to the top of this mountain, which is also known as Savage
Mountain. First climbed by Lino Lacedelli and Achille Compagnoni, this mountain, which is also named
for Henry Godwin-Austen, is the tallest in the Karakoram Range. For 10 points, name this second tallest
mountain in the world.
ANSWER: K2 [or Mount Godwin-Austen until mentioned]
The location of "sip wells" is often kept a secret in this desert, which is home to many ancient river
beds called omiramba. Along with the Australian Aborigines, a group living in this desert with a
gift-based economy was called "The Original Affluent Society" by Marshall Sahlins. The remains of
Lake Makgadikgadi are an endorheic basin in this desert, formed by the same processes that created
the swampy delta of the (*) Okavango river. A long-term project to study meerkats is based in this desert,
which comprises most of the area of the former Bechuanaland. The discovery of a Coca-Cola bottle by a
San
tribe in this desert opens the film The Gods Must Be Crazy. For 10 points, name this large desert that
encompasses most of Botswana and is the home of the bushmen.
ANSWER: Kalahari desert
Towns in this region include Tshane and Orapa, and the Morokweng crater is located underground in it.
Flamingos are known to flock to the Makgadikgadi Pan, which is located in this area's namesake basin, and
Chief's Island is part of the world's largest inland delta located in this region. Gemsbok National Park is part
of its Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park, which contains the dry Nossob riverbed, and this place also contains the
Omuramba. Its only permanent river is the Okavango, and it contains native populations like the Khoikhoi
and San bushmen. For 10 points, identify this African desert covering parts of Namibia, South Africa, and
Botswana.
ANSWER: Kalahari Desert
Ancient river beds in this desert are called omuramba, many of which would have flowed into Lake
Makgadikgadi. After the Battle of Waterberg, Lothar von Trotha forced many Herero into the Omaheke
region, which is covered by this desert. Known as "dorsland" or "thirst land" in Afrikaans, this desert is
home to a swamp formed by the Okavango delta. Part of this desert, in which Bushmen can be found,
borders the Namib desert. For 10 points, name this large semi-arid savannah that spans Botswana, Namibia
and South Africa.
ANSWER: Kalahari desert
The Khutse Game Reserve and the Kgalagadi Park are found in this region, as well as the towns of
Kanye and Monepolole. Iron oxide gives the region its distinctive red color, and ancient riverbeds
known as omuramba traverse it. One of the largest zebra populations in the world can be found in
the Makgadikgadi Pan in this region, and this place's name comes from the Tswana word for (*) "the
great thirst" and "a waterless place." The San Bushmen have lived here for more than 20,000 years. The
Okavango River lies in this desert's north. For ten points, name this arid desert in Southern Africa that lies
primarily in Botswana.
ANSWER: Kalahari Desert
This polity falls in the Bishopric of Samland, a name taken from its native Sambians, founded in 1243. Its
capital, built on the ruins of Tvankse, was named in honor of King Ottokar II of Bohemia who had
supported its conquest by the Teutonic Knights in 1255. Yantarny, once the world's biggest amber mine, lies
on its coast. Currently governed by Georgiy Boos and a threatened site of Iskander missile deployment, it
contains the port of Baltiysk, which headquarters the Russian Baltic Fleet. The port of Sovetsk in this polity
was once site of the town of Tilsit, of treaty fame. A sea route linking this region with Ust-Luga was opened
in 2006, critical as this territory is an exclave bordered by Poland and Lithuania. FTP, name this oblast
whose capital contains a cathedral that holds Immanuel Kant's tomb and was formerly called Konigsberg
ANSWER: Kaliningrad oblast (prompt on Konigsberg before mention)
This peninsula has hot springs at its towns of Esso and Paratunka. It is west of the Commander Islands and
north of Paramushir Island, and its weather is impacted by the Oyashio Current. Its northern Koryak region
was the site of a series of 2006 earthquakes near its Korfa Bay. A 2007 landslide on this peninsula did
severe damage to its Valley of Geysers, and it has several volcanoes in its Sredinny Range, including
Kronotsky. The Kuril Islands appear to extend southward from it, and it separates the Pacific Ocean from
the Sea of Okhotsk. Name this large peninsula southwest of the Bering Sea in eastern Russia.
ANSWER: Kamchatka Peninsula [or Poluostrov Kamchatka]
The western portion of this state features such landmarks as Horse Thief Canyon and the sphinx-like
Monument Rocks. This state once included the endpoint of the Chisholm Trail, which brought cattle to its
railroad depots at Dodge City and Abilene. Many corporations are headquartered in Overland Park, part of
a metroplex centered on two cities named for this state. For 10 points, name this home of Wichita and
Topeka, which is found to the west of Missouri and south of Nebraska.
ANSWER: Kansas
This state is home to Don Knacht's backyard island castle in its fine town of Junction City, while its
namesake "Cosmosphere" and underground salt museum are both found in this state's city of Hutchinson.
This state's largest city is home to an independent minor league baseball team called the Wingnuts, and
Forts Larned and Scott are located in this state. Its largest city's suburbs include Derby, El Dorado, and
Maize, and that city includes the Quaker-aligned Friends University. The Missouri River forms a few miles
of this state's border with Missouri, and some of its cities include Lawrence and Lecompton. For 10 points,
name this state, home of Wichita and Topeka.
ANSWER: Kansas
The tributaries of this state's namesake river include the Big Blue and Smoky Hill. The Flint Hills are
located in the east-central portion of this state. This state is home of Horse Thief Canyon and the
Gypsum Hills, which are located near Medicine Lodge. This state's highest peak is Mount Sunflower, and
the city of Lawrence lost out on being its capital by two thousand, seven hundred votes. The home of
the geographic center of the contiguous fifty states, for 10 points, name this state, whose cities include
Overland Park, Wichita and Topeka.
ANSWER: Kansas
One landmark in this state is a coal shovel in West Mineral called Big Brutus, and another landmark
here is the world's largest ball of Sisal twine in Cawker City. One city here is the headquarters of
Cessna, and another city has the Carrie Nation museum at Medicine Lodge. This state's flagship
university is in a city that was razed by Quantrill, and Constitution Hall is this state's city of Lecompton.
Home to the birthplace of Amelia Earhart and a capitol building with murals of John Brown, for 10
points, name this state, home to Atchison, Lawrence, Wichita, and Topeka.
ANSWER: Kansas
Architectural landmarks in this city include the Frank Lloyd Wright designed Community Christian
Church, the Wight & Wight designed Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, and a Moshe Safdie-designed center
which houses this city's orchestra. The 1981 Hyatt Regency walkway collapse killed 114 people in this
city. The consumption of "burnt ends" and preparation using molasses and wood smoke are characteristic
of this city's style of barbecue. For 10 points, name this city nicknamed the "City of Fountains", the home
to the Royals and Chiefs.
ANSWER: Kansas City, Missouri
This region contains the Shaksgam River, a tributary of the Yarkand River, which is used to approach the
north ridge of K2. This region contains the Trans-Karakoram tract and one part of it is called "Jammu and"
this region. This region's largest city is Srinigar, and it is the origin of the Jhelum River, which after joining
the Chenab flows through Punjab and into the Indus River. One country notably censors documents that
show the actual Line of Control in this region, which was disputed in three wars. For 10 points, name this
region that is disputed between Pakistan and India, known for a certain fine textile.
ANSWER: Kashmir
The Verinag Spring, located within this geographical region, is the source of the Jhelum (JELL-UM) River.
China claims the Aksai Chin in this area, which includes the Ladakh district of another country. The Line of
Control is located here. Located between the Pir Panjal and Karakoram Ranges, this territory has two
different regional capitals at Muzaffarabad and Srinagar. Goat husbandry in this region lent its name to a
type of wool. It's located northeast of Punjab. A state is named for Jammu and this region, once called
"Heaven on Earth" by Mughal emperors. For 10 points, name this region fiercely contested between
Pakistan and India.
ANSWER: Kashmir [or Jammu and Kashmir; or Azad Kashmir; prompt on "India", "Pakistan", or "Southwest Asia"]
The Saltoro Mountains cut through this region and their namesake river flows into the Shyok River.
One group of people in this region treats a course of meals called wazwan as a work of art; dum aloo is also
a popular dish from this region. Ladakh is a part of this region that lies south of the Kunlun Mountains.
China connected Xinjiang and Tibet by building a railroad through this region's Aksai Chin portion. The
Siachen Glacier area is disputed within this region, and Srinagar is on the Jhelum River in this region's
Valley. An Indian state groups together part of this region with Jammu. For 10 points, name this disputed
region in the northern part of the Indian subcontinent.
ANSWER: Kashmir
In 2005, this region experienced a magnitude 7.6 earthquake that killed 80,000 people and destroyed the
town of Balakot. A state within this region has both summer and winter capitals, Jammu and Srinagar. This
region is divided by both the "line of control" and the "line of actual control," which sets off its Aksai Chin
region. This region contains part of the Karakorum range, including K2. For 10 points, name this region of
the Indian subcontinent, which is disputed by India and Pakistan and which exports a characteristic type of
wool.
ANSWER: Kashmir [or Jammu and Kashmir; or Azad Kashmir; prompt on India; prompt on Pakistan]
This region's Kibara Plateau contains Upemba National Park, and it was once ruled by a Mwaanta
Gaand under the Kingdom of Lunda. In 2009, this region was divided into four provinces, which
include Haut-Lomami and Lualaba. The Yeke Kingdom was centered in this region's city of
Bunkeya, and was led by its Garanganze people. This region was the subject of the Stairs Expedition,
in which a European force captured and beheaded its King Msiri. This region's larger cities include
Kolwezi and the capital of Elizabethville which is now called Lubumbashi, and it borders Lake Tanganyika.
Moise Tshombe led a state of this name which broke away from the government of Patrice Lumumba, but it
was later retaken by Mobutu. For 10 points, name this copper-rich region in the southeast of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo which formed an independent country in the 1960s.
ANSWER: Katanga [or Shaba]
The unusually high number of wild chickens on this island is thought to be due to the destruction of
chicken coops by Hurricane Iniki. Seventeen miles southwest of this place is a "Forbidden" Island, which is
privately owned by Bruce and Keith Robinson. The second-highest point on this "Garden Isle" is Mount
Waialeale (WHY-ah-lay-AH-lay), sometimes considered the wettest place on Earth. This is the oldest and
fourth-largest of the main Hawaiian Islands, and Waimea Bay lies between Oahu and this island. For 10
points, name this northwesternmost of the eight main Hawaiian Islands.
ANSWER: Kauai
This country's capital contains the Palace of Peace and Reconciliation, which is a giant pyramid designed
by the architectural firm of Norman Foster. A blue dome adorns the Ak Orda Presidential Palace of the
leader of this country, whose highest point is Han-t-eng-ko-li Peak on its Mount Khan-Tengri. The Irtysh
River passes through this country, which contains the cities of Aqtau and Atyrau and Lake Balkash. This
country, which owns the northern half of the Aral Sea, is bounded to the west by the Caspian Sea and shares
borders with Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Russia. For 10 points, name this central Asian
country with a capital at Astana.
ANSWER: [Republic of] Kazakhstan
In 2008, the Canadian company Cameco helped this country build a uranium processing plant in
its eastern city of Oskemen. This country, which boasts the world's second largest reserves of
uranium, was the site of the Semipalatinsk nuclear facility before it voluntarily abandoned the
world's fourth largest stockpile of nuclear weapons. It is also the site of Baikonur (*) Cosmodrome,
and it owns the northern part of Renaissance Island, an anthrax burial site that was once an island in the
shrinking Aral Sea. Almaty is the most populous city in this second largest former Soviet republic after
Russia. For 10 points, name this Central Asian country whose capital is Astana.
ANSWER: Republic of Kazakhstan
The Illi, Karatal, and Aksu Rivers drain into the largest question of water wholly contained in this country. This
country also has the world's second largest uranium reserves, behind Australia, and about one-fifth of the
world's supplies of chromium and gold. This country's highest point is Khan Tengri, in the Tian Shan
Mountains on the border with Kyrgyzstan, and it also shares the Altay Mountains with Russia and China.
This country is also the world's largest landlocked one, although it borders the Aral and Caspian Seas, and
contains all of Lake Balkash. For 10 points, name this Central Asian country, the ninth largest in the world,
whose capital is Astana.
ANSWER: Republic of Kazakhstan [or Qazaqstan Respublikasy]
The last Soviet republic to declare independence, this country's largest political party is the Nur Otan. The
world's oldest space launch facility, Baikonur Cosmodrome, is located in this country north of the Syr
Darya river. This country also contains the Soviet Union's primary nuclear test site at Semipalatinsk. Its
capital was moved to its current location from Almaty in 1997, and its largest lake is Lake Balkhash. It has
nearly 2000 kilometers of shoreline along the east side of the Caspian Sea, and it is bordered by Russia,
China, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan. For 10 points, name this central Asian nation with
capital at Astana, the world's largest land-locked country.
ANSWER: Republic of Kazakhstan
The Irtysh and Ishim are among the few major rivers in this country to eventually drain into an ocean. Its
highest peak is the Khan Tangiri, which it shares with a southern neighbour. It contains the world's largest
space launch facility, which is currently being leased to another country until 2050 and contained within the
city of Baikonur. This country lies partly in Europe and Asia because the lower course of the Ural River
runs through the western part of this country, while Lake Balkash is in its southeast. In 1997, this country
moved its capital from Almaty to its present-day location. FTP, name this former Soviet republic, the largest
landlocked country in the world, with capital at Astana.
ANSWER: Kazakhstan
Lake Zaysan lies in the eastern part of this country, high in the Tarbagatai Mountains. Its most
populous province has its capital at Shymkent. The Syr Darya has its mouth in this country, while in
its southeast, the Ili River flows into Lake Balkhash. This country's most populous city lies on the (*)
Esil, a tributary of the Irtysh. The Baikonur Cosmodrome lies in the south of this country, east of the Aral
Sea. For ten points, name this second-largest former Soviet republic whose capital was Almaty but is now
Astana.
ANSWER: Republic of Kazakhstan
Lake Balkash lies within this nation and its capital lies on the Ishim River. The former Semipalatinsk
nuclear test site and the towns of Semey and Kurchatov are located in this nation, whose borders contain the
mouths of both the Syr Darya and the Ural Rivers. Nikita Khrushchev's Virgin Lands program opened up
large amounts of unsettled land in this nation to settlement. This nation also contains the northern half of the
Aral Sea and borders the eastern part of the Caspian Sea near its border with Turkmenistan. For 10 points,
name this country, the largest landlocked nation in the world, whose capital was moved to Astana in 1997
after having long been in this country's largest city Almaty.
ANSWER: Kazakhstan
This country's highest point is at Khan Tengri, which is in the Tian Shan mountain range near its border
with Kyrgyzstan. It is home to the Baikonur Cosmodrome, the first and largest rocket launching facility.
The Ili River feeds this country's largest lake, Lake Balkhash. This country is bordered by Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan to the south and by Russia to the north. For 10 points, name this massive
former Soviet republic which has its capital at Astana.
ANSWER: Kazakhstan
This country's capital contains a tower crowned by a golden orb, which represents an egg laid in a poplar
tree by Samruk. This country is home to the Bayterek monument, as well Lake Balkhash, into which the Ili
River flows. The southern portion of this country contains the Kyzyl Kum desert and the Aral Sea, which
are located between the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers. Nursultan Nazarbayev has been the one and only
president of this country, which is located east of the Caspian Sea. For 10 points, name this large central
Asian country, with capital at Astana.
ANSWER: Kazakhstan
This state's Pennyroyal Plateau borders the Pottsville Escarpment. Its highest point lies between Harlan and
Letcher counties, the Black Mountain, and it contains the longest cave system in the world, its Mammoth
Cave National Park. The seat of Fayette County is Lexington, and its western counties were purchased from
the Chickasaw Indians by Andrew Jackson. Its eastern portion is intersected by the Cumberland Plateau.
This state has a namesake annual horse race held in Louisville. For 10 points, name this southern U.S.
"Bluegrass state" with capital Frankfort.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Kentucky
In the 50s, many of this country's Nandi-speaking tribes took the unified name Kalenjin, though
outsiders still call them "running people." A lake in this country names the Turkana Boy fossil
skeleton found here by Richard (*) Leakey. This home country of the Luo and the Maasai Mara reserve
has a namesake mountain which is thought to house a godly abode by the plurality Kikuyu ethnic group.
This nation's major port is Mombasa. For 10 points, name this African nation, the northern neighbor of
Tanzania.
ANSWER: Republic of Kenya [or Jamhuri ya Kenya]
The western Kakamega Forest is the last remnant of a rainforest in this country. Containing the
Ewaso Ng-iro and Athi-Galana-Sabaki Rivers, this nation's economy is based in a city with landmarks
such as Fort Jesus, Tudor Creek and Kilindi Harbour while the capital's name translates as "Place of Cool
Waters" in Maasai. Halford Mackinder was the first person to climb its namesake seventeen-thousandfoot
peak. For 10 points, name this East African country whose cities include Mombasa and the capital,
Nairobi.
ANSWER: Republic of Kenya
This nation disputes the Ilemi Triangle region with its northern neighbor. This nation's fertile
White Highlands region is the home of native tribes such as the Embu, Meru, and Gikuyu. This
nation's largest city contains one of the world's largest slums, Kibera. This nation's southwest
contains a huge game preserve called the (*) Maasai Mara, which is in the Serengeti. A major city in this
nation is Mombasa. For 10 points, name this African nation whose capital and largest city in Nairobi.
ANSWER: Republic of Kenya [or Jamhuri ya Kenya]
This country's city of Garissa lies on the Tana River. Its capital is home to a large slum named
Kibera. Its western border is the site of Mount Elgon, and its namesake mountain is the
second-highest mountain in Africa. It contains the coastal cities of Malindi and (*) Mombasa. It shares
Lake Turkana with its neighbor to the north, Ethiopia, and also borders Tanzania and Somalia. For 10
points, name this country whose capital is Nairobi.
ANSWER: Republic of Kenya
The first successful ascent of one of this mountain's peaks was made by Percy Wyn-Harris and Eric
Shipton. Johann Ludwig Krapf was the first European to report seeing this mountain. After his country
gained independence, Kisoi Munayo raised his country's flag on the top of this mountain. The Embu people
build their houses so that the doors face this place. The Gikuyu people believe that God, or Ngai, lived on
this mountain before he came to the earth. Peaks of this mountain include Nelion and Batian. Jomo
Kenyatta wrote an anthropological text about "Facing" this place. For ten points, name this second-tallest
mountain of Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kenya
This mountain is home to the Lewis and Tyndall glaciers, and its Batian peak was ascended by Halford John
Mackinder in 1899. It is known as the "Mountain of Whiteness" by the native Kikuyu people. Though this
mountain is the second-tallest peak on its continent following Mount Kilimanjaro, it is the tallest in its
namesake country. For 10 points, name this stratovolcano located 150 miles northeast of Nairobi, the capital
of its namesake country.
ANSWER: Mount Kenya [or Kirinyaga; accept "Mountain of Whiteness" before mentioned]
The first person to climb this mountain was the author of "The Geographical Pivot of History," Halford
Mackinder. It is locally identified with the god Ngai and called by a name meaning "Mountain of
Whiteness." While the Embu and Meru people also live near here, this mountain's environs are dominated
by a group whose culture was chronicled in a book about "facing" this mountain, the Kikuyu. For 10
points, name this mountain, found a hundred miles northeast of Nairobi.
ANSWER: Mount Kenya [or Kirinyaga; or Kere-Nyaga]
During WWII, Felice Benuzzi escaped a British prison camp and climbed to this mountain's Lenana
Peak, a trip he detailed in his book "No Picnic" on this mountain. The home of the Lewis glacier, it is
located east of the Aberdare Range. The Teleki Valley is located in this mountain's vicinity, and its
prominent peaks include Point Lenana as well as Nelion and Batian. This mountain is the source of
the (*) Tana River, the longest in the country where it is located, and it was first ascended in 1899 by
Halford John Mackinder. The deity Ngai is thought to live on this mountain, which is called "Kirinyaga" by
the locals. Those people, the Kikuyu, are discussed in an anthropological text titled "Facing" this mountain
that was written by Jomo Kenyatta. For 10 points, name this second-highest mountain in Africa that shares
its name with the country where it is located.
ANSWER: Mount Kenya [accept Kirinyaga before it is read; accept Mountain of Whiteness]
This mountain's unusual shape comes from the fact that it is a lava plug eroded by glaciers. Local tribes
build their houses so that this mountain is visible from the door, because the god Ngai is said to live here.
In 1888, the Hungarian explorer Count Teleki became the first European to attempt to climb this mountain,
and also discovered nearby Lake Rudolf, now called Lake Turkana. This extinct stratovolcano dates to the
opening of the nearby Great Rift Valley. The culture of the nearby Kikuyu tribe was described in a famous
anthropology book about "facing" this mountain. For 10 points, name this second highest mountain in
Africa, which shares its name with the home of Mombasa.
ANSWER: Mount Kenya
The history of a state centered on this city was chronicled by a monk at the Monastery of the Caves,
Nestor. The St. Andrew's Church in this city was designed by Bartolomeo Rastrelli. Its Upper Town is
connected to its Podil neighborhood by the Andriyivskyy Descent. This city was legendarily founded by
the brothers Kyi, Shchek and Khoryv. Thirty-four thousand Jews were massacred at a ravine near it called
Babi Yar. The Desna meets the Dnieper just upstream from this city. For 10 points, identify this capital of
Ukraine.
ANSWER: Kiev
This city's Podil district was historically its financial center. This city's ancient church of St. Michael
of the Golden Domes was demolished in 1930. Francesco Bartolomeo Rastrelli designed the
turquoise-domed St. Andrew's Church in this city. This city's Pechersk district contains the
Monastery of the Caves, and a statue in this city commemorates a man who destroyed its (*) Polishbuilt Catholic monasteries named Bohdan Khmelnytsky. This city is located below where the Desna joins
with the Dnieper River. Viktor Hartmann proposed a never-built structure to supplement this city's Golden
Gate. The Cathedral of St. Sophia in this city contains the tomb of one of its rulers, Yaroslav the Wise. For
10 points, name this capital of the Ukraine.
ANSWER: Kiev (or Kyiv or Kyyiv or Kiyev)
In 1870, Konstantin Mayevsky restored a palace in this city. The House with Chimaeras is located in
the Lypky neighborhood of this city. Most of the buildings on this city's Khreshchatyk Street were
dynamited in 1941, and this city is the home of the Mariyinsky Palace. A Grand Prince of this city baptized
its inhabitants after marrying the sister of Basil II and was Vladimir the Great. This city's Podil
neighborhood is overlooked by its St. Andrew's Church. This city on the Dnieper served as the capital of
the state of Rus (ROOS). For ten points, name this Ukranian "mother" of Russian cities.
ANSWER: Kiev [or Kyiv]
Decken and Kersten Glaciers flow from Rebmann Glacier on this feature's south face, and climbers of this
mountain's Machame route must scramble up the Barranco Wall. The Garden of Senecios here is named for
endemic giant groundsels, and Gilman's Point is on the way to the crater first reached by Hans Meyer and
named for Richard Reusch. Mawenzi and Shira are two of the three cones of this stratovolcano, but the
highest is home to the Furtwangler Glacier and is called Kibo. For 10 points, name this Tanzanian mountain
called Uhuru in Swahili, the tallest in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
One trail found on this mountain stops by the "Garden of the Senecios" and the Barranco Wall. One
landslide in this mountain created the Western Breach, which leads up to the Lava Tower. Near its summit
is the retreating Furtwangler Glacier, which is passed by on the Northern Circuit, Rongai, and Umbwe
routes. The Kibo, Mawenzi, and Shira are the three cones that make up this stratovolcano, the tallest
freestanding mountain in the world at 19,334 feet. Located in Tanzania, for 10 points, name this tallest
mountain in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
The steepest way to climb this mountain is nicknamed the "Vodka Route," and Gillman's Point lies
near its summit. Barranco Valley is a popular campground for this mountain's climbers, and it was
once known as "Kaiser Wilhelm's Peak." First climbed by Hans Meyer, this mountain has a feature
called the (*) Ash Pit, which lies in the Reusch Crater. The Machame and Marangu are two routes to reach
its summit at Uhuru Point, which sits in this mountain's diminishing ice fields. For 10 points, identify this
dormant volcano in Tanzania, the tallest mountain in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
It was first scaled by Hans Meyer and Ludwig Purtscheller in 1889. One area near the main summit of this
mountain is known as the Western Breach, while a remnant of the summit's icecap, the Furtwangler Glacier,
shrunk by fifty percent between 1976 and 2000. To its east are the two parts of Tsavo National Park, while
Mt. Meru in Arusha National Park is nearby. Actually three distinct peaks, the Kibo, Mawenzi, and Shira,
its highest point is Uhuru peak on Kibo, reaching an altitude of 5,895 meters. Part of a belt of volcanoes in
East Africa, FTP, name this inactive stratovolcano, the highest peak in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
The town of Moshi lies on the south slopes of this mountain, which Douglas Adams climbed in a rhino
suit for charity. The highest of this mountain's three cones, Kibo Peak, is a dormant volcano that has
(*) lost a significant portion of its ice cap in recent years. It is located roughly 300 miles southeast of Lake
Victoria on the border between Kenya and Tanzania. For 10 points, name this tallest mountain in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
An October 2010 report noted that the Furtwangler Glacier near the summit of this mountain is rapidly
melting. Home to the Chagga people, this mountain is known for Gilman's Point, a common stopping point
located on the rim of a volcanic crater. Its actual summit of Uhuru Peak can be reached by a variety of
trails, many of which are accessible to those without climbing equipment. This mountain's name likely
comes from Swahili. It is located in Tanzania. For 10 points, name this highest mountain in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
This mountain was first summitted in 1889 by Hans Meyer, and it is marked by landslide-formed
Western Breech. Climbs of this mountain often begin at the nearby town of Moshi and can follow a
route up the Barranco Wall and past the Garden of Senecios. This mountain is crowned by the [*]
Furtwangler Glacier and Shira Plateau, from which the neighboring Mt. Meru is visible. The Reusch Crater
tops Kibo, the highest of this dormant stratovolcano's three cones. Called Uhuru in Swahili, the largest
freestanding mountain in the world is, for 10 points, which Tanzanian mountain, the tallest in Africa?
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
This mountain was first climbed by Hans Meyer with Ludwig Purtscheller and Kinyala Lauwo in 1889.
A stratovolcano, its three dormant volcanic cones are Kibo, Mawenzi and Shira. Also sometimes called
Uhuru Peak or Kibo Peak, many speculate that its name is Swahili in origin. Collapses and landslides have
created the Western Breach on the Kibo cone. The fourth tallest of the Seven Summits, It is located in
Tanzania near the border with Kenya. For 10 points, name this tallest mountain in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro [or Uhuru before it is read; or Kibo before ti is read]
Shira is the shortest of the three distinct volcanic cones that form this mountain. Giant groundsels are
endemic to this mountain, and the Rebmann and Furtwangler glaciers are both located near the summit of
this mountain. Its peak was named "Kaiser Wilhelm Peak" after Hans Meyer made the first ascent in 1889,
but it was changed to Uhuru Peak after Tanganyika gained independence. Mawensi and Kibo are the two
other volcanos that make up - for 10 points - what mountain located in Tanzania, Africa's highest?
ANSWER: Kilimanjaro [accept Uhuru Peak before mentioning]
Treks up this mountain begin at Moschi and proceed up the Barranco Wall and past the Garden of
Senecios. The Rebmann and Furtwangler Glaciers are located at the top of this mountain. This
mountain was named "Kaiser Wilhelm peak" in 1889 by the first person to ascend it, Hans Meyer.
The Reusch Crater is found within Kibo, which, along with Mawenzi and Shira, is one of the three
cones that make up this mountain. Not far to west lies Mount Meru, while Mount (*) Kenya lies 200
miles to the north. Called Uhuru in Swahili, this is, for ten points, what stratovolcano located in Tanzania,
the tallest mountain in Africa?
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
One trail on this mountain stops by the "Garden of the Senecios" and the Barranco Wall. The Western
Breach, created by a landslide is located on this peak and leads up to the Lava Tower. The nearest
settlement to it is Moshi, where an associated national park is located. The myth that this was presented to
Queen Victoria by Wilhelm II has been debunked. For 10 points, name this tallest freestanding mountain in
the world, a dormant stratovolcano in Tanzania and the tallest peak in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
A 2002 study by Lonnie Thompson suggested that the Furtwangler (firt-VAIN-glur) Glacier, located on
this structure, will disappear by 2015. The northern route of this location features the Rongai gate, while the
Lemosho route leads to the Shira plateau. Mount Meru lies to the west of this mountain. In 1889, Hans
Meyer ascended Kibo, the highest of this mountain's three peaks. For 10 points, name this mountain that is
known as "Uhuru" in Swahili and is the tallest mountain in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
This mountain's caldera contains the Reusch Crater, and is notable for its lack of alpine bamboo. The
nearest settlement to it is Moshi, and it contains the Furtwangler and Rebmann Glaciers. The next highest
mountain in its country is Mount Meru, and the forests on its peak are the highest in the continent. First
climbed by Hans Meyer, it is the highest freestanding mountain in the world. It is notable for its glaciers at
the top which could disappear soon, and its highest point is Uhuru. For 10 points, name this inactive
stratovolcano in Tanzania, the highest mountain in Africa.
ANSWER: Mount Kilimanjaro
The Emert L. Davis Memorial Library is located at this site's General George Patton Museum and
Center of Leadership. Because of the outbreak of World War II, this site ended up holding, for nearly ten
years, a copy of the Magna Carta in a building operated by the Treasury Department. For ten points, identify
this site in Kentucky, named for the first Secretary of War, that is the location of the United States' gold
bullion depository.
ANSWER: Fort Knox
The Howrah Bridge is an emblem of this city. That bridge spans the Hooghly River, which runs through this
city. Nobel Laureate Rabindranath Tagore was born in this city. It was the center of British control of India
from the late eighteenth to the early twentieth century. The imprisonment of British soldiers in Fort William
was called the Black Hole of this city. Bengali is the primary language of this city, and a majority of its
residents are Hindu. For 10 points, identify India's fourth-largest city, located in the Ganges delta.
ANSWER: Kolkata [or Calcutta]
This city is home to the William Emerson-designed Victoria Memorial, and most of its commercial activity
is centered in the Barabazar district, while other landmarks here include Fort William and the Sahid Minar.
The nearby archaeological site of Chandraketugarh suggests an inhabitance of over two millennia. Its
suburbs include Howrah, Baranagar, and South Dum Dum, and it is serviced by Subash Chandra Bose
International Airport. It is centered on the east bank of the Hugli River and served as its country's capital
under British rule until 1911. For ten points, name this city in eastern India, capital of the state of West
Bengal.
ANSWER: Kolkata or Calcutta
This area contains four granite tunnels whose walls were painted to resemble anthracite coal, as well as
other landmarks such as the Sunken Garden and the former site of an infamous poplar tree, the Bridge of No
Return. This region is home to the red-crowned and white-naped cranes, and it extends westward into the
ocean as the Northern Limit Line, to the south of which lie islands such as Yeonpyeong. Four kilometers
wide, it contains the Peace Village and the unpopulated Propaganda Village. For 10 points, name this area
that crosses the 38th parallel and surrounds the border between North Korea and South Korea.
ANSWER: Korean Demilitarized Zone or DMZ
One section of this location is called the JSA, where a series of buildings called Conference Row are
located. Camp Bonifas is located within this feature. It was penetrated by Unit 124 during the Blue House
Raid, and a tree in this location was cut down in Operation Paul Bunyan after two officers were killed in
the Axe Murder Incident. The Bridge of No Return is located in this area. The so-called "Peace Villages"
are located on opposite sides of this feature, which was set by an agreement signed at Panmunjom. For 10
points, name this feature located near the 38th parallel, which currently separates two countries on the
Korean peninsula.
ANSWER: DMZ [or Demilitarized Zone]
Arthur Bonifas and Mark Barrett were murdered with axes in this region in 1976
while trying to prune a tree. This region serves as a nature refuge for the endangered
Amur leopard, red-crowned crane, and Asiatic black bear. The village of Kijong-dong in
this region contains the world's largest flag pole and is believed to be an uninhabited. Tourists
visiting this region can tour the third tunnel built under this area. Containing the Bridge of No
Return, this is for ten points what heavily guarded border area between North and South
Korea?
ANSWER: Korean Demilitarized Zone (accept DMZ)
The arrangement of betel leaves used during weddings inspired the layout of this city's
Palace of Culture. A National Monument located in this city has garlands laid on it every
Warriors' Day and was originally adjacent to Cenotaph Road. A mosque in this city has towers
and a main dome resembling closed and open umbrellas and also contains the Heroes
Mausoleum. The most famous building in this city includes a cross-section resembling the Rub
el Hizb symbol from Islamic art, and contains a skybridge connecting its two halves. That Cesar
Pelli-designed building in this city was surpassed by Taipei 101 as the world's tallest building.
For 10 points, name this Asian capital city that contains the Petronas Towers.
ANSWER: Kuala Lumpur [or KL]
This city includes districts such as Kampong Baharu and Kenney Hill, and the Gombak River
meets another river in this city. The Bukit Nanas, or Pineapple Hill, is a forest reserve located in this
city, and this city's Moorish-style buildings include the Sultan Abdul Samad Building.(*) A city to this
city's south named Putrajaya is the administrative center of this city's country, and this city's ocean port is
Port Kelang. For 10 points, name this home of the Petronas Towers, the capital of Malaysia.
ANSWER: Kuala Lumpur
This city is the center of the Klang Valley, and it contains the Bukit Nanas rain forest. This city
was the site of the 13 May incident, a riot between its two major ethnicities. Arthur Benison Hubback
designed several landmark buildings in this city, including the Jamek Mosque. Menara Telekom and
Dayabumi are two (*) skyscrapers located in this city, whose International Airport is located in the Sepang
District. A Cesar Pelli-designed complex in this city features the tallest twin skyscrapers in the world. For
10 points, name this Asian city that is home to the Petronas Towers in Malaysia.
ANSWER: Kuala Lumpur
Islands controlled by this country include Warbah and Bubiyan. The two largest governorates by
area of this country are Al-Jahra and Al-Ahmadi. The Uqair Protocol established this country's
boundary with (*) Saudi Arabia. This country has the world's fourth-largest oil reserves, and it is the site
of the Burgan Field, which was set on fire in 1991. For 10 points, name this country on the Arabian
Peninsula that was invaded by bordering Iraq, sparking the first Gulf War.
ANSWER: State of Kuwait
One religion commonly practiced among this ethnic group believes in a form of transmigration of the
soul known as Dunaduni and was formed by Sultan Sahak, known as the Ahl-e Haqq. Asenath
Barzani converted some members of this ethnic group to Judaism in the 1600's. Another religion
practiced among this ethnic group believes that God put the world in the care of seven angels lead by
Tawuse Melek, the Peacock Angel. This ethnic group, which has Kurmanji and Sorani dialect groups,
mostly consist of Sunni Muslims and currently live in Kermanshan and Ilam provinces of Iran and several
provinces in northern Iraq, which is sometimes named for them. For 10 points, name this middle-eastern
ethnic minority, many of whom were killed by Saddam Hussein.
ANSWER: Kurds
In accordance with geomantic principles, it is located in the Yamashiro Valley, which is bordered by the
Higashi, Kita and Nishi mountains. Among its eleven wards are Nishikyo, which contains the Moss Temple
and the Katsura Imperial Villa, and Nakagyo, which the Kamo River and Jidai and Gion Matsuri pass
through. Companies with headquarters in this city include Nichicon, Murata, and Nintendo. Other notable
landmarks in this city include the Kiyomizu Dera, the Nijo Palace and the Kinkaku Ji. For 10 points, name
this Japanese city located north of Osaka, the namesake of an accord on global warming.
ANSWER: Kyoto
Even though 85% of the people who jump off the stage of one temple in this city survive the 13-meter
wish granting fall, that practice is now banned. If someone with their eyes closed can successfully
walk the 18 meter gap between two "love rocks" in that temple, then they will find true love. In
addition to the Kiyomizu-dera, it is also home to a Zen temple that was destroyed by arson in 1950,
and that three-story structure is completely covered with (*) gold leaf. This city that contains the
Temple of the Golden Pavilion also contains the largest collection of manga in the International Manga
Museum. Its canal to the nearby Lake Biwa was constructed during the Meiji era, which saw the capital
move from this city, based on the Chinese Chang-an, to Tokyo. For 10 points, name this former capital of
Japan, the namesake of a 1997 "protocol" about greenhouse gas emissions.
ANSWER: Kyoto [accept Heian-kyo; accept Heian and something involving capital]
This country's only World Heritage Site is a sacred mountain where Sulayman the prophet was buried.
The Battle of the Talas River took place in this modern-day country. Its capital was once named for
Bolshevik leader Mikhail Frunze. The city of Osh is located in this country's Fergana Valley. Askar
Akayev served as president of this country until he was unseated in 2005 during the Tulip Revolution.
Victory Peak lies on this country's border with China and is the tallest point of the Tian Shan Mountains.
For ten points, name this mountainous state located east of Uzbekistan and north of Tajikstan.
ANSWER: Kyrgyzstan
Spells and potions can be purchased on this city's Calle Linares, which is known as the Mercado de
Las Brujas, or Witches- Market. This city was once named after the Battle of Ayacucho. The heart of this
city is the Plaza Murillo, and the Choqueyapu River runs through it. It is overlooked by the Nevado
Illimani and the Cordillera Real and it is located about 1,400 feet below the the surface of the Altiplano.
This city, which is located between 10,650 and 13,250 feet above sea level, is the world's highest capital
city. For 10 points, name this city which, along with Sucre, functions as a national capital of Bolivia.
ANSWER: La Paz
In 1984, the government in the nation where this lake is located closed down a large pulp and paper plant
on its shore to lower the high rate of pollution. One town on this lake contains a structure translated as "Nut
Fortress", while the town itself means "key fortress", as it was reportedly considered one of the "keys" to
Ingria. An archipelago in this lake is noted for its Orthodox monastery and is named "Valaam". The Treaty
of Tartu demilitarized this lake among the two countries bordering it. The Karelian Isthmus separates this
lake from the Baltic Sea. During World War II, supplies were brought to a certain besieged city through the
"Road of Life", which was across this lake. For 10 points, name this largest freshwater lake in Europe, a
lake located near St. Petersburg.
ANSWER: Lake Ladoga
This question of water is the site of a monastery established by Stephen of Perm during his quest to convert the
Komi people. This question of water is also home to the smallest species of ringed seal, which is named for it,
and the construction of a new canal on this question of water in the 1870s unerthed an ancient Neolithic boat
near its shores. Unlike the Laurentian lakes, which are comparable to it in size, it is frozen during most of
the winter, and important fisheries dependent on this question of water are located on the Svir river, which
flows into it. During the siege of Leningrad in 1943, this question of water served as the so-called "road of
life," to provide food to the city, and along with the Neva, which flows from it, it is part of the shipping
route known as the White Sea-Baltic Canal. For ten points, identify this Russian lake, the largest in Europe.
ANSWER: Lake Ladoga
Isolation from the surrounding region occurred during the Yoldia Sea brackish stage and this question
of water's initial formation occurred during the Younger Dryas stadial at the end of the Weichsel
glaciation. A song title by the Dutch death-metal band Hail of Bullets suggests a massacre occurred
at this place. According to the provisions set out by the Treaty of Tartu neither party could have
warships above a certain tonnage on this question of water, and a common grave between the two
signatories lies in Rahmaa Island located here. The (*) Road of Life was a supply transport across this
question of water and provided relief during the Siege of Leningrad, and major tributaries of this question of water
include the Volkhov and Svir Rivers and its primary outflow is the Neva. Located east of the Karelian
Isthmus in Northwestern Russia, for 10 points, name this largest freshwater lake in Europe.
ANSWER: Lake Ladoga
The principal outlet for this city's exports is Apapa Quay. There are plans to add eight square meters of
reclaimed land from the Atlantic Ocean via the Eko Atlantic City project to this city, which has a major port
at Tin Can Island. This city's namesake state is located south of the state of Ogun and has capital at Ikeja,
and much of it is spread across the islands of Iddo, Ikoyi, and Victoria. Located on the Bight of Benin, it is
Sub-Saharan Africa's most populous city but was deemed to be unsuitable for a neutral legislative capital
following the Biafran War. For 10 points, identify this city that in 1991 was replaced by Abuja as the
capital of Nigeria.
ANSWER: Lagos
This nation traces its history back to Fa Ngum, who founded of the kingdom of Lan Xang in 1354. In
1707 Lan Xang split into three kingdoms, but were reunited in 1949 as this country with Sisavang Vong as
king. A site in this country's Xieng Khouang province near the city of Phonsavan contains structures with
frogs, tigers, or monkeys on their lids. This home of the Plain of Jars is, along with Vietnam, one of two
countries in Southeast Asia under continuous Communist control since 1975. For 10 points, name this
Southeast Asian country between Thailand and Vietnam, with capital at Vientiane.
ANSWER: Laos [or Lao People's Democratic Republic]
The city of Pakxe in this country has seen a decline of importance due to a shift in trading towards this
country's southwestern neighbor. The capital city is provided power by the Nam Ngun Dam, and the
Banghiang, Noi, and Theun rivers flow westward into this country's main waterway. The Kingdom of a
Million Elephants was based in this country's second largest city, Luang Prabang. Unexploded ordinance
from this country's so-called Secret War still litters the Plain of Jars in its center, and this country was also
the main location of the Ho Chi Minh Trail. For 10 points, identify this landlocked country in Southeast
Asia with capital at Vientiane.
ANSWER: Laos
Many old guerrilla hideouts can be found in this country's highest mountain, Mount Bia. This country's
Xieng Khouang Plateau contains an enigmatic Iron Age site called the "Plain of Jars." The Wat Xieng
Thong Temple is one attraction of its former capital, Luang Prabang. After the communist takeover of this
country, many of its Hmong people fled to the United States. The Mekong River forms the western border
of this country, which is in-between Thailand and Vietnam. For 10 points, name this only landlocked
country of Southeast Asia.
ANSWER: Laos [or the Lao People's Democratic Republic]
This country's southern portion includes the Bolovens Plateau, and like the region of Nong Khai across the
Mekong, the area around this country's capital is sometimes home to Naga Fireballs. it contains a region full
of huge ancient stone containers, the Plain of Jars. The Annamese Cordillera runs along the eastern border
of this nation. Large areas in this country are still filled with unexploded mines from this country's Secret
War. The Mekong flows past a city which was once the capital of Lan Xang, Louangphrabang. For 10
points, name this Southeast Asian country with a capital at Vientiane.
ANSWER: Laos [or Lao People's Democratic Republic]
The Kolen mountains border it on the west, and its highest point is Mt. Kebnekaise. Its chief
maritime outlets can be found in Kirkenes and and Narvik. The lake of Inarijarvi is found within
this region, and its name comes from an alternate term for the (*) Sami people, and the native language
is a branch of the Finno-Ugric family. FTP, identify this region of northern Europe encompassing parts of
Norway, Sweden, and Finland that contains a lot of reindeer.
ANSWER: Lapland [accept Lapi, accept Saamiland while in power]
Eighty-seven people were killed in a fire in this city in a major tourist attraction owned by
Kirk Kerkorian. Another tourist attraction here is the "Fremont Street Experience," otherwise
known as "Glitter Gulch." Betty Willis developed a sign in this city which says "Drive CarefullyCome Back Soon" on its back, with its front welcoming visitors to this "fabulous" city. Many of
its tourist attractions were developed by a man who remarked "We only kill each other," Bugsy
Siegel. The lights on a street in this city were only dimmed three times, including in tribute to
Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra. For 10 points, name this city where the Tropicana and Caesars
Palace are located on the "Strip."
ANSWER: City of Las Vegas
This location was the subject of 2009's Project LINQ, which sought to create a more diversified
entertainment district. It was reportedly named by a police officer, who was referencing his hometown of
Los Angeles. The largest privately funded construction project in U.S. history occurred at this location
inside a larger city, which was effectively created by Bugsy Siegel. This All-American Road is technically
located in Paradise and Winchester, and it contains fifteen of the world's twenty-five largest hotels. For the
point, name this location in the American Southwest which features numerous casino resorts includeing
Circus Circus, Treasure Island, and Caesar's Palace.
ANSWER: Las Vegas Strip [prompt on Las Vegas]
This modern-day country was the site of the Staburags Cliff, a travertine rock formation that was
flooded by the Plavinas hydroelectric plant. That cliff was the site of a battle against the Black
Knight in this country's national epic, a work written by Andrejs Pumpurs about the "Bear-Slayer."
A June 2013 election victory by Harmony Center threatens this country's plan to adopt the Euro in
2014. Semigallia and Courland are historical regions of this country, whose western coastline is home
to the last speakers of the endangered (*) Livonian language. Aside from Russia, this country's
population has the highest Russian percentage of any post-Soviet state. The Gulf of Riga indents, for 10
points, what Baltic country between Estonia and Lithuania?
ANSWER: Republic of Latvia [or Latvijas Republika]
The folklore of this country is celebrated in sculptures on Dainas Hill just outside of its Turaida
Museum near the Gauja [GOH-yah] River. The Gauja starts in this country's Vidzeme [VID-zeh-meh]
region, which is near the final stretch of the Daugava River. The Daugava passes by this country's
second most populous city, Daugavpils [DAO-gahv-"pills"], which is near this country's border with
Belarus. Its capital share its name with the gulf it lies on, which is connected via the Irbe [EER-buh]
Strait to the Baltic Sea. Name this country, located between Estonia and Lithuania, whose capital is
Riga.
ANSWER: (Republic of) Latvia
In 1876, Queen Victoria paid for a stone wall near Bsharri to protect a group of these trees from being
eaten by goats. A revolution named for these trees was precipitated by the murder of Rafik Hariri. In
Mesopotamian myth, Humbaba lived in a forest of these trees, and in the Bible, Solomon's Temple was
constructed from their wood. One of these trees, in green, is nestled between two red stripes on a national
flag adopted in 1943. For ten points, name these trees which are a symbol of Lebanon.
ANSWER: Lebanese cedar trees [or Cedrus libani]
Since the 1950s, diamonds have been mined from a tributary of this river , the Vilyuv. Flowing past
usch ports as Osetrovo, Kirensk, and Bulun, it empties into the Laptev Sea and flows primarily
northeast, although the Verkhoyansk Mountains alter its course substantially for a stretch. Its
tributaries include the Bykov and the Kirenga, and its largest port city is (*) Yakutsk. A massacre at
this river's namesake goldfields inspired a certain politican to change his name. For 10 points, name this
fourth-longest river of Russia, originating near Lake Baikal.
ANSWER: Lena River
This country's political parties include the Marematlou Freedom Party and the Batho Democratic Party, and
its district capitals are known as camptowns. This country is currently cooperating with its neighbor to
provide hydroelectric power and water through its Highlands Water Project. Its lowest point is the highest
in the world, while its highest point, Thabana Ntlenyana, is located in the Drakensberg range. Its
international airport is named after Moshoeshoe (mo-shway-shway), who signed a treaty with the British
that created this country's predecessor, Basutoland. For 10 points, name this country completely surrounded
by South Africa, with capital at Maseru.
ANSWER: Lesotho
Part of this country's eastern border is formed by the Cavalla River, while cities near its northern border
include Saniquellie and Voinijama. St. Paul is the longest river in this country, whose Cape Mount county
receives most of its rainfall. Mount Nimba is shared with two of this country's neighbors but Mount Wuteve
is the tallest mountain in this nation, whose civil war from 1988 to 2001 saw Charles G. Taylor engage in
trade with RUF insurgents in this country's western neighbor. Bordered by Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire, and Sierra
Leone, for 10 points, name this West African country whose capital of Monrovia was founded by freed
slaves.
ANSWER: Republic of Liberia
The area that composes this country was initially known as the Costa da Pimenta, or Grain Coast, by
Portugese explorers. Its highest point is Mount Wuteve, which is part of the Guinea Highlands. Bounded on
the southeast by the Cavalla River, and the Mano and Morro in the north and northwest, this country is also
one of its- continents leading producers of iron ore, and during World War II it and Ceylon were the Allies-
only source for rubber. Bordered by Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Cote d-Ivoire, for 10 points, what is this
nation, whose first president was Joseph Jenkins Roberts, who was born in Virginia, and whose capital is
Monrovia?
ANSWER: Republic of Liberia
This nation's Great Manmade River project pumps fossil water from the Tazerbo and Sarir in the
Kufra Basin and notable rock art can be found at Tadrart Acacus near Ghat. This country's highest point,
Bikku Bitti, lies adjacent to an area this country was pushed out of in 1987, the Aozou Strip. It saw a battle
of the Desert War during World War II at the seaport of Tobruk. Also containing Al 'Aziziyah, which
recorded the highest temperature on Earth, for 10 points, name this nation led by Colonel Muammar AlQadafi with its capitol at Tripoli.
ANSWER: Libya
The first documented east-west crossing of this desert was done by Ralph Bagnold. An important oasis
in this desert is Al-Kufra. A field of this desert's namesake glass, which is made completely of silica, is
found in the Great Sand Sea north of the Gilf Kebir plateau. This desert contains the Jebel Uweinat
mountain range, which is located near the borders of the three countries in which it is found. One
impenetrable landform in it marked the southern extent of the British and German armies at both Battles of
El-Alamein; that landform is the Qattara Depression. For 10 points, identify this northeast part of the
Sahara that is located in Egypt, Sudan and a namesake country.
ANSWER: Libyan Desert [or Western Desert; prompt on the Sahara Desert]
One castle that overlooks this country's capital was built by the Counts of Werdenberg-Sargans
(VER-den-berg ZAR-ganz). The Samina River originates in this country and merges with the Ill.
Ivoclar Vivadent is a company that makes a product for which this country is the world's largest
exporter, false teeth. That company is located in its largest municipality of (*) Schaan. Bounded on the
west by the Rhine, it is the only country that is entirely in the Alps. For 10 points, name this German
speaking doubly landlocked European nation with capital at Vaduz.
ANSWER: Liechtenstein
Along with Uzbekistan, this principality is the only landlocked country to be surrounded entirely by other
landlocked countries. Its legislative question, the Landtag, consists of 25 members of parliament, who meet no
more than ten times per year. In 1868, this nation's army was disbanded for financial reasons, leaving it
utterly defenseless in 2007 when 170 Swiss soldiers accidentally invaded. For 10 points, name this
German-speaking microstate with capital at Vaduz.
ANSWER: Principality of Liechtenstein
One street in this city is the Alameda de los Descalzos, which is named for this city's barefoot monks.
The most popular festival in this city honors an image of a black Christ drawn by a slave in colonial
times and is called the Senor de los Milagros or the Lord of the Miracles. This city, popularly called
the (*) Octopus, holds much of its population in shanty towns called pueblos jovenes. It is the site of the
National University of San Marcos, the oldest university in South America. This city, which has its seaport
at Callao, draws its water from the Rimac, Lurin, and Chillon Rivers. This city is bounded on the east by a
desert that separates it from the Andes mountains. Originally called Ciudad de los Reyes, it was founded in
1535 by Francisco Pizarro. For 10 points, name this capital of Peru.
ANSWER: Lima
This question of water it is fed by the Olifants River, below which this river is navigable. Its mouth is
located at Xai-Xai (shy-shy), which it reaches after draining the Waterburg Biosphere. One of its
tributaries, the Shoshe, forms part of the Botswana-Zimbabwe border before joining this river.
Called the (*) Krokodil near its source, it flows through Mozambique and was described by Kipling as
"great, green, greasy" For 10 points, name this second-longest of the rivers that flow to the Indian Ocean
from Africa.
ANSWER: Limpopo River
The confluence of this river with the Shashe River is the location of the Mapungubwe National Park.
Boats navigating this river can enter it at its confluence with the Olifants River. The port of Xai-Xai is built
on this river, which is described as "greasy" and "set about with fever trees" in Rudyard Kipling's Just-So
Stories. This river flows from the confluence of the Marico and Crocodile Rivers. This river flows eastward
into the Indian Ocean. For ten points, name this river in southern Africa that separates South Africa from
Mozambique and Zimbabwe.
ANSWER: Limpopo River
The European Maritime Safety Agency is located in this city, as is the European Monitoring Center for
Drugs and Drug Addiciton. Expo -98 was held in this city, which was at one point ruled by the children of
Sabur the Slav. This city contains the "25th of April Bridge" connects the city to neighboring Almada, in
addition to another bridge which is the longest in Europe. The western boundary of this city is marked by
the Monsanto forest, and this city was built on a series of terraces on the slopes of the Sintra Mountains and
on the banks of the Tagus River. Notable for having a major earthquake in 1755 and for being larger than
Oporto, for 10 points, identify this city, the capital of Portugal.
ANSWER: Lisbon (or Lisboa)
Smaller cities surrounding this larger one include Estoril and Cascais, the former residence of many
European royal families, as well as Sintra. The downtown area of this city is called Baixa and many parts of
this city was restored by the Marquis of Pombal. This city is home to an area called Belem, which contains
the Jeronimos Monastery and a monument shaped like a ship with explorers depicted on the sides called the
Monument to the Discoveries. This city is separated by the wide Tagus River estuary. For ten points,
identify this capital of Portugal.
ANSWER: Lisbon
Landmarks in this city include the Pepper Wreck and an ornate sculpture of 33 distinct personalities
standing or kneeling in a row, with a man cradling a ship in his hands standing in front. That
sculpture, the Monument to the Discoveries, was built for the 1940 World's Fair. A structure in this
city is the Torre de Belem, which is dedicated to this city's patron saint, Vincent. This city contains both
the "25th of April Bridge" and the longest bridge in Europe, named for an explorer noted for his voyages to
India. For 10 points, name this city which was severely damaged in a 1755 earthquake, a European city
located on the Tagus River that serves as the capital of Portugal.
ANSWER: Lisbon
One landmark in this city is an old fortification in the Manueline style called the Tower of St. Vincent.
This city's Alfama district accounts for much of its nation's characteristic fado music. This city's
downtown was restructured by the Marquis of Pombal following a major disaster in 1755. This city's
skyline prominently features a bridge similar to the Golden Gate Bridge, named for the 25th of April,
which sits across from Europe's longest bridge. That bridge, which lies on the Tagus River, is named for
national hero Vasco da Gama. For 10 points, name this earthquake-prone capital city of Portugal.
ANSWER: Lisbon [or Lisboa]
Although it is not Poland, this country's Trakai Island contains a castle known as "Little Marienburg." This
country contains the "Highlands" of Aukstaitija and the "Lowlands" of Samogitia, and its longest river is the
Neman or Nemunas, which originates in neighboring Belarus. This country's major port is Klaipeda, and its
capital was nicknamed "Jeruzale" for its large Jewish population. This country contains the northern section
of the Curonian Spit, the southern part of which is in Kaliningrad Oblast owned by Russia. For 10 points,
name this southernmost of the Baltic states which borders Latvia and Poland, and has capital at Vilnius.
ANSWER: Lithuania
A city in this region is legendarily named for the dying words of Kari, the daughter of Chief
Wautonomah, and was once known as Six Shooter Siding. This home of Tucumcari was warned against by
Charles Goodnight as containing "nothing to create an echo" and called an endless "sea of grass" by
Coronado. The ancient Clovis culture was discovered in this region. The west side of this region is defined
as the Mescalero Ridge, and it is also bounded by the Edwards Plateau on its south, the "break of the
plains" on its east, and the valley of the Canadian River on its north. For ten points, name this region
containing Lubbock and Amarillo, a large mesa in western Texas and eastern New Mexico.
ANSWER: Llano Estacado [or the Staked Plain]
Standing in Kluane National Park, it was first climbed in 1925 by an expedition led by Albert MacCarthy. .
Rising from the St. Elias mountains, it reaches a height of 17,224 feet over the Mentasta Pass. In 2005, Jean
Chretien proposed that it be renamed after Pierre Trudeau, but after a backlash from geologists it was left
bearing the name of the founder of the Canadian Geological Survey. For 10 points, name this highest
mountain of Canada.
ANSWER: Mount Logan
This mountain is believed to have the largest circumference of any mountain in the world, and the
Hubbard Glacier begins at this mountain. This peak rises above the Seward Glacier and is located in the St.
Elias Mountains. It was named for the founder of its nation's geological survey, and it is located in the
Kluane National Park and Reserve. This mountain was proposed to be renamed for Pierre Trudeau
following Trudeau's death in 2000, though that plan was scuttled. For ten points, name this 19,551 foot peak
that is located in the Yukon Territory that is the second highest peak in North American and the highest
peak in Canada.
ANSWER: Mount Logan
In this city, an aquatics center that is overlooked by the ArcelorMittal Orbit was constructed by Zaha
Hadid. The introduction of flush toilets to this city led to its Great Stink. The barber Sweeney Todd
supposedly lived on Fleet Street in this city. This city's "Wobbly Bridge" is actually the Millennium
Bridge, which lets off near the Globe Theater. Following a 1666 fire, numerous churches in this city were
rebuilt by Christopher Wren. Zero degrees longitude is defined as running through this city's district of
Greenwich. For 10 points, name this city in which the Palace of Westminster, where the British Parliament
sits, is located.
ANSWER: London
One proposed plan to alleviate air traffic congestion in this city is the construction of an artificial island
named for its current mayor. The result of an effort to revitalize its western portion was the development of
the Canary Wharf financial district on the West India Docks of its Isle of Dogs, and Russell Square is home
to this city's School of Economics. The M25 motorway spans its perimeter, and its internal transportation
has a central hub at Charing Cross Station. For 10 points, Lord Mayor Boris Johnson currently leads this
capital and largest city of the United Kingdom situated on the Thames river.
ANSWER: London
Landmarks in this city include the Gherkin and the Tower Bridge. A major island in this city's limits is
the Isle of the Dogs, which is near its business district at Canary Wharf. This city instituted a high profile
"congestion charge" in 2007. It often places installation art on the "fourth plinth" of its Trafalgar Square.
This city's other attractions include a giant Ferris wheel called "the Eye" and a clock tower referred to as
Big Ben. For 10 points, name this capital of England.
ANSWER: London, England
Decimus Burton and Richard Turner built the Palm House at this city's Kew Gardens. The Jubilee
Gardens in Lambeth is home to this city's ferris wheel known as the Eye. Four lions surround Nelson's
Column in the center of this city's Trafalgar Square. This city, home to Regent's Park and Hyde Park,
contains the boroughs of Mayfair and Soho. Westminster Abbey, Buckingham Palace, and Big Ben are
located in this city, through which the Thames flows. For 10 points, name this capital of England and the
U.K.
ANSWER: London
Embankments in this city were built by Joseph Bazalgette as part of its sewage system. The Swiss Re
Building is a skyscraper in this city nicknamed "the Gherkin." "Beefeaters" are wardens at another site in
this city, where, according to superstition, ravens prevent the country from falling. A domed cathedral in
this city, built after a devastating fire in 1666, was designed by Christopher Wren. For ten points, name this
location of St. Paul's and a "tower" where British prisoners were kept.
ANSWER: London
Muswell Hill and Bushey Heath are high points in this city that is home to the river islands of Chiswick
Eyot and Eel Pie. The Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy is 125 miles north of this city. A
structure suspending a river in this city was recently given a thirteen ton addition. That addition to the
Tower Bridge consisted of five identical metal shapes. Home to Wembley Stadium, FTP, name this
European city which hosted the 1908, 1948, and 2012 Olympic Games.
ANSWER: London
One of the largest herbariums in the world can be found at this city's Kew Gardens, which are located along
with Hampton Court in this city's Richmond borough. Rugby is played in this city's Twickenham Stadium,
and ministerial and bureaucratic offices can be found along the street of Whitehall in this city. A notable
domed cathedral designed by Christopher Wren, St. Paul's, and the Prime Ministerial residence at 10
Downing Street can be found in this city which has a namesake "Eye" ferris wheel on its riverfront. For 10
points, name this city located on the Thames River, the largest city and capital of the United Kingdom.
ANSWER: London
This city's minor rail systems are the Docklands Light Railway and Tramlink, and its Metropolitan Railway
became the first underground rapid transit system in 1863. In 1956, this city began using a fleet of
Routemaster buses. This city is served by Stansted airport. A memorial in this city's Hyde Park
commemorates the July 7, 2005 terrorist bombings on its public transportation systems. Passengers in this
city are told to "mind the gap" on its Underground, colloquially known as the Tube. For ten points, name
this city also served by Gatwick and Heathrow airports and a fleet of red double-decker buses.
ANSWER: London, England
The Shinnecock and Possepatuk Indian Reservations are the only ones located here, and it was called
Paumanok by the Native Americans. It contains 4 counties, including Suffolk county, and it was formed by
glacial moraines. Minor towns here include Far Rockaway, Oyster Bay and Glen Cove, and it is home to
Hofstra University and the United States Merchant marine academy. Located to the south is Fire Island, and
scientists may know it as the location of both Cold Spring Harbor and Brookhaven national laboratory. At
the farthest east point is the Montauk lighthouse, and in the eastern part of the island are the Hamptons. A
namesake sound separates it from the mainland, and Nassau county is located on it. For 10 points, name this
most populated island in America, just east of Manhattan, separated from the rest of New York by the East
river.
ANSWER: Long island
Harbor Hill and Ronkonkoma are moraines which create the "spine" of this island. Riverhead is the seat of
the county that dominates its eastern two-thirds, Suffolk. Another county, Nassau, lies immediately east of
the two boroughs that provide over 90% of this island's population. Rockaway Beach sits on this island's
southern shore, while Oyster Bay sits on its northern shore. Separated from Manhattan and the Bronx by the
East River is, FTP, what island, home to Queens and Brooklyn.
ANSWER: Long Island
This island is home to Cold Spring Harbor National Laboratory and Jones Beach State Park,
which was developed by Robert Moses. The Oyster Bay branch is part of its namesake railroad, the
busiest commuter system in America. The Town of Hempstead on this island is home to the first
Levittown, and its two suburban counties are Nassau and Suffolk. It contains both the (*) LaGuardia
and JFK Airports. For 10 points, name this most populous island in America, which stretches 118 miles
from Montauk Point to Queens and Brooklyn in southern New York.
ANSWER: Long Island
This location's namesake railroad is the only American commuter line that operates on a 24/7 basis.
This landmass's eastern half extends to Montauk Point and is comprised of Nassau and Suffolk counties.
Its west includes Flushing Bay and Rockaway Beach. This island is separated from Connecticut by a
namesake "sound." For 10 points, identify this island which extends from the mouth of the Hudson into the
Atlantic Ocean and is home to millions of people in Queens, Brooklyn, and eastern New York suburbs.
ANSWER: Long Island
Gardiners and Napeague Bays are found off the eastern side of this island, whose southern shores are
home to Fire Island National Seashores. Bordered to the east by the Block Island Sound, it includes
Suffolk and Nassau Counties and is home to Gateway National Recreational Area and (*) Flushing
Meadows, the site of the 1939 and 1964 World's Fairs. Bordered to the north by a namesake sound found
on the shores of Stamford and New Haven, this island is the eastern terminus of the Verrazano Narrows
Bridge, which connects it to Staten Island. For 10 points, identify this New York island home to the
boroughs of Queens and Brooklyn.
ANSWER: Long Island
This town was founded by the Detroit businessman Ashley Pond, who founded a ranch school named
for the nearby cottonwood trees that bloomed in autumn. In 2000, everyone in this town was evacuated and
400 homes were destroyed in the disastrous Cerro Grande forest fire. This town is near an Ancestral Pueblo
site named after a Swiss anthropologist, known as Bandelier National Monument. The true nature of cargo
arriving into this town, once known as Site Y, was concealed between 1942 and 1945. For 10 points, name
this New Mexico town, home to a national laboratory founded to carry out the Manhattan Project.
ANSWER: Los Alamos
This city's namesake basin is a source of oil first tapped by Edward Doheny, and nearby cities
that grew up around that oil supply include Signal Hill. That basin includes the Palos Verdes
Peninsula, and its geologic center is in the city of South Gate. Other oil sources around this city
include an area where prehistoric (*) animals are trapped in tar pits, La Brea, and the Huntington Beach
Oil Field in Orange County. For 10 points, name this city whose most profitable oil well is found in
Beverly Hills.
ANSWER: Los Angeles
This city's history is the subject of its Heritage Square Museum in its Montecito Heights neighborhood. Its
George C. Page Museum in Hancock Park on Wiltshire Avenue contains many fossils found at a site in the
city. In 2012, the USS Iowa was put on permanent display at its port on San Pedro Bay. Its municipal art
gallery is named for Aline Barnsdall, who lived in the Frank Lloyd Wright-designed Hollyhock House, and
van Gogh's Irises is on display at its Brentwood neighborhood's Getty Center. This city is also the home of
Grauman's Chinese Theatre near the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Name this populous city in southern
California.
ANSWER: Los Angeles, California [do not accept "Hollywood"]
This city's downtown features the Angel's Flight incline and the Mexican neighborhood of Olvera Street.
Notable neighborhoods in this city include Echo Park, Westwood, and Venice Beach, while the San
Fernando Valley attempted to secede from this city. The Watts Riots happened in this city, which is also the
home of Hollywood. For 10 points, name this largest city in California.
ANSWER: Los Angeles [accept LA]
This state's Mermentau River flows between Calcasieu (KAL-ka-shew) River and Vermilion Bay,
and the Amite River flows into Lake Maurepas, which lies next to the second-largest inland question of
saltwater in the US. The Pearl River lies on part of this state's eastern boundary, while the (*) Sabine
River lies on its western boundary, and its highest point, Driskill Mountain, lies in the north. After flowing
past Shreveport, the Red River flows into the Atchafalaya River, which empties into the Gulf of Mexico.
Lake Pontchartrain lies in, for ten points, what state with capital at Baton Rouge?
ANSWER: Louisiana
This state contains Driskill Mountain near its town of Bryceland. It borders Weeks Bay, which is an arm of
Vermillion Bay, and one of its islands, named Last Island, was destroyed by a hurricane. Its senators are
Mary Landrieu and David Vitter, and its governor is Bobby Jindal. Its capital contains Myrtles Plantation
and has a French name that means "red stick". Its most populous city, located on Lake Pontchartrain, was
greatly damaged by Hurricane Katrina. Name this state, the home of Baton Rouge and New Orleans.
ANSWER: Louisiana
This state's Vermilion Bay contains Marsh Island and Avery Island, formerly the main site of tabasco
pepper production. Morgan City lies in this state's Atchafalaya Basin, and this state's eastern boundary is
defined by the Pearl River. The Tchefuncte River here flows into a lake that is connected by the Rigolets
Strait to a larger question of water. That lake is Lake Pontchartrain, which opens to the Gulf of Mexico. Instead
of counties, this state is divided into parishes, and it contains the largest swamp in the U.S. along with many
bayous. For 10 points, name this state with capital at Baton Rouge, home to New Orleans.
ANSWER: Louisiana
This state's only national forest is Kisatchie, and its Cane River Park encompasses the towns of
Natchitoches. Grand Isle is one of this state's largest barrier islands. This state contains the country's
largest swamp, the Atchafalaya Basin, and Lake (*) Pontchartrain (PON-cha-train) lies north of its
largest
region, Jefferson. Rather than counties, this state is organized into parishes, and its largest city's Ninth Ward
was mostly destroyed when Hurricane Katrina hit. For 10 points, name this state with capital at Baton
Rouge.
ANSWER: Louisiana
The removal of a levee around Mollicy Farms, near this state's northern border on the Ouachita River, is
one of the first floodplain restoration projects in the US. Another project in this state seeks to redirect
nutrient- and sediment-rich water through the Amite River in order to restore the wetlands around Lake
Maurepas. One coastal restoration project in this state dredged sediments from the Natal Channel and
Castille Pass to create new marshlands at the mouth of the Atchafalaya River, while another will feature the
re-creation of brackish marshes beyond Bayou Dupont by piping sediment from the Mississippi River. The
MRGO Canal has been closed in, for 10 points, what state, in order to prevent storm surges from passing up
it to New Orleans?
ANSWER: Louisiana
One city in this state, Lake Charles, is home to McNeese State University. This state's capital city is the
home of One American Place. This state is where the Red River flows between Bossier City and
Shreveport. Landmarks in this state's largest city includes the French Quarter. For 10 points, name this state
with capital at Baton Rouge.
ANSWER: Louisiana
The Calcasieu River is one of several waterways in this state's only national forest, Kisatchie, which
lies in large part in its Natchitoches region. St. Joseph, the seat of its Tensas region, contains the oxbow
Lake Bruin, and other regions include Cameron and Jefferson, its largest by population. The largest
continuous swamp in the United States is this state's Atchafalya Basin, which is fed by waterways that
include the Bayou Teche. This state is divided into parishes rather than counties and contains the
Mississippi River Delta. For 10 points, name this state with capital at Baton Rouge that contains Lake
Ponchatrain and New Orleans.
ANSWER: Louisiana
This country teaches preschool, primary, and secondary school students in three different
languages, respectively, with the first used being a Germanic language that shares its name with this
country and has nine different pronunciations for the letter "g." This country, whose population is
almost twenty percent immigrants from Portugal, is divided into Oesling and Gutland regions, and is
separated by the Sauer, Our, and (*) Moselle rivers from Germany. This smallest founding member of
the European Economic Community is a constitutional monarchy headed by Democratic Party prime
minister Xavier Bettel and Grand Duke Henri. For 10 points, name this country which makes up a
longstanding economic union with Belgium and the Netherlands.
ANSWER: Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
This country's former intelligence head was reportedly secretly recording conversations in the
Bommeleer scandal. The Family of Man photo exhibition by Edward Steichen is permanently on display in
this country, as Steichen was a native of it. George S. Patton is buried here. The eastern border of this
country is basically formed by such rivers as the Moselle. This country was where the European Economic
Community signed the Schengen Agreement. It consists of the northern Oesling and the southern Gutland.
This country is ruled by Grand Duke Henri. For ten points, name this very small country found to the east of
Belgium.
ANSWER: Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
This island's Lingayen Gulf is home to the Hundred Islands National Park, and it was ruled by the
kingdoms of Namayan and Tondo until its conquest by Europeans. This island is home to Lake Taal,
which surrounds its namesake caldera, as well as the Mayon Volcano, sometimes called the "Perfect
Cone" because of its shape. This island's Vigan City is its oldest surviving colonial city, and dates
from the time when this island was conquered by Miguel Lopez de Legazpi. Tagalog is the most
spoken language on this island, and Quezon City is its largest. This island was once home to Clark Air
Base, and during World War Two, it was the site of the Bataan Death March. The site of the 1991 eruption
of Mount Pinatubo, for 10 points, name this Pacific island containing Manila, the largest island of the
Philippines.
ANSWER: Luzon
This island is the center of the new Christian denomination "Iglesia ne Cristo." A major religious
festival on this island is the Feast of the Black Nazarene. A mountain range on this island contains the
unimaginatively named High Peak, which is taller than Mount Mariveles; both mountains are in the
Zambales range, which begins at this island's northern Lingayen Gulf. The Bicol Peninsula on this island is
where Legaspi is overlooked by the Mayon Volcano. A strait named after this island separates it from
Taiwan on its north. This island was menaced by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo and is the site of Quezon
City. For 10 points, name this island, the home of Manila and the largest island in the Philippines.
ANSWER: Luzon
This region has a sixteen foot tall, 5,500 pound bronze and gold statue called "God of Fortune" in a
building owned by Sheldon Adelson. People who sell "dead chips" in this region take part in a business
system called bate-ficha. Franco Dragone created "The House of Dancing Water" for this region's City of
Dreams, which is a complex located on reclaimed land between the islands of Coloane and Taipa. This
region includes the Cotai Strip, and it is known as the "Monte Carlo of the Orient." For ten points, name this
special administrative region of China that in 2006 started taking in more revenue than Las Vegas from
gambling.
ANSWER: Macau Special Administrative Region [or Aomen Tebie Xingzhengqu; or Regia Administrativa Especial de Macau]
This city's historic center contains the Senado Square and the A-Ma Temple, and it consists of a namesake
peninsula and the islands of Taipa and Coloane. This city's main border crossing with its neighbor is the
Portas do Cerco. From 1962, the city's main industry was monopolized by Stanley Ho; the 2002 end of that
monopoly led to the construction of the Cotai Strip, which contains the Wynn, the MGM Grand, and the
Venetian, the fourth largest building in the world by floor area. Name this Chinese city popular with Kim
Jong-Il, the world's highest-volume gambling center, which from 1849 to 1999 was a possession of
Portugal.
ANSWER: Macao [or Aomen]
The Patua creole is spoken in this polity, and this polity is divided into seven parishes and the Cotai
Landfill. Stanley Ho owns a number of popular tourist destinations in this polity, and the 12-3 riot occured
here after the colonial government forbade the construction of a private school on this polity's island of
Taipa. Branches of the Wynn and the MGM Grand have recently opened here, and Edmund Wah replaced
General Vasco Rocha Viera as Chief Executive following the 1999 handover to China. For 10 points, name
this former Portuguese colony and gambling haven, located across the Pearl River Delta from Hong Kong.
ANSWER: Macau or Aomen
This country's Titov Veles district is known for its high quality opium. A campaign to build nationalist
monuments in this country is known as antiquisation. The Golem Grad, home to ruined churches and
thousands of snakes, can be found in this country's majority portion of Lake Prespa. Using Motorola's
Canopy technology, this country was the first to achieve nationwide wireless broadband. In 1995, this
country was forced to remove a 16-rayed sun from its flag, as part of a dispute that still keeps it out of the
EU. This country was forced to use a name abbreviated FYROM when it joined the UN. Lake Ohrid lies on
this country's border with Albania. For 10 points, name this country that disputes a national identity with
Greece, a former Yugoslav republic with capital at Skopje.
ANSWER: Macedonia [or Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; accept FYROM ["fie"-rahm] before it is mentioned]
A mostly discredited theory about this site's use claimed that it was the birthplace of the Virgins of the
Suns. According to John Rowe, this site served as the estate of Pachacuti. The Mollepata, Classic and One
Day trails make up a larger trail that ends at this site. A room in this complex features three trapezoidal
windows and is located near the Temple of the Condor. Yale agreed to return artifacts taken from this site
by Hiram Bingham. This site is located on a mountain in the Urubamba Valley, about fifty miles northwest
of Cuzco. For 10 points, name Incan complex that is located in Peru.
ANSWER: Machu Picchu
In November 2012, Yale University returned artifacts excavated from this site. The Torreon tower is
located at this site, which was connected by a bridge over the Pongo de Mainique (mye-ey-NEE-kay). This
estate for Emperor Pachacuti was dedicated to the sun god Inti. In 1911, Hiram Bingham arrived at this
place, about fifty miles away from Cuzco. For 10 points, name this "lost city" of the Incas.
ANSWER: Machu Picchu
Above this city rises the "Young Peak," shaped remarkably like a human face. It contains the
Condor Temple and the (+) Temple of the Sun. Located above the Urubamba Valley, this city was
rediscovered in 1911 by American explorer (*) Hiram Bingham. For 10 points, name this mysterious
ancient city of the Incas.
ANSWER: Machu Picchu
This city near the Urubamba River contains a temple named for a row of three trapezoidal windows. Its
landmarks include a stone called the "Hitching Post of the Sun" or Intihuatana. Artifacts from this place are
being returned from Yale, which employed Hiram Bingham during his exploration of it in 1911. For 10
points, name this elevated Inca ruin in Peru.
ANSWER: Machu Picchu
A hiking trail to this site goes through "Dead Woman's Pass," and this site includes the Room of the
Three Windows. This site, built as an estate for Pachacuti in the 15th century northwest of the
capital city Cuzco, is situated high in a (*) Peruvian mountain range. For 10 points, name this "lost city of
the Incan Empire" introduced to New World scholars by Hiram Bingham in 1911.
ANSWER: Machu Picchu
This site contains the Torreon (torr-ey-OHN) observatory and the Room of the Three Windows. This
location may have been found and looted in 1867 by German engineer Augusto Berns. This site is located
above the Urubamba River in the Cordillera (cord-ee-YAIR-uh) de Vilcabamba. This site was misidentified
as Vilcabamba when it was found in 1911 by Yale archaeologist Hiram Bingham. For 10 points, name this
site located in southern Peru that is known as the "lost city of the Incas."
ANSWER: Machu Picchu
Fort Good Hope lies along this river, which is located west of the Franklin mountains after passing by
Wrigley. The Laird River joins it near Fort Simpson, and Richards Island is the largest island located near
its delta, which lies to the west of Richardson Mountains and is bounded by Shoalwater Bay. It initially
flows to the west, south of Horn Plateau, but turns north, running parallel to its namesake mountains
eventually emptying into the Beaufort Sea. It originates at the Great Slave Lake, and is named for a man,
who initially called it "Disappointment River" after navigating its course in 1789. For 10 points, name this
longest river in Canada.
ANSWER: Mackenzie River
Russian satellite Cosmos 954 plunged into this river's source in 1978. The Liard River joins it at Fort
Simpson, and the Redstone and Keele rivers enter it north of Wrigley. This river broadens to four miles in
width at Norman Wells, and its water transportation routes terminate at Tuktoyaktuk, North of the Sans
Sault Rapids. Its namesake, discovering that it did not terminate in Cook Inlet, dubbed it "Disappointment
River" after exploring from a trading post of Fort Chipewyan on Lake Athabasca. Flowing into the Beaufort
Sea, for 10 points, identify this river that begins at Great Slave Lake, the longest in Canada.
ANSWER: Mackenzie River
Passing through the oil-rich settlement of Norman Wells, this river runs through a basin whose mineral
wealth lies in bituminous tar and oil sands. During the Wisconsin time period, the Laurentide Ice Sheet
covered most of its basin. This river bears the name of its principle explorer who surveyed its entire length
in 1789 and named it "Disappointment River. " Its delta is fifty miles long and borders the Arctic Ocean.
Emptying into the Beaufort Sea, this river carries water from Great Slave Lake over one thousand miles
upstream along its course. For 10 points, identify this river named for the explorer Alexander, the longest in
Canada.
ANSWER: Mackenzie River
The area around this river has been home to the Slavey people, a group of Dene, and it goes past the
Norman Wells oil fields. Its longest feeder is the Liard River, which meets it at Fort Simpson in the Dehcho
Region. It is fed near its end by the Peel and Arctic Red Rivers. The first European to travel its length
wanted to named it Disappointment River because it does not reach the Pacific Ocean, but it is named after
him instead. It is fed by the Great Bear River, empties into the Beaufort Sea, and begins at Great Slave
Lake. Name this longest river of Canada.
ANSWER: Mackenzie River
A series of man-made and natural lakes connected by rivers run down the east coast of this country
and is called the Canal des Pangalanes, and this country's Tsaratana Massif in the north is home to
its highest peak, Maromokotro. This country is home to the Mananjary and (*) Bemarivo Rivers, and
erosion of the central highlands of this country led to its nickname, "The Red Island". Antananarivo is the
capital of, for ten points , what island nation located off the southeastern coast of Africa, which is not
actually home to the dancing lemurs?
ANSWER: Madagascar
This country's namesake tectonic plate is affected by the east side of the Davie Fracture Zone.
Daewoo tried to lease over three million acres of land from this nation in 2009. The northern part of
this nation features the (*) Tsaratanana Massif, and its national capital is also the capital of the
Analamanga Region and is the site of the palace once used by the rulers of the Merina Kingdom. For 10
points, name this island nation, the home of lemurs, found to the southeast of the mainland of Africa.
ANSWER: Madagascar
One ethnic group of this nation has a name that translates to "those who do not cut their hair" and are the
Tsimihety people. The highest annual soil losses in the world occur in this country due to the Betsiboka
River. Its highest point is Maromokotro. Its capital city contains a palace complex known as the Rova that
includes the Queen's Palace. Its largest seaport is Toamasina, and the largest ethnic subgroup here is the
Merina. Its national language is Malagasy. This country borders the Mozambique Channel and its capital is
Antananarivo. For 10 points, name this large island nation off the coast of southeast Africa that is home to
lemurs.
ANSWER: Republic of Madagascar [or Repoblikan-i Madagasikara; or Republique de Madagascar]
This island's indigenous languages are Austronesian in origin and are named Malagasy. This island is
home to the tenrec, an animal similar to the hedgehog, as well as forty species of lemurs. Its unique
biodiversity has resulted in over six hundred species being discovered here since 2000. This fourth largest
island in the world by area is located on the Mozambique Channel. For 10 points, name this island nation
off the coast of southern Africa.
ANSWER: Madagascar
The volcanic Ankaratra Massif lies in its center, and this nation's Great Cliff of Angavo is bordered by the
Betsimisaraka Escarpment. The Mandrare, Mananara, and Ivondro rivers are located in this nation, and its
largest port is Toamasina. Lake Alaotra is its largest lake, its highest peak is Maromokotro, and the
coelacanth (SEEL-uh-canth) lives off its shores. This country's largest ethnic group is the Merina, and this
former colony of France is located on the east of the Mozambique Channel. For 10 points, name this
African island nation, with its capital at Antananarivo.
ANSWER: Madagascar
This country's Tsingy de Bemaraha Strict Nature Reserve is one of the best examples of Karst
topography in the world. The island of Nosy Mangabe can be found in this country's Antongil Bay.
Ethnic groups native to this country include the Sakalava and Merina, who dominated much of it
until
the arrival of the French. Islands off its coast include Juan de Nova and the Gloriosos, and it is the
natural home of (*) lemurs. For 10 points, name this island country which contains the fourth largest island
in the world and is found to the east of Mozambique.
ANSWER: Madagascar
In an epic poem from this country, Joy-Giving Girl gets engaged to the son of Beautiful-Rich, Ibonia.
This nation celebrates the New Year on Alahamady Be. The traveler's palm is one plant endemic to this
island, whose language's transcription in the Arabic script was known as Sorabe. Maromokotro is located
on the Tsaratanana Massif in this country's north, while its central plateau is home to most of the Merina
People. Antsirabe and Toamasina are among this country's most populous cities. Its national language is
Malagasy and it is separated from the mainland by the Mozambique Channel. For 10 points, name this
island nation east of Africa to which lemurs are indigenous.
ANSWER: Republic of Madagascar
Lac Alaotra is the largest question of water in this nation known for its prominent red lateritic soils. The Canal
des Pangalanes is a series of dams on its coast. The distinctive trees in the Menabe region compose this
nation's first national monument, the Avenue of the Baobabs. Trade winds arrive in this region because of
anitcyclones off the coast of India, and this nation's forests contain rare endangered species such as the
Golden-crowned sifaka and the Aye-aye. Separated from continental Africa by the Mozambique Channel,
for 10 points, name this island country notable for its lemurs, with capital at Antananarivo.
ANSWER: Madagascar
This island is the world's leading exporter of ylang-ylang and vanilla. This country's royal family
was sent east to the nearby Reunion Island after being colonized by the French. (+) Malagasy is the
national language of this island that was also a proposed site for Jewish resettlement during the
Third Reich. Maromoktro, located in the (*) Tsaratana Massif, is the highest point on this island.
Separated from the mainland by the Mozambique Channel, this island is home to many lemurs. For 10
points, what is the largest island off the coast of Africa?
ANSWER: Republic of Madagascar
Hungary, Slovakia, and Poland all claim this nation's king Maurice Benyofszky as from their nation, and he
is credited with introducing its Latin alphabet. However, Radama and Ranavalona are the two most
common names of its native monarchs. Sometimes known as the "Island of the Moon," geographically its
highest peak is Mt Maromokotro, its largest lake is Alaotra, and its longest river is Betsiboka. FTP identify
this fourth largest island in the world, the home to the fossa and lemur, with its capitol at Antananarivo.
ANSWER: Madagascar, accept Malagasy
David Graeber's book Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology includes research he did in this country
among the Tsimihety people. The Tsimihety refused to be ruled by Radama I, a king of the Merina
kingdom that once ruled what is now this country. The most common language of this country is in the
Austronesian family, despite its geographic nearness to Bantu speaking people. The Merina ruled from this
country's current day capital, which under French colonization was called Tananarive. For 10 points, name
this island country which the Mozambique Channel separates from the African mainland.
ANSWER: Republic of Madagascar
The largest two islands that surround this country are Nosy Be and Nosy Boraha. A series of man-made
and natural lakes on this country's eastern coast are known as the Canal des Pangalanes (pon-guh-LAHN).
The national language of this country is Malagasy, which is spoken by the Merina and Bara ethnic groups.
This country is home to a large population of lemurs and is separated from the mainland by the
Mozambique Channel. For 10 points, name this largest island in Africa.
ANSWER: Madagascar
The Bemolanga and Tsimimaro oil fields on this island produce heavy oil. Inhabitants of this
island have burned reed beds to make more rice paddies along Lake Alaotra, its largest lake.
Ruins of the Merina kingdom dot this island, the westernmost place settled by people late in the
Austronesian expansion. This island, whose Sava region lets it produce more vanilla than any
other place in the world, is home to the Canal des Pangalanes in its east, and the Tsaratanana
massif in its center. Its indigenous language is Malagasy. For 10 points, name this large island,
home to the lemur.
ANSWER: Madagascar
The eastern shore of this island features Tintingue Bay, which is across from the much smaller Nosy
Boraha Island. Its southwest coast is known for its spiny thickets, and its west coast includes the port
of Mahajanga and is near Juan de Nova Island. Some of the islands northwest of this one include
Mayotte, Comoros, and the Glorioso Islands. This island is the native home of lemurs, and islands
further off its east coast include Mauritius and Reunion [rayn-yaw]. Name this island home of the
nation whose capital is Antananarivo, located between the Mozambique Channel and Indian Ocean
off the east coast of Africa.
ANSWER: Madagascar
Sharp limestone spires known as tsingy make up this nation's Bemaraha national park and the
Avenue of the Baobabs is a tree-lined dirt road in this country's western Menabe region. This
country's major rice-growing area is centered at Lake Alaotra and its capital, which in the 17th
century saw the rule of the Merina kings is now served by the Ivato Airport. This country was once
the home of (*) Aepyornis, the now-extinct elephant bird, and its largest mammalian carnivore is the fossa
which preys on this island's population of lemurs. The place where Malagasy is spoken, FTP, identify this
large island nation off the southeastern coast of Africa with its capital at Antananarivo.
ANSWER: Madagascar
This country's tallest peak is Maromokotro, which is located in the Tsaratanana Massif range in the
northwestern Mahajanga Province. The Betsiboka River flows north and empties into Bombetoka
Bay, and Europa Island lies off the west coast of this nation. An epic poem known as the Ibonia
originates in this country. This nation was dominated by the Merina Kingdom until a (*) French
annexation in 1896. This nation's namesake plan called for a large-scale Jewish relocation to this place, but
the Nazis never followed through. For 10 points, name this island nation with capital at Antananarivo that is
separated from the continent by the Mozambique Channel and whose demonym is Malagasy.
ANSWER: Republic of Madagascar [or Malagasy Republic before mentioned]
A royal residence and monastery 30 miles north of this city is named El Escorial. A monument at
Atocha station memorializes a terrorist attack in this city, where economic protestors have recently
occupied this city's (*) Plaza Mayor [plaza mah-YOR] and Puerta del Sol. A 2004 Al-Qaeda train
bombing killed 191 people in, for 10 points, what city, home to the Prado art museum, which Philip II
named as capital of Spain?
ANSWER: Madrid
After this city was chosen as capital for its lack of distinguishing features, a playwright standing on a
bridge above the tiny Manzanares River here suggested that the king either "sell the bridge or a buy a new
river." Joseph III patronized such squares as the Plaza del Sol in this city. This home to the verbena of San
Isidro is also the location of several art museums, including a tapestry exhibit in the mayor's house at Casa
de Cisneros and the Prado. For 10 points, name this city, chosen by Philip II as the capital of Spain.
ANSWER: Madrid
The Evangelistas Lighthouse directly overlooks this question of water, and the Otway Sound is home to a
species of penguin named for this question, which connects that sound to the Pacific Ocean. It is bordered to
the north by the Brunswick Peninsula, which is home to Cape Froward. Running by the cities of Puerto Saro
and Punta Arenas, this question of water serves as an alternate route to the Drake Passage, which itself lies
between Cape Horn and Antarctica. It was first discovered in 1520 by its namesake who traveled through
this region north of the Tierra del Fuego. For 10 points name this waterway at the southern tip of South
America, a certain strait named for a Portuguese explorer.
ANSWER: Strait of Magellan [accept plural]
This region's name literally translates as the "place where the sun sets." Habib Bourguiba once defined
this region as the area in which couscous was the staple food. A group formerly known as the Salafist
Group for Preaching and Combat renamed itself to "al-Qaeda in" this region and claimed responsibility for
2013 attacks on Timbuktu. For 10 points, name this region containing the Arabic-speaking countries of
northwest Africa.
ANSWER: Maghreb [or Maghrib]
This state has been continually plagued by secessionist demands for a new State of Vidarbha, ever since
it was formed in 1953 by the Nagpur Pact. This present-day state was the home of several rebellions against
Mughal and British rule led by such figures as Pesha Baji Rao II and Shivaji, the Maratha wars. This state
is home to the University of (POO-nay) Pune and the Bollywood film industry. With a population equal to
that of Mexico, it is smaller by population than only Uttar Pradesh. For 10 points, name this second-largest
state of India, which dominates the central west coast of the country and is the home of India's financial
sector at Mumbai.
ANSWER: Maharashtra
Its white branch begins in the Fichtelgebirge, and both its white and red branches join in Kulmbach. Major
tributaries of it include the Tauber and Regnitz, and it is well known for its wines, served in the so-called
Bochsbeutel [box-boy-tel]. Towns on it include Lohr, Wertheim, Aschaffenburg and Wurzburg, and
Bayreuth is located on its red branch. It is navigable downstream of Bamberg, while a canal completed in
1992 connects it to the Danube River Basin. Beyond its origins in upper-Franconia, it flows further through
Bavaria, Baden-Wurttemburg, and Hesse. It is an important European waterway, and a major right tributary
of the Rhine. FTP, Frankfurt lies on and is named after what German river?
ANSWER: Main River
This state's Presumpscot River flows through Windham and Gorham and begins in Sebago Lake, the largest
lake in Cumberland County. This state's largest city contains Munjoy Hill, upon which stands the only
remaining maritime signal tower in the United States. That city, which shares its name with Oregon's
Portland, is on the shore of an Atlantic gulf named after this state, which also forms the shorelines of this
state's southern neighbors, New Hampshire and Massachusetts. For 10 points, name this state with capital
Augusta which contains the most northeastern point in New England.
ANSWER: Maine
Rivers in this state include the Stroudwater River, which flows into the Fore River and is spanned by
the Casco Bay Bridge. George Lonrezo Noyes, known as the thoreauvian of this state, has a mountain
named for him in this state's town of Greenwood but himself lived in Oxford County in this state's
town of Norway. Mount (*) Desert Island in this state is home to the town of Bar Harbor, which itself
contains the only national park in New England, Acadia National Park. Also known as the state containing
the Bush family's summer home in the city of Kennebunkport, this is, FTP, what U.S. state with capital at
Augusta?
ANSWER: Maine
This state's Sugarloaf Mountain overlooks the Carrabassett River. Its Mount Desert Island is home to its
Acadia National Park. This state's highest point is Mount Katahdin, which is the northern terminus of the
Appalachian Trail. For 10 points, name this state which is bordered to the north by Canada and which has
its capital at Augusta.
ANSWER: Maine
Sugar Island is located in a lake in this state that is drained by the Kennebec River; that question of water is
Moosehead Lake. One peak in this state is Sugarloaf Mountain; another peak in this state, located in Baxter
State Park, is Mount Katahdin. It also contains the delta of the Penobscot River, along whose banks lies the
city of Bangor. With a capital at Augusta, for 10 points, name this state located in the extreme northeast of
the continental U.S..
ANSWER: Maine
This state retained control of Seavey's Island in a 2001 Supreme Court case contesting its border with its
southern neighbor at the Piscataqua River. The first transatlantic balloon crossing was launched from its
city of Presque Isle. Much of this state is watered by the Penobscot River, which becomes navigable after
running past the city of Bangor. The "Hundred-Mile Wilderness" in this state culminates in Mount
Katahdin, the northern terminus of the Appalachian Trail. For 10 points, name this state which was
partitioned entirely out of Massachusetts and which has cities named Portland and Augusta.
ANSWER: Maine
The Down East section of this state includes the cities of Ellsworth and Calais. The city of Kennebunk
[pr. Kenny-bunk] in this state is home to the Nature Conservancy Blueberry Barrens. At one point, a
city in this state ran a ferry known as "The Cat" to and from (*) Canada. Though not Oregon, Portland
is this state's largest seaport and also its most populous city. Mount Desert Island and Acadia National Park
are popular tourist attractions in this state. For ten points, name this northernmost New England state with
capital at Augusta.
ANSWER: Maine
Lessening traffic in this question of water is one reason for a proposed canal in the Isthmus of Kra. Bush fires
to the south of this question of water regularly cause low visibility, and its shallowest point is 25 meters deep,
defining its namesake naval architecture. Its westernmost extent is the island of Phuket ("poo-kay"), and
nearby cities include Kedah and Kalentan. Along with the Sunda, it is one of the two major straits of
Southeast Asia. For 10 points, name this strait bordering Singapore, one of the busiest shipping lanes in the
world.
ANSWER: Strait of Malacca
The Kasungu National Park is located on this country's western border, and the Chizumulu and Likoma
islands belong to it. This country's major primary language is sometimes called Chewa, while Tumbuka and
Yao are each spoken by one million people in this country. The Zomba plateau is located to this country's
south, and the Shire River, which empties into the Zambezi, flows north of its economic center of Blantyre.
Also consisting of Lake Malombe, a lake named for it borders Mozambique and Tanzania. Previously
called Nyasaland, for 10 points, name this country, a southeast African nation that is the ghost-rat capital of
the world, with political capital at Lilongwe.
ANSWER: the Republic of Malawi [prompt on Nyasaland until mentioned]
This country is the only home of the Johnston's river frog, which lives on the Mulanje Massif. Chisi
Island is located in this country's Lake Chilwa. The first president of this country was born near its
town of Kasungu and belongs to its most populous ethnic group, the Chewa. This country contains a
large man-made forest, Viphya, which is located near the city of Mzuzu. Michiru Mountain is located
near this country's city of Blantyre. The southern half of this country is surrounded by Mozambique,
and it also borders Tanzania and Zambia. Name this country, formerly known as Nyasaland, that
shares its name with its large lake.
ANSWER: (Republic of) Malawi [or (Dziko la) Malawi]
A resident of this country's village of Chiradzulu criticized the rampant vampire problem in the Thyolo and
Chikwawa areas by suggesting that blood-suckers could contract AIDS. An urban governor here was stoned
for harboring vampires, and this country's Sanjika Palace was reportedly host to a series of mysterious
dwarves. More recently, journalists reported that invisible rodents crawled on the president here. Attractions
in this country include Mount Mulanje and the citie sof Monkey Bay and Nkhata Bay . Home to the source
of the Shire (shee-ray) River, for 10 points, name this country whose cities include Zomba, Blantyre, and
Lilongwe, formerly called Nyasaland.
ANSWER: Republic of Malawi [prompt on "Nyasaland" before mentioned]
Zomba and Mangochi are two districts in this country's Southern Region. Nicknamed the "warm
heart," of its continent this nation obtained independence from the UK in 1964. The official
languages of this nation are English and (*) Chichewa, also known as Nyanja. This country has its
second largest city at Blantyre. The start of the Shire River is in the southern half of this country. Along
with Tanzania and Mozambique, this landlocked country borders the third largest of the African Great
Lakes, Lake Nyasa. Formerly known as Nyasaland, for 10 points, name this landlocked African country
with capital at Lilongwe.
ANSWER: Republic of Malawi or Chalo cha Malawi or Dziko la Malawi
A scientific drilling project recently concluded at this site in 2005 suggested that, as the continent's climate
stabilized around 70,000 years ago, this lake grew in depth from 100 to 700 meters. Likoma and Chizumulu
are two major islands on this lake, and its wildlife includes many species of cichlid (sik-lid). The primary
inlet is the Ruhuhu River and this lake's only outlet empties into Lake Malombe, the Shire. An old European
name for it was Livingstone's Lake though it has undergone a more recent naming controversy. Situated
among Tanzania, Mozambique and its namesake country, for 10 points, name this east African lake.
ANSWER: Lake Malawi [or Lake Nyassa]
Chizumulu and Likoma are the only two inhabited islands in this lake. Languages spoken by inhabitants of
this lake's shores include Chewa and Tonga. One of its main ports is Nkhata Bay, and the Lilongwe River
flows into this river after passing through a national capital. The main outflow of this lake is through the
Shire River, which connects it to Lake Malombe and flows through Mozambique into the Zambezi River.
Also known as Lake Nyasa, this lake is the second deepest in Africa after Lake Tanganyika. For 10 points,
name this lake with a namesake southern African country.
ANSWER: Lake Malawi
Portuguese Caspar Bacarro was the first European to report this question of water's existence, which was the
site of the first naval action of the First World War, when a single gunboat was disabled by the SS
Gwendolen in a port then called Spinxhaven. A territorial dispute in this question of water resulted from the
1890 Heligoland Agreement that gave the polity controlling its northeastern shore no jurisdiction over it.
Other ports on this question of water include Likoma Island, Nkhata Bay, and Chipoka. This lake has a
southeasterly wind called the mwera. Two countries that border this lake is prefer to call this lake by a
generic term from languages spoken around it that literally means "Lake Lake." This lake lies south of the
David Livingstone Mountain Range and is drained a tributary of the Zambezi River; that tributary is the
Shire River. This southernmost lake of the Eastern African Rift Valley system separates Mozambique and
Tanzania from its namesake country. For 10 points, name this lake named for a nearby nation with capital at
Lilongwe.
ANSWER: Lake Malawi [or Lake Nyasa; or Lake lake before mention; prompt on "lake"]
Bodies of water within this lake include the comically named Monkey Bay and Cape Maclear. Lake Malobe
is adjacent to it, and it is bounded by the Kirk Range along with the Viphya Mountians to the north. The
largest islands in this question are Likoma and Chizmulu. Its primary inflow is the Ruhuhu River, and its major
outflow is the Shire River, which flows into the Zambezi. Ecologically, this lake is home to the largest
number of unique species of fish in the world. South of Lake Tanganyika. For 10 points, name this Great
Rift Valley lake whose namesake country has its capital at Lilongwe.
ANSWER: Lake Malawi
Monkey Bay is a major port located on this question which lies near Cape Maclear. It is near the city of
Mangochi, which lies between the southernmost point of this question and Lake Malombe. In the only
recorded battle on this question, the HMS Gwendolyn destroyed the German boat Hermann von Wissemann
The largest river flowing into this lake is the Ruhuhu River, and it is drained by the Shire River which flows
into the Zambezi. For 10 points, name this lake located southeast of Lake Tanganyika, which is shared by
Mozambique, Tanzania, and its namesake country.
ANSWER: Lake Malawi [or Lake Nyasa]
The Kirk Range and Viphya Mountains rise on the shores of this question of water, and Cape Maclear is a
promontory of its southern section. The Monkey and Nkhata bays lie on this question of water, whose
distributary flows through the Majete Game Reserve, and creates Lake Malombe. The Ruhuhu River is the
main tributary of this lake, and the Likoma and Chizumulu islands lie in it. It is drained by the Shire River,
which eventually flows into the Zambezi. For 10 points, name this lake of the Great Rift Valley which is
bordered by Tanzania, Mozambique and its namesake nation, which has its capital at Lilongwe.
ANSWER: Lake Malawi [accept Lake Nyasa until read]
This nation's largest island is Banggi island, and its Trus Madi Range contains Mount Trus Madi, this
nation's second highest peak. The capital of this nation is at the confluence of the Gombak and Klang
Rivers, while this nation's highest point is Low's Peak at Mount Kinabalu. Its states include Sabah and
Sarawak, both located on an island it shares with Brunei. The Strait of Malacca separates it from India. For
10 points, name this country with capital Kuala Lumpur.
ANSWER: Malaysia
The Cogam Alam is a sacred symbol to this country's leader, who lives in the State Palace, and whose
official title is Yang di-Pertuan Agong. This country's National mosque lies nearby its Heroes Mausoleum,
and it was designed by the Public Works Department. The Bukit Nanas is a rainforest that can be found in
the capital city of this nation. This country's capital sits at the confluence of the Klang and the Gombak
rivers, and it is in this country's state of Selangor. That capital features a suspension bridge designed by
Cesar Pelli, and the country of Indonesia is separated from it by the Strait of Malacca. For ten points, name
this country that is the namesake of a peninsula, whose capital is Kuala Lumpur.
ANSWER: Malaysia
Bombolai Hill is the only volcano in this nation, which has its highest point at Low's Peak on Mt. Kinabalu.
A city-state is separated from this nation by the Straits of Johor, and off its northwest coast is Penang Island.
Its states of Sabah and Sarawak are separated from its capital, which is home to the Petronas Towers. For
10 points, name this nation split between Borneo and its namesake peninsula, ruled from Kuala Lumpur.
ANSWER: Malaysia
The capital of this country has access to the sea through the Klang river, and the city is situated at
the Klang's confluence with the Gambak. The Titiwangsa Mountains cover one portion of this
country, with valleys that shelter cities like Ipoh, Penang, and the capital. Labuan is a small but
wealthy island under this country's jurisdiction, near another (*) small nation that only borders this
nation. Kota Kinabalu is a major city in the state of Sabah on another island, while Sarawak is the largest
state of this nation that spans two major landforms. Currently governed by Najib Abdul Razak, for 10
points, name this nation that holds territory on Borneo and a namesake peninsula that is home to its capital
of Kuala Lumpur.
ANSWER: Malaysia
Mount Korbu lies in this country's Titiwangsa Mountains, while its Crocker Range contains Mount
Tambuyukon. Sibu lies on this country's longest river, the Rajang. Major cities in this country
include Ipoh and Kuching, and coral reefs attract tourists to its Sipadan Island and Swallow Reef.
This country's Gunung Mulu National Park is located in (*) Sarawak, and Mount Kinabalu lies in the
state of Sabah. This country's biggest city lies in the Klang valley, and landmarks within its capital include
the Istana Negara, the KL Tower, and the world-famous Petronas Towers. The Straits of Johor separate this
country from Singapore, and it shares Borneo with Brunei and Indonesia. For ten points, name this
southeast Asian country which has its capital at Kuala Lumpur.
ANSWER: Malaysia
An airport in this country was attacked in Operation Cactus. Its Gan International Airport was once a
RAF base, and another airport is located at the island of Hulhule. This country has a president who was
featured in the documentary The Island President. That president, Mohamed Nasheed, is noted for his
efforts to investigate rising sea levels. Tamil mercenaries assisted in a 1988 coup here against President
Maumoon Abdul Gayoom. This island country is the smallest Asian country by population and land area.
For ten points, name this island state of twenty-six atolls in the Indian Ocean, with its capital at Male
(mah-LAY).
ANSWER: Republic of the Maldives
Boucle du Baoule is a national park found in the Kayes region of this country, whose National Assembly is
presently dominated by members of the Alliance for Democracy and Progress. Its highest point is Mt.
Hombori Tondo, and Bambara is spoken by about 80% of the population. The Mande and the Fula ar two
of this country's main ethnic groups, and minor cities in this country include Kidal, Sevare and Segou though travelers might prefer to visit the Tomb of Tupama and other remnants of the Jenne-Jeno civilization
at Djenne, site of a namesake "Great Mosque." Bounded to the south by Burkina Faso and the Republic of
Guinea, the Battle of Tondibi took place is this country, which was formerly home to empires led by Sonni
Ali and Mansa Musa. FTP, identify this nation whose cities include Timbuktu and the capital Bamako.
ANSWER: Republic of Mali
The capital of this country is built on a height called Mount Sceberras, which divides this country's Great
Harbor from Marsamxett Harbor. The Roman governor Publius is buried in a cathedral in this country at
Mdina. This country contains a set of Megalithic temples, including the Ggantija complex and the Tarxien
complex, on Gozo. During World War II, this country as a whole received the St. George Cross for valor. It
was defended from the Ottomans under the leadership of Jean de la Vallette. This country's symbol is the
eight-pointed cross adopted by its longtime rulers, the Knights Hospitallers. For ten points, name this
Mediterranean island nation south of Sicily and north of Libya.
ANSWER: Malta
This island's namesake language is the only Semitic tongue written in the Latin alphabet. After the
Knights Hospitallers were driven from Rhodes, the order took up residence on this island. For 10 points,
name this oft-besieged independent country found off the coast of Sicily.
ANSWER: Malta
One island in this country is home to the Neolithic temple Ggantia and has its capital at Victoria. That
island, Gozo, is connected by ferry to this country's mainland port of Cirkewwa. Its only airport is located at
Luqa, and Grand Harbor and Marsamxett are bays fed by nine seasonal rivers. It was the site of numerous
bombing attacks during WorId War II, and its largest city is Birkirkara, which features an aqueduct built in
1622 by the Knights Hospitaller. For 10 points, name this former British colony with capital at Valletta, a
Mediterranean island nation near Sicily.
ANSWER: Malta
Uninhabited islands belonging to this nation include Kemmunett and Filfla, and Marsaxlokk [mar-sashlock] Bay indents its biggest island. Neolithic temples in this country include Tarxien [tar-shien], Ta-
Hajrat, [hadj-rat] and Hajar Qim [ha-jar eem]. The Blue Lagoon is off this nation's island of Comino. This
nation's capital is a port which contains the Marsamxett [mar-sam-shet] and Grand Harbours. One island in
this nation has its largest town at Victoria, also known as Rabat, also the name of a town outside the old
capital of Mdina. That island is home to the aforementioned megalithic temples, which include Ggantija
[djgan-ti-yah], or the Giant's Tower. Besides that "Island of the Three Hills", Gozo, its namesake island
contains this country's largest town, Birkirkara. For 10 points, name this small island nation south of Italy
with capital at Valletta.
ANSWER: Malta
One island in this nation can be visited on a ferry that departs from Cirkewwa. A cathedral in the city of
Mdina in this country was supposedly built on the spot where the governor Publius met Saint Paul
following his shipwreck. This nation's flag features the George Cross, as King George VI awarded one to
this entire nation for the "heroism and devotion of its people" during World War II. The islands of Comino
and Gozo are part of this country. The capital of this country is named for the member of the Knights
Hospitaller who successfully defeated the Great Ottoman Siege of 1565. For 10 points, identify this island
nation, located south of Sicily, that has its capital at Valletta.
ANSWER: Malta
In 2007, 53 people disappeared while trying to reach this country, where Katrine Camilleri's car and door
were firebombed for advocating on behalf of refugees. Those migrants often depart for this country from the
city of Zuwara and head for Victoria, also known as Rabat, or for its most populous city, Birkirkara.
Migrants might settle on its island of Gozo or hire boats to take them north to Catania or Syracuse. This
country's status as the front line in immigration to Europe stems from the fact that, since 2004, it has been
the southernmost member of the European Union. For 10 points, name this Mediterranean island whose
capital is Valetta.
ANSWER: Malta
Although home to mythologically-inspired places like Echo River and Lake Lethe, this place contains a
room just past Acute Corner, where a makeshift hospital for tubercular patients visited. It is the largest
ecosystem of its type east of the Mississippi that is affected by White Nose Syndrome. Routes inside of this
locale include the Star Chamber Tour, as well as the Violet City Lantern Tour, both of which are named for
rooms within it. Located in Edmonson, Hart and Barren Counties, it is situated nearby the city of
Brownsville. This system is larger than the similar Jewel and Wind ones in South Dakota. For 10 points,
name this cave system in Kentucky, so named because of its large size.
ANSWER: Mammoth Cave
It is found next to similar structures at Martin Ridge and Fisher Ridge. Near it, the Nolin River flows
into the Green River, the level of which Edouard-Alfred Martel predicted should be related to the
Echo River, which flows through it. The Big Clifty Sandstone serves as its cap, overlying the Girkin
Formation, and Kaemper's survey data was notably not used in creating entrances like one at Violet
City. Containing segments such as Frozen Niagara and Fat Man's Misery, for 10 points, name this national
park and cave system of southern Kentucky, the largest in the world.
ANSWER: Mammoth Cave
At this location, John Croghan ran a tuberculosis hospital until he died of tuberculosis, having
erroneously believed conditions here could cure it. Floyd Collins became trapped in a sub-location at this
place and died in 1925. It is primarily located in Edmonson County, and visitors to it can take the Echo
River Tour and hear about things such as Frozen Niagara and Fat Man's Misery. This location has over
400 miles of surveyed passageways, which makes it over twice as long as Mexico's Sac Actun system. For
the point, name this longest cave system in the world, a U.S. National Park in Kentucky.
ANSWER: Mammoth Cave [or Crystal Cave]
This city contains the oldest public library in its country, Chetham's Library. Ford Madox Brown
painted a series of twelve murals depicting this city's history; those murals are displayed in its Alfred
Waterhouse-designed town hall. One of the murals depicts the opening of the Bridgewater Canal, built to
bring coal from Worsley to here. John Taylor was a member of the "Little Circle" here that started the
newspaper The Guardian, which until 1959 was named for this place. For 10 points, name this English city,
one of whose Premier League soccer teams has Rafael and Wayne Rooney.
ANSWER: Manchester
Among the unique features of this city is the so-called Gay Village on Canal Street, as well as Moss Side, an
area widely considered one of the worst places for violent crime anywhere. In its city center stands a statue
of Abraham Lincoln, to whom workers from here sent a letter of support in 1862 even though his cotton
blockade threatened to ruin them. A library and rail station built in Roman-style stands over the site where,
almost sixty years before the letter to Lincoln, unemployed textile workers here protested the high prices of
grain and lack of parliamentary representation, an assembly forcibly broken up by cavalry in the so-called
"Peterloo Massacre". Past the Albert Square one can take Market Street past this city's large Ferris Wheel
in Exchange Square, and at the Printworks one can dine at the Hard Rock Cafe emblazoned with lyrics from
Oasis, which came from here. For 10 points name this northwestern English City, also famous for its
football club and their characteristic red and gold colors.
ANSWER: Manchester
It lies to the south of the Stavonoy mountains, and it includes a craton that was the northernmost land on
earth during the Carboniferous period. The home of the Ulchs and the Hezhen, it includes the Changpai
mountains, in particular the Peik-tu-Shan volcano. Historically known as Guandong, it consists of the states
of Heilongjiang, Jilin and Liaoning, and includes cities such as Changchun, Shenyang and Harbin. By one
definition, this region stretches north to the Amur River, and the Yalu marks its border with another
neighbor. Bordering both the Sea of Japan and the Yellow Sea, name, for 10 points, this region of China
that took its name from the founders of the Qing Dynasty.
ANSWER: Manchuria
Inwood is at this island's northern tip, and it once contained the crime-ridden Five Points slum. The
Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire took place in this island's Greenwich Village. Canal Street is north of this
island's neighborhood of TriBeCa. This island is also the site of the Upper East Side and Madison Square
Garden. For 10 points, name this island borough home to Times Square.
ANSWER: Manhattan [or New York County]
This Canadian province contains Atikaki Provincial Wilderness Park and Nopiming Provincial Park, the
location of Booster and Springer Lakes. It also contains the river mouths of the Nelson and Churchill
Rivers, which empty into the Southwest corner of Hudson Bay. The Red River of the North flows into this
province in addition to forming the boundary between North Dakota and Minnesota. Other than the Great
Bear and Great Slave in Northwest Territories, this province contains the largest lake located entirely within
Canada, and that lake shares its name with this province's capital city. Its second largest city is Brandon,
and it is located between Saskatchewan and Ontario. Name this province whose capital is Winnipeg.
ANSWER: Manitoba
Features in this province include Split Lake, Playgreen Lake and Cross Lake, which are all connected by the
Nelson River. The large plateau of Riding Mountain National park is in its southwestern corner and its
highest point is the 2,726-foot high Baldy Mountain, part of this province's namesake escarpment left by
Glacial Lake Agassiz. This province receives the Red River of the North and its southeast corner contains a
small portion of the Lake of the Woods. Famous for polar bear gatherings at Churchill and bordering
Nunavut, Saskatchewan, and Ontario, FTP, name this Canadian province whose cities include Portage la
Prairie, Brandon and Winnipeg.
ANSWER: Manitoba
The best book published in either English or French in this polity is awarded the annual Aqua Books
Lansdowne Prize. Just like a nearby province, which hosts Ogopogo, this place is home to a lake monster,
that is named after this province. This province's highest point, Mount Baldy, is found in its Duck Mountain
Provincial Park. Here, the Assiniboine River meets the Red River system, which also includes the Nelson
River. Tourists come to its city of Churchill to see polar bears migrate inland toward the shore of Hudson
Bay, which borders the northeastern tip of this province. This easternmost of the "Prairie Provinces"
borders Nunavut to the north, North Dakota and Minnesota to the south, and Saskatchewan to the west. For
10 points, name this home of Winnipeg.
ANSWER: Manitoba
This province lies at the eastern edge of the original definition of the arid region known as Palliser's
Triangle. This province contains its country's northernmost port, which is owned by OmniTRAX. That port
is in this province's city of Churchill, which is known as the polar bear capital of the world. Birds Hill
Provincial Park becomes the third-largest city in this province every year during the annual Folk Festival in
this province's capital city, which also hosts Folklorama. The Red River of the North receives the
Assiniboine River as a tributary in this province before emptying into its largest lake. For 10 points, name
this province that contains Lake Winnipeg.
ANSWER: Manitoba
This province contains the eastern half of a greenstone-mining belt jointly named for Snow Lake and
a city named after the fictional Josiah Flintabbatey Flonatin. The largest population of Icelanders
outside of Iceland is around the municipality of Gimli in this province whose capital contains the
Exchange District and The Forks. British conservationist Grey Owl was an animal caretaker at this
province's Riding Mountain National Park and its city of (*) Churchill is nicknamed the "Polar Bear
Capital of the World." Much of this province is in the bed of the prehistoric Lake Agassiz and it is the only
prairie province with coastline, since its northeast borders Hudson Bay. For 10 points, name this Canadian
province between Ontario and Saskatchewan whose largest lake shares a name with its capital, Winnipeg.
ANSWER: Manitoba [or Le Manitoba]
This question's rampaging duckweed infestation has nearly overtaken Zapara and Los Parajos Islands. General
Rafael Urdaneta Bridge crosses the Tablazo Strait and connects Cabimas with this lake's namesake city,
found near its confluence with another question flanked by the Guajira and Paraguana Peninsulas. The Merida
and Sierra de Perija ranges flank its basin, through which runs this lake's major tributary, the Catatumbo
River. For 10 points, identify this brackish question of water which sits atop a major oil reserve, considered the
largest lake in South America and found in Venezuela.
ANSWER: Lake Maracaibo
A battle named after this question essentially ended its nation's war of independence, and it is the second oldest
in the world. Prolific eutrophication in the form of duckweed poses significant threat to its ecosystem,
unique for the small saline percentage of this question due to a narrow strait to the north. Its primary outlet is
spanned by the Rafael Urdaneta bridge, and it is primarily fed by the Catatumbo River. A poorly-made dike
was constructed to prevent damage due to this lake sinking significantly, a result of massive amounts of oil
being removed. With a basin accounting for two thirds of its nation's oil supply, FTP, identify this largest
lake of South America, located in Venezuela.
ANSWER: Lake Maracaibo
Nancy Wexler traced the high level of Huntington's Disease in the villages that surround this lake to a
single woman who migrated there in the 1800s in an example of the founder effect. This lake's basin
contains a namesake city, the capital of Zulia State, and Cabimas lies on its shore. The decision to allow
tankers bringing oil from the Tomoporo region into this lake has caused increased salinity, which may have
helped fuel an outbreak of lemna, a type of duckweed coving up to 18% of it. The Catatumbo River flows
into this lake, which is spanned by the General Rafael Urdaneta Bridge. This lake has an outlet to a gulf
named for the nation that contains it, an arm of the Caribbean Sea. For 10 points, name this lake in northern
Venezuela, the largest in South America.
ANSWER: Lake Maracaibo
Otto Krummel produced what was likely the first stand-alone map of this location in 1907 based on models
used by Supan to describe similar features named for the Japan-Kuril and Aleutian Islands. Both the Kaiko
and the Trieste missions explored this location, though the former was lost in the process. The deepest part
of this oceanic feature was explored by the Challenger submarine and has thus been dubbed the Challenger
Deep. Containing the lowest point anywhere on Earth's surface, for 10 points, name this trench in the
Pacific Ocean named for a nearby island chain.
ANSWER: Marianas Trench
This location, as described by Don Walsh and Jacques Piccard, is covered in diatomaceous (di-ah-tuhmAY-shus) ooze. Moritella yayanosii was found here in bacteria samples collected byKaiko, and is being
studied for treating cancer and hypertension. Charles Wyville Thomson first recorded this place's existence
when he was aboard the ship for which its deepest part is named; that section is Challenger Deep. Walsh
and Piccard remain the only men to ever visit this location, which they did nearly fifty years ago in a
bathyscaphe. Identify this feature near Guam, the deepest-known oceanic trench on Earth.
ANSWER: Marianas Trench [accept Challenger Deep before it is mentioned]
One of this city's museums is a former poorhouse called Vieille Charite. Louis XVI built over a fortress
of the Knights Hospitallers to construct this city's Fort Saint-Jean. Marcel Pagnol founded his film studio in
this city. This city's main thoroughfare, which takes its name from the hemp once transported along it, is La
Canebiere. A 27-foot-tall copper statue of Mary tops the bell tower of this city's Notre Dame de la Garde.
The Frioul Islands lie in this city's harbor, which contains the notorious Chateau d'If. A stew called
bouillabaisse comes from this port founded in 600 BCE by Phoenician traders. For 10 points, name this
port city in the south of France.
ANSWER: Marseille [or Marseilles]
Many people in this country were forced to relocate from their homes to (EE-bye) Ebeye Island. This
country completely lost its island Elugelab in 1952. This country is made up of two chains called Ratak and
Ralik, which mean sunrise and sunset. This country's legislature is made up of the Council of Iroij and
Nitijela. This country is the site of the Reagan Test Site on its islands in Kwajalein. Other testing by the
United States occurred on this country's Enewetak and Bikini Atolls. For 10 points, name this Pacific island
country that is part of the Compact of Free Association with the US along with Palau and Micronesia.
ANSWER: Republic of the Marshall Islands
The C and O Canal is almost entirely within this state. This state's highest point is found on Mount
Backbone in its Garrett Country. Its universities include Goucher and Towson. Its Bread and Cheese
Creek empties into the Back River. Along with Delaware and Virginia, it is the namesake of a peninsula
on the eastern bank of the Chesapeake Bay. This state is the site of the US Naval Academy. For 10 points,
name this mid-Atlantic state which contains cities named College Park, Annapolis, and Baltimore.
ANSWER: Maryland
This state's highest point is Mount Greylock, which lies in the Taconic Mountains near the
Housatonic Valley. Its western portion contains the Berkshires, and this state's cities of
Northampton, Holyoke, and Springfield lie on the Connecticut River. Olmsted Park, the Prudential
Center, and the Old North Church are located in this state's largest city, which lies at the mouth of
the (*) Charles River. Other cities in this state include Worcester, Lowell, and Plymouth. This state's
islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket lie south of Cape Cod. It borders New Hampshire to the north
and Rhode Island to the south. For ten points, identify this New England state with capital at Boston.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Massachusetts
The southern side of this state includes Buzzards Bay, and its highest point is Mount Greylock. It
includes a former textile hub in its city of Lowell, and this state's city of Waltham is home to (*)
Brandeis University. Its city of Springfield lies on the Connecticut River. This state includes Martha's
Vineyard and Nantucket, and its Charles River flows by Harvard. For 10 points, name this state that is home
to Cape Cod and Boston.
ANSWER: Massachusetts
Its French name, from the same Latin root as the genus of deer that includes elk, is Cervin. The usual
climbing route up it is via the Hornli ridge on the northeast, which is the central ridge seen from Zermatt. In
1931, Franz and Toni Schmid were the first to climb up its dreaded North Face, and the first group to
ascend it was led by Edward Whymper in 1865. Its more familiar name derives from combining the German
words for "meadow" and "peak". For 10 points name this 14,692 feet mountain located between
Switzerland and Italy.
ANSWER: The Matterhorn
This island contains La Perouse Bay and is sometimes called the "Valley Isle" for its large central
isthmus. Named for a trickster demigod, it is located very close to Lanai and Molokai and is separated from
the "Big Island" by Alenuihaha Channel. For 10 points, name this second-largest of the Hawaiian Islands.
ANSWER: Maui
This country contains the city of Atar, which is located on the Adrar Plateau. It recently jailed a man from
Mali, Omar Sid-Ahmed Ould Hamma, for kidnapping Spanish aid workers and giving them to Al Qaeda.
This country's government was overthrown by military coups in 2005 and 2008, removing Ould Taya and
Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi from office. This nation's Richat Structure appears on sattelite photos to be a
bullseye at the Western end of the Sahara. Bordered by Algeria and Mali, this country is between Senegal
and Western Sahara. Name this nation currently headed by President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz with its
capital at Nouakchott.
ANSWER: Mauritania
The world's longest train passes from the coast of this country to the mining town of Zouerate (zoo-WAREaught) in the interior. This country's namesake Thirty Years- War from 1644-1674 failed to bring the
Sanhajas to power here. The historical ruins of Awdaghost and Kumbi Saleh, historical centers of the Ghana
empire, are found within this country. It is home to people speaking a dialect of Arabic known as Hasaniya
as well as French, and cities such as Tidjikdja, Nouadibhou, and Nawakshut. For 10 points, name this large
West African country bordered by Western Sahara, Algeria, Mali, and Senegal.
ANSWER: Mauritania
This country's unicameral parliament ensures that underrepresented groups have a say by having eight
slots for the "best losers." Rodrigues and Saint Brandon are part of this country's economic exclusion zone.
The depopulation of Diego Garcia to create a US military base intensified this country's dispute with the
UK over sovereignty of the Chagos islands. As a penal colony for the Dutch, this country saw the
introduction of pigs, monkeys, and rats, which, coupled with the Portuguese introduction of dogs, spelled
the extinction of a species in 1681. For ten points, name this island country, once home to the dodo.
ANSWER: Republic of Mauritius [or Republique de Maurice]
Mapou, Rose Hill and Souillac are three of its district capitals, and other important cities include Curepipe
and Beau-Bassin. Part of the Mascarene islands, its dependencies include the Agalega islands and the
volcanic island of Rodrigues, and its highest point is the Piton de la Petite Riviere Noire. Although a
republic, this tropical island nation is part of the British Commonwealth, and its current president is
Anerood Jugnauth. Its main ethnic groups are Indian and Creole, a consequence of its past as a sugar-cane
producing colony of the Dutch, the French, and the British. Located roughly 1000 km east of Madagascar
and 200 km northeast of Reunion, and with capital at Port Louis, what is, FTP, this island, probably best
known as the home of the now-extinct dodo?
ANSWER: Mauritius
In 1910, a scandal erupted when Frederick Cook falsely claimed to have climbed this mountain. It is now
summited by climbers of the West Buttress route who begin at the Kahiltna Glacier. Outdated names for it
include Densmore's Mountain and the Russian name Bolshaya Gora. The first European to see this
mountain was George Vancouver, who was sailing in Cook Inlet. For 10 points, identify this mountain
located about halfway between Anchorage and Fairbanks, the highest in North America.
ANSWER: Mount McKinley [or Denali]
Bradford Washburn went to this mountain to prove Frederick Cook never climbed it. It is
located in a national park near the city of Healy. This peak's name is vigorously protected by
Congressmen from Ohio despite its home state wishing to change it. This mountain was named as a
(*) political statement by a gold prospector. Referred to by the Athabaskans as "Denali," it was first seen
by George Vancouver. For 10 points, name this highest mountain in North America.
ANSWER: Mount McKinley [or Mount Denali until it is read]
This mountain borders Ruth Glacier and it was first climbed by a team led by Hudson Stuck. Although
named for an Ohio politician, the Athabaskan people give it a name meaning "the high one." At 20,335 ft.
it is the highest point in both the United States and North America. For 10 points, name this Alaska peak.
ANSWER: Mt. McKinley [accept Denali]
The Peter's Glacier lies on the northeastern side of this mountain, which juts into Cheapman Bay. The
Sourdough expedition was the first to reach the North Summit of this mountain. The Koyukon Athabaskan
people live in the Tanana, Kuskokwim, and Yukon Basins surrounding this mountain. It is referred to by
the Alaskan State Board of Geographic Names as Denali. For 10 points, name this highest peak in the
United States.
ANSWER: Mount McKinley [or Denali before it is read]
Kashwitna Lake and the Moose's Tooth are two areas near this mountain, which has an alternate name
which comes from the Koyukon (COY-oo-con) Athabascan word for "the great one." The first ascent of
this mountain was by a team including Harry Karstens and Robert Tatum. This mountain is located about
160 miles southwest of Fairbanks and 130 miles north of Anchorage and is part of Denali National Park.
For 10 points, name this Alaskan mountain, the highest in North America.
ANSWER: Mount McKinley [or Denali before it is read]
A 1975 attempt to officially rename this landmark was blocked by Ohio congressman Ralph Regula and
notable features of it include the Browne Tower and the South Buttress. The Moose's Tooth is located 15
miles southeast of this landmark and the first account of it was recorded by the New Hampshire-born
William Dickey, who was digging for gold along the Susitna river when he spotted it. This landmark is an
example of a granitic pluton, and the Kahiltna Glacier extends extends southwest from it. Its local name is
taken from the Koyokoun Athabaskan for "The High One." For 10 points, name this Alaskan mountain,
which at 20,320 feet is the highest in North America.
ANSWER: Mount McKinley [Accept Denali.]
Just north of this mountain's Great Gorge lies the Don Sheldon Amphitheatre, which is located at the
top of the Ruth Glacier and near the Broken Tooth. Perhaps because helicopter rescues are viable, an
unusually large percentage of South Korean climbers have had to be rescued from Cassin Ridge and
its West (*) Buttress Route. The nearby landmarks of Browne Tower, Mount Silverthrone, Mount
Huntington, and Mount Foraker can be seen in airplane tours based out the nearby town of Talkeetna. The
first man to summit it was Walter Harper, in an expedition led by Harry Karstens and Hudson Stuck. Its
alternate name means "The High One" in Athabascan. For 10 points, name this centerpiece of Denali
National Park, the highest mountain in North America.
ANSWER: Mount McKinley [or Denali before it is read]
This area was the namesake of a 1997 poetry collection interspersing tales from the Odyssey and a failed
marriage, by Louise Gluck. Planning in this area, whose natural features include William DeKorte Park and
Berry's Creek, is handled by a commission founded in 1969 primarily in response to unregulated landfills in
this region which features land reclaimed by the Mosquito Control Commission. The remains of
Pennsylvania Station were dumped here in 1963, an act which prompted the first historic preservation
measures in New York City. Found along the lower reaches of the Hackensack River just north of Newark
Bay, for 10 points, name this estuarine wetlands and possible final resting place of Jimmy Hoffa in
northeastern New Jersey, also the home of a sports complex containing the Big M and Giants Stadium.
ANSWER: New Jersey Meadowlands [or Hackensack Meadowlands before mention]
Historical buildings in this city have recently been destroyed by Wahhabists who fear idolatry. The
Cave of Hira is outside this city, which is also the site of the Well of Zamzam. Masjid al-Haram, the
Grand (*) Mosque, is in this city which contains the Ka'aba, a black stone that is faced during prayer. The
hajj is a pilgrimage to, for 10 points, this Islamic holy city in Saudi Arabia, the birthplace of Muhammad.
ANSWER: Mecca, Saudi Arabia
Submarine karst springs called vruljas are found in this question of water. The Zanclean flood refilled this
question of water. Climate zones named for this question of water exist between thirty-one and forty degrees north
and south of the equator. Winds crossing this question of water include the mistral and the sirocco, and the
Levant wind blows across its western expanses. In the Koppen system, this question of water is the namesake
of a dry-summer subtropical climate. For ten points, name this sea whose basin supports olive trees growing
in North Africa and Southern Europe.
ANSWER: Mediterranean Sea
After the closure of the Betic Corridor, this question of water experienced the Zanclean flood, which ended a
period of extremely high salinity. The Calypso Deep is this question's deepest point, and to the southwest of
this question of water lie the Rif mountains. Cities located on the shores of this question of water include Gaza,
Alexandria, and Benghazi, while islands such as Corsica, Cyprus, and Crete are located here. It is connected
to the Atlantic Ocean by the Strait of Gibraltar. For 10 points, name this question of water located between
Europe and Africa.
ANSWER: Mediterranean Sea
The port cities Mahon and Heraklion are located on islands in this question of water. Resort destinations on this
question of water include the Costa Brava and the Costa Blanca, the latter of which includes the city Alicante.
This question of water's Gulf of Lion, which is plagued by a cold wind called the mistral, receives the Rhone
River. It meets the Atlantic Ocean off Cape Trafalgar, and the Sea of Marmara is linked by the Dardanelles
to one of its constituent seas. For 10 points, the Aegean Sea is part of what question of water separating Europe
and North Africa?
ANSWER: Mediterranean Sea
This sea's most active oilfield is the Bouri field, and studies utilizing seafloor spreading have shown that
this sea was not a remnant of the Tethys Sea. Winds such as the mistral and sirocco create high evaporation
rates in this sea during the summer. Dams such as those on the Ebro led to increased salinity levels in this
sea, and the Barcelona Convention was put in place to protect this sea's environment. For 10 points, name
this sea which is connected by the Sea of Marmara and the Bosporus to the Black Sea, bounded to the north
by Europe and to the south by Africa.
ANSWER: Mediterranean Sea
Near the end of the Miocene epoch, a near total evaporation of this question of water caused a salinity
crisis. Several emperors pursued the strategy of turning this question of water into a "Roman lake." An arm of
this question of water, the Sea of Marmara, is connected by the Bosporus Strait to the Black Sea. For 10 points,
name this question of water that separates Europe and Africa.
ANSWER: Mediterranean Sea
The Calypso Deep is the lowest point in this question of water, and Strait of Bonifacio separates two of its
larger islands. This sea contains the Balearic Islands, and the Ebro and Rhone rivers flow into it. This sea is
connected to the Black Sea via the Bosphorus Strait and to the Atlantic by way of the Strait of Gibraltar.
Extensions of this sea include the Aegean and the Adriatic. Containing the islands of Sardinia and Sicily,
this sea forms the coastlines of Libya and Algeria. For 10 points, identify this large sea sandwiched between
north Africa and Europe.
ANSWER: Mediterranean Sea [accept Ionian Sea until "Bonifacio" is read]
This question of water is the namesake of a four-nation commission formed in 1957 to develop hydroelectric
projects using its water. Khone Falls prohibits navigation of one section of this river, whose early course is
called the "River of Turbulence" and flows parallel to the Salween. Starting at the River of Rock in the
Tanggula Mountains, this river drains both the Khorat Plateau and the western portion of the Annamese
Cordillera, and the Sab River connects it to Tonle Sap. Branching into the Massac south of Phnom Penh
and forming part of the Laos-Myanmar border, for 10 points, name this longest river of Southeast Asia.
ANSWER: Mekong River
The Za Qu is the principle headstream of this river, which is referred to as the Lancang in China.
During heavy rains, this river forces the flow of the Sab River to reverse, creating an enormous lake
on the (+) Tonle Sap floodplain. Two tributaries of this river drain the Khorat Plateau, the Chi and
Mun. This river forms part of the border between Burma and (*) Laos, as well as between Laos and
Thailand. It breaks into a number of distributaries, such as the Bassac, at Phnom Penh. It drains into South
China Sea below Ho Chi Minh City. For 10 points, identify this river containing a bunch of un-exploded
ordinance from the Vietnam War.
ANSWER: Mekong River [or Lancang River before it is read]
Mysterious glowing balls spontaneously rising from this river are called Naga fireballs. The Ruak
River joins this river in the Golden Triangle. The Chi and Mun Rivers flow through the Khorat
Plateau before emptying into this river. This middle river of the Three Rivers of Yunnan flows over
Khone Falls, which is located west of the Annamite Range. Pakse and Luongprabang are cities on
this river, which receives water from (*) Tonle Sap. National capitals on this river include Vientiane and
Phnom Penh. For ten points, name this Asian river which forms the border between Laos and Thailand and
flows through Cambodia before reaching the South China Sea near Ho Chi Minh City.
ANSWER: Mekong River
This is the middle river of the Three Parallel Rivers protected area, and another UNESCO World
Heritage site along its course is the former royal capital of Luang Prabang. The 150-pound giant
river carp native to this river are nearly extinct, for which this river's namesake Commission blames
the Manwan Dam upstream in Yunnan Province. Annual floods of this river irrigate farmland and
replenish the (*) Tonle Sap, but in September 2011 hundreds of people died in this river's floods, which
even forced several tourists to be airlifted out of Angkor Wat. Both Vientiane and Ho Chi Minh City are
located on this river, which forms the boundary between Thailand and Laos. For 10 points, name this river
that flows into the South China Sea in southern Vietnam.
ANSWER: Mekong River
This river passes through Pakse, the capital of the former Kingdom of Champasak. This river
originates in the Three Rivers area in the Tibetan Plateau. One of this river's tributaries, the Tonle
Sap, changes its course twice a year due to flooding. During late October, the Naga fireballs
phenomenon occurs on this river near (*) Nong Khai and Vientiane. This river branches off after leaving
Phnom Penh and shortly before entering Vietnam where it forms its delta. For ten points, name this longest
river of Southeast Asia.
ANSWER: Mekong River
One tributary of this river drains the Khorat Plateau. That tributary is the Mun. The Khone Falls blocks
prevents navigating this river into one country. The Za Qu River is its primary source. This river is home to
an exceptionally large species of giant catfish. Tonle Sap drains into this river. Phnom Penh is located
along this river which makes up the border between Thailand and Laos. For 10 points, name this large river
of southeast Asia whose delta is in Vietnam.
ANSWER: Mekong River
This is the central of the "Three Parallel Rivers" that name a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Pak Mun
dam is located at the confluence of this river and its tributary, the Mun River. A "Friendship Bridge"
spanning this river forces users to change over driving side when going from Savannakhet Province to
Mukdahan Province. Pyotr Kozlov discovered that this river's source is the Lasagongma Spring on Mount
Guozongmucha. Runoff from the Tonle Sap reservoir enters this river when the Tonle Sap River is formed.
This river flows through Yunnan Province from its origin on the Tibetan Plateau, and it flows through
Thailand, Burma, Laos, and Cambodia before emptying at its namesake delta in Vietnam. For 10 points,
name this principal river of Southeast Asia.
ANSWER: the Mekong River
The proposed Xayaburi (SHY-ah-burr-ee) Giant Dam on this river has raised concerns from
fishermen and farmers. The Za Qu (zah SHU) and Mun Rivers flow into this waterway, which is fed
by the Ruak River in the Golden Triangle. The Tonle Sap is a lake that drains water into this river,
which rises in China's Yunnan province and flows past (*) Vientiane. After composing much of the
border between Laos and Cambodia, it comes to its mouth south of Ho Chi Minh City. For 10 points, name
this river that cuts through much of southeast Asia and empties into the South China Sea in Vietnam.
ANSWER: Mekong River
Organized crime in this city was long dominated by the Pettingill family, and it was the site of the
Great Bookie Robbery and a controversial police raid on the nightclub "Tasty." Beginning in the
1990s, this city renovacted the rundown Docklands area into a new multiuse district. Ferdinand von
Mueller founded the National Herbarium in this city, home to a noted Royal Botanic Gardens. This
city is surrounded by wealthy suburbs such as (*) Toorak, Hawthorn East, and Armadale, and is just
about fifty miles southeast on the Western Highway from Ballarat. This city, which was the host of the
Olympics at which the Blood in the Water game took place, is found at the mouth of the Yarra River and
overlooks Port Phillip Bay. For 10 points, name this capital of Victoria, the most populous non-Sydney
city in Australia.
ANSWER: Melbourne
This city was named for the Prime Minister who was thought to be Lord Byron's illegitimate son and
resigned over the Bedchamber Crisis. This home of Colonial Stadium and Monash University heads the
world's southernmost metro area with more than a million residents and was established by Batman's
Treaty. For 10 points, name this city overlooking Port Philip Bay, the capital of Victoria state and the
second-most populous metro area in Australia after Sydney.
ANSWER: Melbourne
This city was originally called Batmania after its founder, John Batman, and its suburbs today
include Stonnington and Boroondara. Ranked second behind Vancouver on The Economist's 2011
"most livable cities" list, this home city of (*) Monash University was its nation's first capital from 1901
to 1927. A mining company based in this city, BHP Billiton, owns the Ekati diamond mine in the Northwest
Territories and made a bid in 2010 for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. This city, situated on Port
Phillip Bay at the mouth of the Yarra River, saw its population boom after an 1850s gold rush. The host of
the 1956 Olympics, for 10 points, name this capital of Victoria province, the second-largest city in
Australia.
ANSWER: Melbourne
This city's suburbs include Southaven, Collierville, Olive Branch, and Horn Lake. It is the home of the Stax
Records museum, and The Pyramid was once this city's premier sports venue. This city is located on the
Chickasaw Bluffs and serves as the seat of Shelby County. Located along the Mississippi River, its metro
area spans three states, including Arkansas and Mississippi. For 10 points, name this largest city of
Tennessee, named for an ancient capital of Egypt.
ANSWER: Memphis
Mud Island is located in this city. In a hotel in this city, ducks live in a palace on the roof and march down
to a fountain in the lobby twice a day. The National Civil Rights Museum is at the Lorraine Motel in this
city. An attraction in this city has a green gate with musical notes written on it. Sun Studio is located in this
city, where WC Handy first got his start playing blues music. This seat of Shelby County is the largest city
on the Mississippi River. The world's largest barbecue competition is located in this city each May. Popular
tourist attractions in this city include the Peabody Hotel, Beale Street, and the estate of Elvis Presley,
Graceland. For 10 points, name this largest city in Tennessee.
ANSWER: Memphis, Tennessee
This nation is home to the volcanoes Iztaccihuatl (ISS-TACK-see-WAT-el) and Popocatepetl (PO-po-COTuh-PET-el). Another volcano here is a cinder cone that first appeared as a hole in a corn field and within 10
years grew 9,012 feet. The Bay of Campeche borders this country, whose tourist destinations include
Cozumel, Cabo San Lucas, Tijuana (tee-WAHN-uh), and Cancun. For 10 points, name this country in
which Ciudad Juarez (SEE-oo-dad WAR-ez) sits on the other side of the Rio Grande from Texas.
ANSWER: Mexico [or United Mexican States; or Estados Unidos Mexicanos]
The Chivela Pass, located in this country, has an important role in wind strength in the surrounding area.
This country also contains the Isthmus of Tehuantepec (teh-JUAN-teh-pec). The tallest mountain in this
country is the Pico de Orizaba (or-ith-AH-buh). The Paricutin volcano suddenly erupted in this country in
the twentieth century. Major cities in this country include Guadalajara and Veracruz. For 10 points, name
this country, home to the popular tourist destination of Cancun.
ANSWER: Mexico
This country's town of Batopilas once contained lucrative silver mines. Multiple classical capital cities in
this country have gone by the title "Tollan," meaning "among the reeds." This country and its northern
neighbor engaged in the long-simmering Chamizal border dispute over land created by a shifting riverbed.
The Fuertes River cuts through Copper Canyon in this country, whose citizens call the river demarcating
much of its northern border the Rio Bravo del Norte. The Pyramids of the Sun and Moon and the Avenue of
the Dead are found in this country's ancient city of Teotihuacan. For 10 points, name this country home of
the cities of Guadalajara and Cancun.
ANSWER: Mexico [or United Mexican States; or Estados Unidos Mexicanos]
This nation's state of Quintana Roo borders the state of Campeche. In this country, six rivers form
the Copper Canyon before merging into the Fuertes River to empty into the Sea of Cortez. One
province in this nation contains the Rio Conchos, which joins with the Rio Bravo del Norte in
Ojinaga, and this nation also includes the states of Sonora and [*] Tabasco. This country, which
contains the Yucatan peninsula and the city of Cancun, has another state that contains the border city of
Tijuana. Including Chihuahua and Baja California, for 10 points, name this Latin-American country directly
south of the United States.
ANSWER: Mexico
The Ixtoc I Oil Spill occurred in waters near this country, which is home to the archaeological site of
Monte Alban. Tiburon Island is found in one question of water mostly enclosed by this country, at whose
outlet lies Cabo San Lucas. The Bay of Campeche's (com-PAY-chayz) shores are owned by this country, as
is the majority of a peninsula that contains the state of Quintana Roo. For 10 points, name this country that
owns most of the Yucatan Peninsula and several Aztec ruins.
ANSWER: Mexico [or United Mexican States; or Estados Unidos Mexicanos]
Padre Island lies in this question of water, and its lowest point lies in Sigsbee Deep. The Suwanee and
Trinity Rivers flow into this question of water, which receives water from Vermilion and Apalachee
Bays. The Bay of Campeche forms an arm of it, into which the (*) Sabine and Brazos Rivers flow. Dry
Tortugas National Park lies in this question of water, and cities lying on it include Biloxi, Tamaulipas,
Veracruz, and Mobile. For ten points, identify this question of water into which the Mississippi River flows,
located northwest of the Caribbean Sea.
ANSWER: Gulf of Mexico
The Sigsbee Deep is the lowest point in this question of water, and oil is produced in its Bay of Campeche
[cam-"peach"-ee]. Rivers that empty into this question of water include the Coosa, Pearl, and Sabine,
and cities on its shore include Tampico, Veracruz, and (*) Corpus Christi. Home to Galveston Island
and the end of the Rio Grande and Mississippi River, for 10 points, name this site of the 2010 Deepwater
Horizon oil spill.
ANSWER: Gulf of Mexico
One area of this city is home to the triangular prism-shaped Torre Insignia and a massive run-down
apartment complex designed by Mario Pani. The Ajusco Mountains lie southwest of this city, and a
roundabout in this city circles a golden angel on a column that celebrates its country's independence. This
city's Plaza de las Tres Culturas was the site of student anti-government protests in 1968. A presidential
residence, Los Pinos, is found in this city's sprawling Chapultepec Park, and its Metropolitan Cathedral and
National Palace overlook the Zocalo. For 10 points, name this populous city built on the former site of
Tenochtitlan in the country south of the United States.
ANSWER: Mexico City [or Ciudad de Mexico; or Mexico, Distrito Federal; or Mexico, D.F.; prompt on "Mexico"]
This city's Paseo de la Reform is home to the "Angel of Independence" victory column and runs
through Chapultepec Park. Overlooked by the mound volcano Ajusco [ah-HOO-skoh], this city
north of (*) Puebla was built on an island in Lake Texcoco over the sacked ruins of Tenochtitlan; as a
result, the artificial valley prevents wind from clearing out heavy smog. The most populous North American
city is, for 10 points, what capital city?
ANSWER: Mexico City (accept Ciudad de Mexico)
A building in this city that used to be known as Black House became used for minting coins and now houses
a museum of cultures. A castle here which used to house royalty and presidents became a history museum in
1940. Ove Arup, Frank Gehry, and Fernando Romero recently designed an art museum named after its
patron's wife, Soumaya. A column surrounded by bronze statues is topped by a bronze Nike holding a
laurel and a broken chain in this city; that memorial was built in 1910 to commemorate the centennial of a
war for independence, and is titled The Angel of Independence. This city is built on the site that was once
the capital of the Nahua people and then, until it was destroyed by a Spanish invasion, the capital of the
Aztec Empire. Name this North American capital city.
ANSWER: Mexico City [or Ciudad de Mexico; prompt on Tenochtitlan]
"Major" Uruchurtu was the head of this city for fourteen years and resigned after protests over his
decision to remove tenements for an Olympic stadium. Miguel Angel de Quevedo built an arboretum in this
city to serve as a seedling nursery for reforestation projects in its neighborhood of Coyoacan. The Party of
the Democratic Revolution has won its head of government since elections started in 1997. An 1985
earthquake killed over 10,000 people in this city. Monuments such as the Angel of Independence lie on its
Paseo de la Reforma, which goes from its central plaza, the Zocalo, to Chapultepec Castle. For 10 points,
name this capital of Mexico.
ANSWER: Mexico City, Federal District [or Ciudad de Mexico, D.F.]
Slums in this city are known as ciudades perdidas, or "lost cities". Modern buildings here include the
Museo Soumaya, named after a magnate's late wife. Milpa Alta and Magdalena Contreras are among its 16
boroughs, or delegaciones. The Torre Latinoamerica stands near this city's Plaza de la Constitucion, a large
public square also called the Zocalo. This city's main thoroughfares include Insurgentes Avenue and Paseo
de la Reforma. The main campus of its National Autonomous University is in Coyoacan. The Ninos Heroes
died trying to defend this city's Chapultepec hill. This city was originally on an island in Lake Texcoco and
was founded on the site of Tenochtitlan. For 10 points, name this metropolis that forms its nation's Federal
District, the capital of a North American nation.
ANSWER: Mexico City or Ciudad de Mexico [accept Federal District or Distrito Federal until mentioned]
This city's borough of Milpa Alta borders a state with the same name as the country in which it is located.
The Cumbres del Ajusco National Park, located near this city, contains the source of the Lerma River which
flows into Lake Chapala. The Paseo de la Reforma is a wide boulevard in this city and was modeled after
the Champs-Elysees. In 1824, this city beat out (*) Queretaro to become the capital of the nation in which it
is located. This city lies in the bed of the former Lake Texcoco upon which Tenochtitlan was established.
For 10 points, name this capital of America's southern neighbor.
ANSWER: Mexico City or Ciudad de Mexico
This city is bisected by a wide road called the Paseo de la Reforma, which passes by a monument
known as "The Angel of Independence." Its largest park is overlooked by Chapultepec Castle. It was built
near the remnants of Lake Texcoco over the ruins of Tenochtitlan, the main city of the Aztec civilization.
For 10 points, name this most populous city in North America.
ANSWER: Mexico City
The longest avenue in this city, named for the soldiers who fought for its country's independence, is the
Avenida de los Insurgentes. Austrian officer Ferdinand von Rosenzweig designed the Paseo de la Reforma
that runs through this city diagonally. Chapultepec Castle is one of the landmarks of this city. This city's air
quality has improved drastically since 1992, when it was the most polluted city on the planet. For 10 points,
name this city built on the former site of Tenochtitlan, the capital of America's southern neighbor.
ANSWER: Mexico City [or La Ciudad de Mexico]
Poor neighborhoods in this city include Allapattah, the home of a namesake gang, as well as the
historically African-American Overtown. Every March, this city celebrates a carnival called the
Calle Ocho, while a controversial construction project is underway to construct a billion-dollar port
tunnel under this city's Government Cut channel. The Supreme Court heard a case concerning
Santeria animal sacrifices arising from this city's suburb of (*) Hialeah, where English is the native
language of only 7 percent of the population. A 1980 riot and the 1998 drug war centered on its crimeridden Liberty City neighborhood, but its best known neighborhood is undoubtedly Little Havana, the
center of its Cuban community. For 10 points, name this seat of Dade County in southern Florida.
ANSWER: Miami
Southeast of this city lies the Safety Valve, a series of shoals on which is built a group of raised buildings
called Stiltsville. The artificial islands of the Venetian Causeway extend east from near this city's Overtown
district. It's not New York, but this city's Freedom Tower overlooks Biscayne Bay. The Villa Vizcaya is a
historic mansion in the Coconut Grove neighborhood of this seat of Dade County. The Calle Ocho Festival
occurs annually in this city in the same metropolitan area as Fort Lauderdale. For 10 points, name this city
whose Little Havana is the heart of America's Cuban immigrant community, in the south of Florida.
ANSWER: Miami, Florida
After a tabloid in this city printed scandalous reports, administrator Arthur Teele shot himself in the
lobby of a newspaper's building. It was where police officers killed Arthur McDuffie while trying to arrest
him, kicking off a series of race riots in the neighborhoods of Overtown and Liberty City. This city is
where the popular Spanish-language newspaper El Nuevo Herald is published and is where the majority of
migrants from the Mariel boatlift settled. This city's metropolitan area includes Broward and Dade counties.
For ten points, name this southeastern Florida city noted for its significant Cuban-born population.
ANSWER: Miami
One upper class neighborhood in this city includes the Cushman School and the Eden Roc Hotel
which are part of this city's namesake "Modernist Architecture" style. This city is also home to the
proposed Brickell World Plaza Center which would make it the largest building in this city's
downtown. Off the coast of this city is a group of houses on the water known as Stiltsville, and this
city is also home to an immigration memorial called Freedom Tower. One part of this city houses the
Villa Vizcaya and is known as Coconut Grove. One famous neighborhood in this city celebrates the annual
Calle Ocho Festival every March. The Venetian Causeway is located in this city as well as a namesake
university in this city's suburb of Coral Gables. For 10 points identify this city which is also home to the
American Airlines Arena and Little Havana, the seat of Dade County Florida.
ANSWER: Miami
A 2004 United Nations report claimed this city had the highest proportion of foreign-born residents in the
world, in front of Toronto. This city is the only major American city bordered by two national parks, one of
which covers much of the lagoon that is the city's main question of water. Its nickname comes from its rapid
population growth from its founding in 1896 by Julia Tuttle due to the southern expansion of Henry
Flagler's railroad. Known for neighborhoods such as Liberty City and Overtown, for 10 points, name this
city, the "Magic City" bordered by Biscayne National Park and Everglades National Park, the second-most populous in Florida.
ANSWER: Miami
Architect Morris Lapidus designed several hotels in this city in the 1950s, including the Eden Roc and the
Fontainebleau. This city was founded on the land of Julia Tuttle, making it the only major American city
founded by a woman. The Casa Casuarina and the Delano Hotel are part of this city's Art Deco district. In
2012, artist Red Grooms received criticism for a $2.5 million animatronic sculpture built in this city, which
hosts the annual Calle Ocho Festival. Hialeah is northwest of this city, the world's busiest cruise ship port.
This city is home to the Little Haiti neighborhood, and its Venetian Causeway connects it to a namesake
beach built on barrier islands in Biscayne Bay. For 10 points, name this home of Little Havana and seat of
Dade County, a large city in southeastern Florida.
ANSWER: Miami, Florida [or Miami Beach]
The Menominee river and the St. Clair river form boundaries around this state, two principle rivers of which
are the Au Sable and Cheboygan. The Porcupine Mountains contains the Lake of the Clouds in this state,
which sees its East and Middle branches of the Escanaba river join in the town of Gwinn. Saginaw Bay
separates its "Thumb" region, and the Straits of Mackinac separate its Upper and Lower portions. It is the
only state consisting of two peninsulas and bounded by four of the five Great Lakes. For 10 points, name
this state whose cities include Grand Rapids, East Lansing, Flint, and Detroit.
ANSWER: Michigan
This state was home to a copper mine called the "Nonesuch Mine" which is found in the
Porcupine Mountains. It contains such rivers as the Ontonagon, and its non-Minnesota "Twin
Cities" are St. Joseph and Benton Harbor. This state's national park is located on (*) Isle Royale. It
contains the third longest suspension bridge in the world, which spans the Straits of Mackinac (MACK-aNAW). For 10 points, name this state which is composed of two peninsulas and is bounded by four of the
Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Michigan
This state's largest city contains Belle Isle Park and is connected to Windsor by the Ambassador Bridge.
The porch of the Grand Hotel is billed as the world's largest on its resort island of Mackinac
(mack-in-AW), and Mackinac also names the bridge connecting this state's lower and upper peninsula.
Those peninsulas are surrounded by the Great Lakes. For 10 points, name this state that contains Lansing
and Detroit.
ANSWER: Michigan
In the north of this state lie the Baraga Forest and the Porcupine Mountains. Though Marshall did not
become the capital of this state, a "governor's mansion" was built there. The suburb of Eastpointe in this
state changed its name from one associated with a nearby city. Bad Axe lies over sixty miles north of the St.
Clair and Huron Rivers in this state, which contains Muskegon, Traverse City, and Saginaw Bay. The
Straits of Mackinac divide this state, in which Kalamazoo and Flint are found. This state, which borders
four Great Lakes, has an Upper Peninsula. For 10 points, name this state whose cities include Lansing, Ann
Arbor, and Detroit.
ANSWER: Michigan
In a conflict regarding this geographical feature, Deputy Sheriff Joseph Wood was stabbed by "Two
Stickney," the son of a rebellious major. Turtle Island in the Maumee River straddles it. This geographical
feature was disputed by Governors Robert Lucas and Stevens Mason, necessitating a convention that gave
one side valuable copper mines in the Keweenaw. After a bloodless war, this boundary was set when the
northern state received statehood and almost all of the Upper Peninsula. For ten points, name this once
disputed geographical boundary between two Midwestern states, a dispute that centered on the city of
Toledo.
ANSWER: the Michigan-Ohio border [or the Ohio-Michigan border; prompt on Toledo until it is read]
This lake is the site of Northerly Island, once the home to Meigs Field airport. It is traversed by the SS
Badger, which runs from Manitowoc to Ludington. This lake contains an island that was once a Mormon
kingdom run by James Strang. The Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore is located on this lake, which
contains Beaver Island and is the only Great Lake located entirely within the U.S. For 10 points, name this
lake that Chicago is found on, located to the west of its namesake state.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
In 2013, ice boulders came up on this question of water's shores, being donned this lake's namesake
"marbles." James J. Strange established a Mormon kingdom on this question of water's largest island, Beaver
Island. According to legend, two bear cubs drowned in this lake, forming the North and South Manitou
Islands. The Old Mission Peninsula splits an extension of it, the Grand Traverse Bay. The Door Peninsula
juts into this lake, which is connected to Lake Huron by the Straits of Mackinac. Milwaukee and Chicago
are cities on its shores. For 10 points, name this Great Lake, the namesake of an American state.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
The Old Mission Peninsula divides this question of water's Grand Traverse Bay in two. This question of
water contains the Manitou Islands and the Beaver Islands, and the Muskegon River flows into it.
Lake Winnebago is connected to this question of water by the Fox River, and this question of water is
drained by the Straits of (*) Mackinac (MACK-kuh-naw). The Door Peninsula and the Upper Peninsula
separate this lake from its largest inlet, Green Bay. Cities that lie on this lake include Milwaukee and
Chicago. For ten points, identify this Great Lake which drains into Lake Huron and borders its namesake
state to the east.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
This question of water's largest island was once ruled by Mormon dissident James Strang and is
called Beaver Island. People cross this lake by boarding a ferry at Ludington called the SS Badger. It
has the site of the Sleeping Bear Dunes National (*) Lakeshore, which references a Chippewa myth. The
Straits of Mackinac separate it from Lake Huron. For 10 points, name this only Great Lake entirely within
the United States, the lake which Chicago rests upon.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
Islands in this question of water include the Beaver, Hog, Fox Islands as well as the Rocky, Rock, and Gravel
Islands. Its 1,638-mile long coastline is often referred to as the "Third Coast", and its sands are known as
"singing". This lake is the largest one in the world that is completely within one country, with a surface area
of 22,400 square miles. That country is the United States. Recently, it was discovered that there are only 4
Great Lakes, as this lake and Lake Huron are actually one massive lake, the largest freshwater one in the
world. Cities on its coast include Gary, Milwaukee and Green Bay. For 10 points, name this lake that is
visible from Chicago and shares a name with a bordering state.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
Washington Island and the Beaver Island archipelago are located in this lake. State parks surrounding
this lake include Muskegon and Traverse City. The Mackinac (MA-kin-aw) Bridge spans the northeastern
part of this lake, and the Door Peninsula juts into its western side. An offshoot of this lake is Green Bay,
and cities lying on it include Milwaukee and Chicago. For 10 points, name this Great Lake, which has the
same name as a U.S. state.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
The Nordhouse Dunes Wilderness lies on the shores of this lake, and this lake's Door Peninsula is
surrounded by islands like Pilot Island and Rock Island. Parks on this lake's coast include the
Muskegon and Silver Lake State Parks. Both the Big Bay de Noc and the Little Bay de Noc are inlets
of this lake, while ports on this lake include Benton Harbor, (*) Racine, and Traverse City. The Beaver
Island archipelago lies in this lake, and the Straits of Mackinac connect this lake to the other Great Lakes.
Milwaukee and Chicago both lie on, for ten points, which Great Lake, the only Great Lake located entirely
within the United States?
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
The Muskegon River flows into this lake. Traverse City is on this lake's coast. The Beaver Island
archipelago lies at the northern end of this lake. Ports on this lake include Benton Harbor, Waukegan, and
Racine. The Straits of Mackinac (MACK-kuh-naw) connect this lake to the rest of the Great Lakes. Green
Bay is an inlet on this lake, which is the only Great Lake entirely within the United States. For 10 points,
name this lake connected to Lake Huron and bordered by Chicago.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
Henry Moore's Man Enters the Cosmos is located next to this question of water. The world's oldest
planetarium, Adler Planetarium, is on a manmade island in this question of water, which also houses the Shedd
Aquarium. A ferry service on the SS Badger crosses it to reach the city of Manitowoc. Mies van der Rohe
designed two apartments on the "drive" which runs parallel to this lake's shore. Grant Park abuts this lake,
and Green Bay is located in its northwest. It is connected to its northeast neighbor by the Straits of
Mackinac. Cities on this lake include Milwaukee and Chicago. For 10 points, name this Great Lake located
entirely within the US.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
Islands in this lake include bird sanctuaries named Hog Island and Fisherman Island. A man-made
peninsula on this lake is Northerly Island, the site of an airport named Meigs Field. This lake contains
islands which according to legend commemorate two drowned bear cubs. Located off the Sleeping Bear
Dunes National Lakeshore, those islands are North and South Manitou Islands. The crazed Mormon "king"
James Strang ruled an island in this lake called Beaver Island. Tourists cross this lake on the SS Badger,
which takes people from Ludington to Manitowoc. For 10 points, name this only Great Lake located
entirely within the United States, which has such cities as Chicago on its shores.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
This lake is the site of Northerly Island, once the home to Meigs Field airport. It is traversed by
the SS Badger, which runs from Manitowoc to Ludington. This lake contains an island that was once
a Mormon kingdom run by James Strang. The Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore is located on
this lake, which contains (*) Beaver Island and is the only Great Lake located entirely within the U.S. For
10 points, name this lake that Chicago is found on, located to the west of its namesake state.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan
James Strang ruled a self-proclaimed kingdom of dissident Mormons on an island in this question of water,
Beaver Island. In 1900, a river that flowed into this question of water was redirected with canals to empty into
the Mississippi River watershed. Sleeping Bear Dunes is a national lakeshore on this lake near the popular
vacation town of Traverse City. The Door Peninsula separates the rest of this lake from Green Bay. An
annual yacht race which does not begin at the Black River begins at Chicago. For 10 points, name this only
Great Lake entirely within the United States.
ANSWER: Lake Michigan [accept Beaver Island before "question of water" is read]
The existence of this entity was first postulated by Matthew Maury, though most of it was not discovered
until the voyage of the Challenger. This structure was likely created during the Triassic period, with its
formation playing a role in the splitting of Pangaea. The most notable part of it normally visible today is the
Reykjanes (ray-KAHN-es) Ridge, which bisects Iceland. About a thousand miles wide at its widest point,
this location is significantly longer than the Andes. Identify this mountain range, most of which can be
found about halfway between the Americas and Africa and Europe.
ANSWER: mid-Atlantic ridge
One of Europe's leading horse tracks, the Ippodromo del Gallopo, is found in this city, whose residents may
relax at the manmade Lake Idroscalo near Linate airport. Suburbs such as Monza and Bollate and creeks
such as the Lambro and the Nirone surround this city, whose slum is known as Brianza. This home to the
International Sample Trade Fair contains the castle known as the Palazzo di Brera and the art gallery at the
Pinacoteca di Brera, as well as the Pirelli Building on the Piazza della Repubblica. This capital of
Lombardy is also home to La Scala. For 10 points, name this city near the Po River, a large urban area in
northern Italy.
ANSWER: Milano
This city's initiative to provide free wireless internet started at its Cathedral Square Park. Its Monarch
Trail is a good place to check out migrating butterflies, and this city is also home to the Boerner
Botanical Gardens. The Root River rises in New Berlin and flows through this city, the largest on that
river's course. This city spans three counties, including Washington and Waukesha. It is located at the
confluence of its namesake river with Kinnickinnic and the Menomonee. Situated on Lake Michigan, for
10 points, name this largest city in Wisconsin.
ANSWER: Milwaukee, Wisconsin
This city was formed by the merger of Juneautown and Kilbournetown, and its Mitchell Park
Horticultural Conservatory is known locally as "the Domes." This city is located where the
Menomonee and Kinnickinnic Rivers join with its namesake river to form a bay on Lake Michigan.
This city is the location of The Captain Frederick Pabst Mansion and (*) Marquette University. For 10
points, name this city known for its brewing industry, the home of Harley-Davidson and the largest city in
Wisconsin.
ANSWER: Milwaukee, Wisconsin
The Leaf Hills located in this state's Otter Tail County are home to its highest point, Inspiration Peak. The
River named for this state rises from the Big Stone Lake and flows by towns such as St. Peter and New
Ulm. International Falls is located near this state's northern border, whose "Northwest Angle" is the only
mainland region north of the 49th parallel. This state's Lake Itasca is the source of the Mississippi River,
and the St. Louis River flows into Lake Superior near its third largest city, Duluth. Bordered by Iowa to the
south and Wisconsin to the east, for 10 points, identify this state with capital at St. Paul and whose largest
city is Minneapolis.
ANSWER: Minnesota
One river in this state is named because of its Jerusalem artichokes, while another river is the La
Seuer, which is itself a tributary of the Blue Earth River. Southwest of the Northwest Angle, is the
U.S. exclave of Elm Point. It also features the High Falls of Tettegouche and Lake Itasca. Its Lakes of
the Woods County is the northernmost point of the continental U.S. Its cities include Maple Grove,
Minnetonka, Plymouth and Rochester. For ten points, name this state that borders the Dakotas and
Wisconsin that features twin cities of Saint Paul and Minneapolis.
ANSWER: Minnesota
This US state borders Rainy River, and it contains Upper Red Lake and Lower Red Lake. Its Arrowhead
Region contains Eagle Mountain and its four large iron ranges, the largest of which is the Mesabi. Its
Northwest Angle in Lake of the Woods County is the only part of the United States outside Alaska north of
the 49th parallel. This state forms part of the northwest border of Lake Superior and is known for its over
ten thousand lakes. Name this state that includes Duluth (duh-LOOTH), and whose capital of St. Paul is one
of the Twin Cities alongside Minneapolis.
ANSWER: Minnesota
David Rittenhouse bought the land on which the first of these buildings was located; when construction
was finished in 1792, that building was the largest in Philadelphia. Another of these buildings, known as
the "Granite Lady," was the only financial institution still standing in San Francisco following the 1906
earthquake. Only two of these buildings, in Denver and Philadelphia, produce objects used by the general
public. The Bullion Depository at Fort Knox is considered one of these buildings even though it is not a
production facility. For 10 points, name these U.S. government buildings at which coins are made.
ANSWER: United States Mint Facilities
The source of the Tombigbee River is in Itawamba County in this state. This state is the southern
terminus of the Natchez Trace, along which Meriweather Lewis famously met his end. Land in what is now
this state was sold to private companies for less than two cents an acre in the Yazoo land fraud. The Yazoo
River forms a delta with a river with the same name as this state. It contains the cities of Biloxi and
Gulfport. For 10 points, identify this state with capital at Jackson.
ANSWER: Mississippi
In a story depicting an "Autumn" in this region, Isaac McCaslin sees that Roth Edmonds has killed a doe
just after helping Roth pay off a black lover. David Cohen quipped that this region extended from the
Peabody Hotel to Catfish Row. The east of this region contains the cities of Greenwood and Vicksburg.
Bounded on the east by the Yazoo River, this region is the birthplace of an early style of blues practiced by
Robert Johnson, and has historically been home to a large black population. For ten points, identify this
northwest section of Mississippi once advantageous for cotton plantations due to its location near a
namesake river.
ANSWER: Mississippi Delta
This river is spanned by the longest cable-stayed bridge in the United States, the John James Audubon
Bridge. The Skunk, Zumbro, and Kaskaskia rivers are all tributaries of this river, whose only waterfall is St.
Anthony Falls. Near the mouth of this river, some of its discharge is diverted into the Atchafalaya River.
This river, which reaches its widest point at Lake Winnibigoshish, has its source in Lake Itasca and is joined
by the Missouri at St. Louis. For 10 points, name this river that flows through New Orleans into the Gulf of
Mexico.
ANSWER: Mississippi River
A gaseous upwelling phenomenon known as the "mud lumps" often takes place near a fishing village
on an old barge called the Taj near the mouth of this river. The Coon Rapids dam is the limit of upriver
navigation on this river and the only natural waterfall on this river was the now-dammed St. Anthony's
Falls. A series of dams known as the Old River control structure prevents this river's course from switching
to the Atchafalaya river, and it is crossed by bridges such as the Eads Bridge, the Rock Island Centennial
Bridge and the Huey P. Long Bridge. For 10 points, identify this distributary of the Red, Ohio, and
Missouri rivers, the longest river in the United States.
ANSWER: Mississippi River
Minor tributaries of this river include the Skunk and Black Rivers, and its source is located in Clearwater
County. This river's flow was disrupted by the New Madrid earthquake, and Joliet and Marquette famously
explored this river. Port cities on this river include Memphis and Baton Rouge. Its source, Lake Itasca, is
located in Minnesota, and its biggest tributary, nicknamed "The Big Muddy," is the Missouri River. For 10
points, name this largest river in North America.
ANSWER: Mississippi River
A byway that follows the entire length of this river is designated by a sign with a green pilot's
wheel and is called the Great River Road. This river's 1927 flood led to the passage of the 1928 Flood
Control Act. The Old River Control Structure was set up to stop this river from distributing too
much of flow to the Atchafalaya River. This river's headwaters come from Lake (*) Itasca. For 10
points, name this river that passes through ten states after it originates in Minnesota and before it empties
from Louisiana into the Gulf of Mexico.
ANSWER: Mississippi River
This state's Three Rivers Area contains the city of Poplar Bluffs, and bodies of water in this state include
Clearwater Lake, the St. Francis River, and Table Rock Lake. The Osage plain covers most of its western
portion, and it contains the northernmost portion of the Mississippi embayment. This state's tallest point is
at Taum Sauk Mountain, and the Ozarks plateau lies in its southern half. Its namesake river runs through it
before becoming its border with Nebraska, and the Mississippi River forms the boundary between this state
and Illinois. For 10 points name this Midwestern state with capital Jefferson City and major cities like
Kansas City and St. Louis.
ANSWER: Missouri
This state's highest peak is located within the St. Francois Mountains, which is bordered by the Mississippi
Alluvial Plains to the south. This state's Marvel Cave contains the one of the largest entrance rooms in
North America and eventually became the basis of the Silver Dollar City theme park. A massive 1812
earthquake originated in this state's New Madrid Seismic Zone, and this state experienced a dioxin
contamination in the 1970s at Times Beach. The Pony Express and Oregon Trail began in this state, and
the Mississippi River and its namesake river converge at St. Louis. For 10 points, name this Midwestern
state with capital at Jefferson City.
ANSWER: Missouri
This river flows through five "Great Falls" including the Black Eagle Falls and the Rainbow Falls. It
passes through Lake Sakakawea and is impeded by the Fort Peck Dam. Its silt deposits give it the nickname
"Big Muddy." This river's tributaries include the Osage, while it is formed from the confluence of the
Jefferson, Gallatin, and Madison Rivers. Cities it flows through include Pierre and Kansas City. For 10
points, name this river that joins the Mississippi River near St. Louis, which is in its namesake state.
ANSWER: Missouri River
One of this river's largest tributaries joins it near the town of Buford before rising from the area around
Younts Peak and Thorofare Mountain. It is stopped by the Oahe Dam and the Garrison Dam, the latter of
which creates Lake Sakakawea. It receives the Milk and Musselshell Rivers near the Fort Peck Dam, while
it is formed near the town of Three Forks from waterways including the Jefferson and Madison Rivers. It
also flows past a series of cataracts called the Great Falls. For 10 points, name this U.S. river that joins the
Mississippi near St. Louis.
ANSWER: Missouri River
This river, which has a primary source near Brower's Spring, has fed the reservoir Lake Sakakawea
since the construction of the Garrison Dam. The Great Falls of this river include the Black Eagle and
Rainbow Falls, which lies downstream from the confluence of the Jefferson and (*) Madison Rivers. It
begins at Three Forks and passes Council Bluffs before receiving its largest tributary, the Platte. The Big
Sioux River is another tributary, and the Heart River joins it in Billings County. It runs from the Rocky
Mountains to St. Louis. For ten points, name this longest American river, a tributary of the Mississippi that
shares its name with a U.S. state.
ANSWER: Missouri River
Tributaries of this river include the Big and Little Nehama, the Niobrara, the White, and Vermillion. A
current environmental issue centers on maintaining its summer flow for a dwindling amount of river barge
traffic, which is made possible by operations at the Fort Randall, Gavins Point, Big Bend, Garrison, Oahe
[oo-AH-hee], and Fort Peck Dams. Beginning at the confluence of the Gallatin, Jefferson, and Madison
Rivers, more notable tributaries include the Yellowstone, Big Sioux, and Platte. For 10 points, name this
long tributary that begins in Montana and enters the Mississippi just north of St. Louis in its namesake state.
ANSWER: Missouri River
This river's "Breaks" region was the hideout for a gang of cattle rustlers targeted by an
enforcement group nicknamed "Stuart's Stranglers." Animals crossing this river appear in paintings
by Charles Marion Russell, whose name is used for a wildlife refuge on the north bank of this river
upstream of the U. L. Bend. This river is formed by the confluence of the Gallatin, Madison, and (*)
Jefferson Rivers northwest of Yellowstone National Park. Fort Mandan was built along this river by the
Lewis and Clark expedition, which used this river to travel across the present-day Dakotas. For 10 points,
name this longest tributary of the Mississippi, which joins it at St. Louis.
ANSWER: Missouri River
This river's tributaries include the Niobrara and the Marias. The Milk River flows into this river at
Fort Peck, while the James River flows into it near Yankton. Billings lies on one tributary of this
river, on which Lakes Oahe and Francis Case can be found. The Garrison Dam forms Lake
Sakakawea on this river, which flows past Great Falls, (*) Council Bluffs, and Sioux City before
meeting with the Platte River. The Jefferson, Madison, and Gallatin Rivers join in Montana to form this
river, which then flows past Bismarck, Omaha, and Kansas City. For ten points, name this longest tributary
of the Mississippi river.
ANSWER: Missouri River
This river passes through Ponca State Park, and it ultimately begins at Brower's Spring. The PickSloan program developed this river, resulting in the creation of Lake Sharpe behind Big Bend Dam,
as well as Fort Peck Dam. It forms near Three Forks where the (*) Gallatin, Jefferson, and Madison
rivers meet, and its tributaries include the Yellowstone and Platte rivers. It passes by the state capitals of
Bismarck and Pierre after beginning in Montana. For 10 points, name this river that flows past St. Louis
before entering the Mississippi in its namesake state.
ANSWER: Missouri River
One dam on this river is located where the Spokane Hills meet the Big Bend Mountains. Along with
Canyon Ferry Dam, Garrison Dam on this river forms Lake Sakakawea. This river is formed by three
headwater tributaries which meet near a town in Gallatin County; those tributaries form this river in Three
Forks, Montana. Besides the Madison and Jefferson Rivers, other tributaries of this river include the Platte
and Yellowstone Rivers. This river flows through the Dakotas before forming part of the border between
the namesake state and Kansas. For 10 points, name this river which joins with the Mississippi River near
St. Louis.
ANSWER: Missouri River
This question of water is home to periodic "Jubilees," in which changing levels of oxygen in its waters
drive fish, crabs, and other creatures towards the shore and the surface, allowing for massive, easy
harvests of seafood. Linked by Grant's Pass to a nearby Sound, the Middle Bay Lighthouse stands at
its center, arising from the water on a series of stilts. Lesser rivers that flow into it include the Fish,
Deer, and Dog Rivers, while its boundary is framed by the (*) Fort Morgan Peninsula and Dauphin
Island. A battle fought in this question of water saw the use of the tactic of moving ships quickly through a
minefield to bring them inside the range of the other side's shore-based guns. That battle saw the crippling
of the Tennessee by forces under David Farragut and was fought during the Civil War. For 10 points, name
this Alabama bay, the namesake of a city on its shores.
ANSWER: Mobile Bay [accept just Mobile after "Bay" is read in the final line of the question]
Under the reign of King Fahd, the Saudi government funded this city's Mosque of Islamic Solidarity,
while its Mosque of Fakr-ad-Din is located in its oldest part, Hamar Wayne. This city's Garesa Palace was
built by the Sultan of Zanzibar. The headquarters of Hormuud are in its violent Bakaara Market, a hub of
guns trading. A namesake "Mile" in this city was used by troops to evacuate during a 1993 battle known as
Black Hawk Down. For 10 points, name this city overlooking the Indian Ocean on the Horn of Africa, the
capital of Somalia.
ANSWER: Mogadishu
This desert contains the Calico Early Man Site, the only Western Hemisphere dig of Louis Leakey.
Within this desert, sodium bicarbonate is harvested from the dry Soda Lake. It contains the towns of
Lancaster and Victorville, and its southwest is the foothills of the San Gabriel and San Bernardino
mountains. Also bordering Lake Mead, its intersection with the Great Basin is found at Death Valley. For
10 points, name this southwestern American desert in Nevada and California, the home of Joshua Tree
National Park.
ANSWER: Mojave Desert
While it is not in South Africa, a Johannesburg is located in this desert which is bordered to the south by the
Chocolate, San Bernardino, and San Gabriel Mountains. Military installations within this desert include
Fort Irwin and Edwards Air Force Base, and the Salton Sea and Imperial Valley lie to its south. To the
north of this desert lie the Sierra Nevada, and it is notable for its Joshua Trees, which have a namesake
national park in this desert. For 10 points, name this desert located in southeastern California and which
contains Death Valley.
ANSWER: Mojave Desert
The Cahul region is a major wine-growing area in this country, which also produces the "Queen of
England's wine", Negru de Purcari. This modern-day nation's second-most-populous city was
founded by Russian general Alexander Suvarov. Forests that grow in this nation's hilly areas are
known as "Codri". This nation's "northern capital" lies on the Raut River. The cities of Bender and
Balti are controlled by this nation, which is currently run by president (*) Nicolae Timofti. The
Dniester and Prut rivers bound most of this nation, the southernmost point of which contains the city of
Giurgiulesti. Its second-most-populous city is Tiraspol, and it considers the breakaway republic of
Transnistria to be a part of its territory. For 10 points, name this landlocked nation that has its capital at
Chisinau.
ANSWER: Republic of Moldova [or Republica Moldova]
In the Medieval Ages, it encompassed a major section of the eastern portion of the eponymous principality,
which at its largest extent stretched from the Dniester River in the east to the proximity of the Carpathian
Mountains in the west. At one point, it was controlled by the Ottomans in the west, while Russia annexed of
the rest of the region. Traditionally, its area between the Dniester and Prut rivers was known as Bessarabia.
After declaring its independence in 1991, this country became a formal member of the Commonwealth of
Independent States in 1994 and established its first post-Soviet constitution. FTP, name this country led by
President Vladimir Vorinin with its capital at Chisinau.
ANSWER: Moldova
The national sport of this country, a form of wrestling derived from ancient Egyptian culture and Biblical
principles, is called tranta and titles the first film by native son Anatol Codru. This country's Cahul district
contains the city of Giurgiulesti ["Gyur-gyu-LESH-ti"], which lies on a river that forms this country's
western border, the Prut River. Following the 1806-1812 Russo-Turkish War, much of the land that would
become this country was annexed as Bessarabia. Its second-largest city is Tiraspol, which is located on the
eastern Dniester in the breakaway republic of Trans-nistria. For ten points, name this landlocked former
Soviet republic which has its capital at Chisinau ["KISH-in-aw"].
ANSWER: Republic of Moldova [or Republica Moldova]
Charles McEwen Hyde wrote that the most notable resident of this island was "a coarse dirty
man," which prompted a literary rebuttal from Robert Louis Stevenson. Jack London wrote that
this island was an "accident of fate," but that he did not need to wear "long gauntleted gloves"
while visiting this island. It is the only site in the United States where two Roman Catholic saints
resided for a significant period of time. A historical park on this island contains a facility whose
residents were advocated for by local celebrity Don Ho. This island's colony of Kalaupapa was
where the saints Marianne Cope and Father Damien attended the ill for many years. For 10
points, name this Hawaiian island best known for once having a leper colony located on it.
ANSWER: Molokai
Just outside this city, disabled workers are employed at the Bombolulu workshops as artisans. This city
is a few miles north of the tourist-frequented Diani Beach.This city's Moi Avenue is home to two towering
sculptures of elephant tusks. Fort Jesus was built by Europeans near this city's Old Town. This city's
namesake island is split from the mainland by Tudor Creek, and its Kilindini Harbor was a major center of
the Swahili slave trade. For ten points, name this port city in Kenya.
ANSWER: Mombasa
Around 20 percent of this nation's landmass was recovered from the sea. The highest point in this nation is
535 feet above sea level and located on the slope of Mont Agel, whose peak is in the territory of another
country surrounding this one on three sides. This nation plays host to the only marathon whose course
passes through three different sovereign nations, and one of the hardest Formula One Grands Prix. This
nation ranges from 382 yards to two thirds of a mile wide. Its estimated thirty five thousand citizens cannot
enter an edifice in its east hosting a casino. For 10 points, name this second smallest sovereign nation
located on the French Riviera which contains Monte Carlo.
ANSWER: Monaco
On special occasions, these peoples cook an animal by filling its stomach with hot stones. A common
meal for these peoples is buuz, a steamed dumpling usually filled with mutton. The largest group of them
today is the Khalkha. They are fond of drinking fermented horse milk called airag. The traditional homes of
these peoples contain a center ring, passed down from the father, known as a shangrak; those traditional
homes are yurts called ger. Their first writing system was vertical and derived from the Uighurs, and they
constitute the majority of the population of Ulaanbaatar. For 10 points, name these peoples united by
Genghis Khan.
ANSWER: Mongols
This country's residents celebrate an annual festival whose events include horse racing, archery, and
wrestling, known as "naadam." With its northern neighbor, this country contains Uvs Lake. This country is
subject to harsh winter storms known as "zuds." The least densely populated country in the world, a large
portion of it is located within the Gobi desert. For 10 points, name this landlocked country found between
Russia and China.
ANSWER: Mongolia
Anthropologist Roy Chapman Andrews visited this country in 1922 and heard its prime minister
discuss a cryptid that is five feet long, can discharge a fatal blast of electricity, and can spit acid that
turns anything yellow and kills humans. This country's Djadochta Formation is the location of a
sandstone ridge named for its orange-red color where all known (*) velociraptor fossils have been
found, the Flaming Cliffs. The Ubsunur Hollow is located near this most sparsely-populated country's
border with Russia. Orkhon is the smallest of this country's "aimag" provinces and is home to its second
most populous city, Erdenet. For 10 points, name this Asian country where most of the Gobi Desert is
located.
ANSWER: Mongolia [or Mongol Uls]
The ceremonial single-piece, sashed dress worn by both genders in this country is known as the "del,"
and a traditional building here has a toono opening for smoke and is a rounded tent called a "ger." This
country's highest point is Khuiten Peak, which is found in the western portion of this nation; its largest lake
is Khovsgol Nuur. Another lake in this country, Uvs Nuur, lies near the city of Ulaangom. The sacred Tuul
River flows through this nation's capital city, and the southern portion of this country contains parts of the
Gobi Desert. For 10 points, name this Asian country that lies between Russia and China, with capital at
Ulan Bator.
ANSWER: Mongolia
This nation is divided into 21 aimags, one of which, Tov, surrounds its capital. Its highest point, Khuiten
Peak, lies in the Altai Mountain range on its western border and is also known as Friendship Peak. This
nation's Lake Khovsgol is one of the largest freshwater lakes in Asia. Bordered to the north by Russia and
on all other sides by China, for ten points, identify this nation which contains part of the Gobi desert, a landlocked Asian nation with capital at Ulaanbaatar.
ANSWER: Mongolia
This country's flag is comprised of three vertical bands of red, blue, and red, with the band furthest left
containing a Buddhist soyombo. It is divided into twenty-one aimags, deems winters that make it impossible
for livestock to graze as "zuds", and contains cities like Choibalsan, Erdenet, Darkhan, and its largest lake
by surface area is Uvs Nuur while its tallest peak is Mount Khuiten, located in the Altai Mountains in the
west of this country. Administered from a capital whose name translates as "Red Hero", for 10 points what
is this nation whose southern portion covered by the Gobi desert, a landlocked Asian country with capital at
Ulaanbaatar?
ANSWER: Mongolia
Khuiten Peak is part of the Five Saints Peaks in this nation's section of the Altay Mountains, which form
part of the northwestern boundary of this nation. Lake Khovsgol lies near this nation's Khangai Mountains
and drains north into the Selenge River. The northern range of the wild Bactrian camel lies in this country,
which lies north of Xinjiang and south of Tuva and which also contains the cold Gobi Desert. For 10 points,
name this country of steppes with a capital at Ulan Bator that is landlocked between China and Russia.
ANSWER: Mongolia
In this country, children may be given names meaning "No name" or "Don-t know" to ward off evil spirits.
The saline Uvs Lake lies mostly in this country, which encloses the ancient Lake Khovsgol. In this country
south of Tuva, the Tuul River is held sacred. This country lies northwest of a similarly named, rare earth
metal-rich, and desertifying region in another nation, called "Inner [this country]."The ger is a round,
portable dwelling found in this country, whose namesake ethnicity invented the yurt. This country's south
lies in the Altai Mountains and Gobi Desert. For 10 points, name this landlocked steppe country between
Russia and China.
ANSWER: Mongolia [or Mongol Uls]
This nation contains most of the Uvs Lake, the rest of which is in Tuva in Russia. This country's third
largest city, Darkhan, has a name that means Blacksmith and was started by the Soviet Union in 1961. Its
second most populous city is Erdenet, which is in the Orkhon Aimag, an Aimag being the equivalent of a
province. The unicameral legislature in this nation is called the State Great Khural, and its leading political
party is the People's Revolutionary Party. Many of the residents of this sparse country live in portable round
dwellings called yurts. The southern part of this country is the Gobi Desert, and its capital is Ulan Bator.
Name this country between China and Russia.
ANSWER: Mongolia
This country's third largest city, Erdenet, was built to exploit Asia's largest copper mine, and lies
in a valley between the Selenge and Orkhon Rivers. Its largest lake is Uvs Lake, the northeastern tip
of which is located in Russia's Tuva Republic. This country's largest ethnic group is the (*) Khalkha,
and the southern region of this country is covered by the Gobi Desert. For 10 points, identify this large,
sparsely populated country between Russia and China.
ANSWER: Mongolia
Eighty percent of this country's population took a surname meaning "master of the blue wolf" after last
names were re-legalized here in 1995. Following this country's 1924 proclamation of a Communist state, its
capital received a new name meaning "Red Hero." The desolate areas of this country's west and south are
dominated by the Altai Mountains and the Gobi Desert. For 10 points, name this Asian country, which is
found south of Russia and north of China, and was the home of conquering horsemen in the late Middle
Ages.
ANSWER: Mongolia [or Mongol Uls]
In this country, the term zud refers to an extremely harsh winter that is difficult for livestock. Its
northern Tuul River is considered sacred while its central portion is dominated by the Khangai
mountains. The southeastern portion of this country is bordered by a region known as the "Inner"
portion of this country; the southwestern portion of this country is bordered by the Xinjiang
province. The northern and western portion of this nation is spanned by the Altai Mountains while its
southern portion is dominated by the Gobi desert. For 10 points, name this sparsely populated Asian nation
sandwiched between China and Russia.
ANSWER: Mongolia
This is the only American state to be the source of rivers that flow into three oceans. National
Battlefield Sites in this state include Big Hole and Bear Paw, where battles were fought during the
pursuit of the Nez Perce. Lewis and Clark located the "Three Forks of the Missouri" in this state. Its
(*) Glacier National Park lies along its border with Alberta. Billings is this state's most populous city. For
10 points, name this state lying north of Wyoming which is known as "Big Sky Country."
ANSWER: State of Montana
This is the only state in the U.S. whose official motto is in Spanish, and it was the site of the "War of the
Copper Kings," which left its institutions under the control of Marcus Daly's Anaconda Company. This
home of Chief Dull Knife College, Stonechild College, and the University of Great Falls gets its news from
such papers as the Missoulian, and the Daily Chronicle, published in Bozeman. The chief universities of
this state, where the Battle of the Little Bighorn took place, have campuses in Billings and Butte. FTP name
this state between North Dakota and Idaho, known as "Big Sky Country."
ANSWER: Montana
It's not California, but this state contains Triple Divide Peak, which is part of the Great Northern Divide
and causes the Waterton River to turn north. This state's Fort Peck Lake was formed by damming the
Musselshell and Missouri Rivers, and is located south of Glasgow. It contains Lake McDonald, next to
which runs Going-to-the-Sun Road, also named Route 1 of its namesake national park. The Bitterroot
Range forms part of its western border, and its city of Whitefish is located north of Flathead Lake and just
west of Glacier National Park. Containing the cities of Butte, Billings, and Bozeman, for 10 points, name
this western US state with its capital at Helena.
ANSWER: Montana
This state's western Beaverhead County includes Monida Pass and the Pioneer Mountains, while a Chinook
wind here caused the greatest recorded 24 hour temperature change in 1974. Trapper Peak in this state lies
east of another state's Selway River, and is the highest peak of the Bitterroot Range. George Crook and
Marcus Reno participated in a battle named for a question of water in this state, whose most famous national
park contains Triple Divide Peak and Going-to-the-Sun Road. The phrase "I will fight no more forever"
was delivered after a retreat to this state by Chief Joseph of the Nez Perce. For 10 points, identify this site
of Little Bighorn and Glacier Park, home tp Billings, Butte, and Helena.
ANSWER: Montana
This state's Anaconda Range is home to Big Hole National Monument, and the Bitterroot Range runs
along this state's western border. This state's Fort Peck Lake is the first major reservoir on the Missouri
River, which flows by this state's city of Great Falls. Home to Glacier National Park and the Little Bighorn
Battlefield National Monument, this state is the only one to border the province of Alberta. Home to the
cities of Missoula, Butte, and Billings, for 10 points, name this fourth-largest state in size with capital at
Helena.
ANSWER: Montana
The Anaconda Mining Company was founded in this state by Marcus Daly after a discovery of silver
and copper deposits, and its town of Glasgow is located near its Fort Peck Lake. The Pompey's Pillar
national monument in this state is notable for the signature of William Clark inscribed upon it. It has
the distinction of being the only state with rivers that eventually flow into the Pacific Ocean, Gulf of
Mexico, and Hudson Bay. Also home to the Glacier National park, the Clark, the Blackfoot and the
Bitterroot Rivers run through Missoula in this state. For 10 points, identify this state, whose largest city is
Billings.
ANSWER: Montana
The Anaconda Mining Company began in this state, whose city of Kalispell lies north of Flathead
Lake. Granite Peak is the highest point in this state, home to the source of the Missouri River. This
state's western border is formed by the (*) Bitterroot Mountains, and it includes the cities of Missoula,
Butte, and Billings. For 10 points, name this western US state with capital at Helena.
ANSWER: Montana
This state's odder historical nicknames include the "Stubbed-Toe State," and in 1995 its tourism department
attempted to market the vanity plate "EZ 2 LUV" as a state slogan. This state was the last to maintain a
"reasonable and prudent" daytime speed limit with no maximum. Organizations such as Carroll College and
the Flathead Lake Protection Association sponsor alternative license plate designs in this state, whose
standard license plate includes the slogan "The Treasure State." For 10 points, name this state whose other
nicknames include "Big Sky Country," and which includes the cities of Butte, Billings, Missoula, and its
capital, Helena.
ANSWER: Montana
A national park in this state contains Going-to-the-Sun Road and the Lewis Overthrust. Granite Peak, the
highest point in this state, can be found in a mountain range that this state shares with its southern neighbor,
the Beartooth Mountains. Fort Peck Lake is formed behind a dam near the city of Glasgow in this state,
which also contains Flathead Lake, a remnant of Glacial Lake Missoula. This state contains the northern
part of the Big Horn Mountains and the eastern portion of the Bitterroot Range, which it shares with another
state's panhandle. Among this state's most populous cities are Butte, Great Falls, and Billings. For 10
points, name this state with capital at Helena.
ANSWER: Montana
This city features the tallest building in its country, a telecommunications headquarters called the Antel
Tower. During the 1843 to 1851 siege of it, its army was under the command of Fructuoso Rivera. The
Good Neighbor Policy was declared at a conference in this city, which hosted all of the matches for the first
FIFA World Cup. The ship Admiral Graf Spee fled to this harbor after the largest World War II naval battle
to take place in South America. It is located on the northeastern bank of the Rio de la Plata. For ten points,
name this largest city in Uruguay.
ANSWER: Montevideo
This city's stock exchange building was converted in 1965 into the Centaur Theater. The largest
island in the Hochelaga Archipelago shares its name with this city, which is the world's largest inland
port. This city contains a green-domed basilica called Saint Joseph's Oratory. An unpopular stadium
here includes the world's tallest inclined tower, but is only really used for the (*) Alouettes after the
departure of this city's baseball team. This city, which hosts the Just for Laughs festival, is the headquarters
for Cirque du Soleil. This host city of the 1976 Olympics lies at the confluence of the Saint Lawrence and
Ottawa Rivers and has a large bilingual population. For 10 points, name this Francophone Canadian city,
the largest in Quebec.
ANSWER: Montreal [accept an unlikely buzz of Hochelaga until mentioned]
Historically, the Lachine Canal in this city's southwest allowed ships to navigate around the canal's
namesake rapids though more recently, that district near Atwater Market, has become gentrified. Just north
of downtown, a giant illuminated cross rests atop a mountain that is part of the Monteregian Hills. Nuns'
Island and Ile Bizard are some of the islands in the Hochelaga archipelago of which this city's namesake
island is the largest. A world exposition in this city gave it a geodesic dome named the Biosphere while an
Olympics nine years later gave it a stadium nicknamed the Big O. Lying at the confluence of the St.
Lawrence and Ottawa Rivers, for 10 points, name this city, the home of McGill University and the largest
city in Quebec.
ANSWER: Montreal
To the north of this feature may be seen the sphere of fast-food joint Orange Julep, which shockingly
rises 40 feet into the air, as well as a namesake university's famed pale-yellow art deco tower and the
Oratory of St. Joseph, home to the world's third-largest basilica dome. The downtown of this
feature's namesake city lies to its south and features skyscrapers like the Pier Luigi Nervi-designed
Stock Exchange Tower and the I.M. Pei-designed (*) Place Ville-Marie. This geographic feature itself
features a 103 foot-high cross that is illuminated in blue in honor of St. John the Baptist and purple to mark
the death of a Pope, while its southern slope is home to its namesake city's McGill University. Named in
honor of King Francis I by Jacques Cartier, for 10 points, name this large hill surrounded by a namesake
city, the largest in Quebec and second largest in Canada.
ANSWER: Mount Royal [accept Mont Royal or Montreal; do not accept "Blue Line"]
This country's Jewish population has diminished from over a quarter of a million to barely five
thousand within the last sixty years. This nation's longest river is the Draa River. Its once contested
southern border is formed by a perfectly straight latitudinal line. Its northern portion contains the
Rif Mountains, while its highest point, Jbel Toubkal, is also the highest peak in the (*) Atlas
Mountains. Its cities include Marrakech, Tangier, and Fez. For 10 points, name this nation with capital
Rabat which is situated across the Strait of Gibraltar from Spain.
ANSWER: Morocco
This country's southeastern Chirac Pastures are claimed by the left-wing opposition party in a
neighboring country. This country claims control over Leila Island as well as Melilla (meh-LEE-yah) and
Ceuta (say-OO-tah), which are currently under the de facto control of Spain. This country's southern half
has long been run by the breakaway Polisario (poh-lee-SAH-ree-oh) Front under the name Western Sahara.
For 10 points, name this country, the home of Tangiers and Casablanca.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Morocco [or Al Mamlakah al Maghribiyah]
This country's Khourigba mine sits over about half the world's known phosphate reserves. A crisis in
this country before World War I occurred when Germany sent the Panther to this country's port of Agadir.
The Spanish exclave of Ceuta juts away from this nation's coast. The western end of the Atlas mountains
lies in this nation, whose monarchy claims to control Western Sahara. For ten points, name this country
south of the Strait of Gibraltar, a North African nation containing Fez and Casablanca.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Morocco [or Tageldit n Elmegrib; or al-Mamlakah al-Magribiyah]
This nation and its northern neighbor dispute the sovereignty of the uninhabited Perejil Island. This nation
borders the Spanish exclaves Ceuta and Melilla. The Kasbah of the Udayas is located along the Bou Regreg
River in this nation's capital city. This nation is the only one in Africa that is not a member of the African
Union. The only home of the Dipper bird is in this nation's Atlas Mountains, and this nation has claimed
Western Sahara since 1975. For 10 points, Casablanca is the largest city in which African nation with a
capital at Rabat?
ANSWER: Kingdom of Morocco [or Al-Mamlakah al-Maghribiyyah]
One of this nation's major cities features the Meroubia Gardens, which abuts its Grand Socco, near which
William S. Burroughs and Paul Bowles briefly lived in the 1960s. Another major city in this country is the
most populous in the Maghreb, a port which is home to the massive Hassan II Mosque. In its southwest is
Mt. Toubkal, the highest point in the Atlas Range. Claiming sovereignty over the autonomous region of
Western Sahara is, FTP, what home of Tangier and Casablanca, with capital at Rabat?
ANSWER: Morocco
One of this country's cities includes the square Jemaa el-Fnaa and includes the gate Bab Ksiba in its red
sandstone walls. This nation's largest city contains the enormous Hassan II Mosque. Its border with its
southeastern neighbor is formed by the Draa River, this nation's longest. In an incident named for this
nation's city Agadir, its sultan fled. This nation's highest peak, Toubkal, is also the highest in the Atlas
Mountains, of which this country contains the westernmost part. This country contains the city of Fez, and
lies south of the Strait of Gibraltar. For 10 points, name this north African country whose cities include
Marrakesh, Rabat, and Casablanca.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Morocco [or Maroc; prompt on "Al-Maghrib"]
This nation, the home of the Rif Mountains, disputes a territory with the Polisario Front, and Spanish
enclaves in this nation include Melilla and Ceuta. This nation, which is part of the Maghreb, contains the
Atlas Mountains and disputes ownership of Western Sahara. Major cities in this nation include Tangier,
Fes, and Marrakech. For 10 points, name this North African nation ruled from Rabat, with largest city
Casablanca.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Morocco or al Mamlaka al-Magribiyya
North of this city lies the former summer residence of the Sheremetev family, Ostankino Palace, and
its largest amusement park is named after Maxim Gorky. This city's roads radiate out from its center
and intersect with various circular roads, which include Garden Ring and Boulevard Ring. The
Cathedral of Christ the Savior lies on the (*) Yauza River in this city, while its main river is the Moskva.
The Seven Sisters and a famous cathedral with onion-shaped domes, St. Basil's, all lie in this city. For ten
points, name this city which contains the Kremlin and is the capital of Russia.
ANSWER: Moscow
This city's Garden Ring is a series of roads which follow the path of sixteenth-century fortifications. Its
subway system consists of eleven spoke lines connected by a 20-kilometer ring line, and some of its ornate
stations are decorated with once-royal chandeliers. This city is home to a theater whose ballet company
premiered Spartacus and a church whose many sanctuaries are each toped with onion domes. This home of
the Bolshoi Ballet and St. Basil's Cathedral is centered on Red Square. For 10 points, name this home of the
Kremlin and capital of Russia.
ANSWER: Moscow
One of the highest points in this city, Sparrow Hills, is located near the Luzhniki Stadium. The main
building of the state university in this city, as well as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, are part of a complex
known as the "Seven Sisters" built from 1947 to 1953. During a modernization period, it demolished such
landmarks as the Sukharev Tower. It is home to an amusement park that once displayed mock-ups from the
Buran space shuttle program. This city's Cathedral of Christ the Saviour is the tallest Orthodox Christian
church in the world, although the onion-domed St. Basil's Cathedral is also found here. For 10 points,
name this city, the site of Red Square and the Kremlin.
ANSWER: Moscow
This city's Old Arbat Avenue is lined with preserved historical buildings. Prospekt Mira and Park
Kultury are connected by the central 5 line on its Metro, which runs in a (+) circle. This city is
organized along the circular Boulevard Ring and Garden Ring. The Yauza river joins this city's
namesake river in its (*) Tagatsky district. Concrete skyscrapers called the Seven Sisters have dominated
its skyline since the Communist era. One church here is topped by nine onion domes of different colors.
For 10 points, name this city where Saint Basil's Cathedral abuts Red Square and the Kremlin.
ANSWER: Moscow [or Moskva]
This city has a state university complex located at Sparrow Hills; the main building of that complex
forms one of the "Seven Sisters" skyscrapers in this city. Its underground metro system has the highest
passenger numbers in Europe. It contains Luzhniki (looj-NEE-kee) Stadium, a complex built for the
Olympic Games and named for the flood meadows on this city's namesake river. This city is home to St.
Basil's Cathedral and the Kremlin. For 10 points, name this capital of Russia.
ANSWER: Moscow
A Chinese embassy is located on this city's Sparrow Hills. It contains several ring roads, the innermost of
which is the Boulevard Ring around the White Town. This city's International Business Center contains the
Imperia Tower and the City of Capitals, and lies on its namesake river. This city is home to a skewed
obelisk with a rocket on top, the Monument to the Conquerors of Space, and is the largest city in continental
Europe. Home to the Seven Sisters, a group of skyscrapers built in the Stalinist style, this city's most
famous structures are St. Basil's Cathedral and the Kremlin. For 10 points, name this capital of Russia.
ANSWER: Moscow or Moskva
This region was once a kingdom whose first known king was simply named "Oldman." Major cities in
this region include Puerto Cabezas and Bluefields. It is the title setting for a novel about ice-making written
by Paul Theroux. Great Britain's encroachment in this historical region necessitated the Clayton-Bulwer
Treaty. This region is named for the Indian tribe that resides there, rather than any form of insect. For the
point, name this strip of land along the Caribbean divided between Honduras and Nicaragua.
ANSWER: the Mosquito Coast
This place's namesake Ladies Association acquired this estate in 1858 and has preserved it since,
including the tradition of acquiring a "Christmas camel." A set of remains housed at this location was
almost moved to the U.S. Capitol Crypt in the 1830s. A key to the Bastille can be found in this place's main
building, which is topped with an octagonal copula with a weathervane in the shape of a dove. For 10
points, name this estate overlooking the Potomac River, the home of George Washington.
ANSWER: Mount Vernon
This country's Tete Province contains the largest hydroelectric dam in Africa, which creates the Cahora
Bassa lake. The capital of this country contains Eduardo Mondlane University. This country contains a lake
whose name literally means "Lake Lake," Lake Nyasa. Since its independence, this country has been
governed by the FRELIMO Party. This country, which has an AK-47 on its flag, borders Zimbabwe to the
west, Tanzania to the north and South Africa to the south. For 10 points, name this country in Southern
Africa that, like Angola, is a former Portuguese colony.
ANSWER: Republic of Mozambique
Natural gas development in this country is taking place in its Inhambane province. This country has
significant coal reserves in its Tete Province, which is also home to the Cahora Bassa Dam. The
Ruvuma River forms much of its northern border. This country's second-largest city is located at the
mouth of the Pungoe and is Beira. This country's capital is on Delagoa Bay and was formerly known as
Lourenco Marques. Xia-Xia marks where the Limpopo flows into the ocean in this country, as does the
Zambezi. For 10 points, name this Portuguese-speaking East African country with capital Maputo.
ANSWER: Republic of Mozambique [or Republica de Mocambique]
This country's northern lakes include Chiuta and Shirwa, and port towns include Xai-Xai and Lichinga.
Ethnic groups in this country include the Shangaan in the southern regions, such as the Gaza province,
while the north is dominated by the Makua. The Ruvuma River forms part of this country's northern border,
and this country disputes the name of a lake which borders its Niassa Province. Its capital city lies in the
southern tip and was once known Lourenco Marques, and the Zambezi River empties into the this country's
namesake channel in the Indian Ocean. FTP, name this former Portuguese colony with capital at Maputo.
ANSWER: Mozambique
The northeast part of this country is Cabo Delgado Province, which has its capital at Pemba. Many people
in the southwest part of this country speak a Tsonga language such as Ronga, and one of its southern cities
is Matola. This country also includes Lake Cahora Bassa, and it is where the Zambezi River flows into the
Indian Ocean. Several of its larger lakes are on its border with Malawi, and it reaches from Tanzania to
South Africa. Name this country whose capital is Maputo which shares its name with the channel separating
it from Madagascar.
ANSWER: Mozambique
Outside of Chimanimani, one can find this country's highest point - Mt. Binga. The flag of this country
includes a red triangle with a farming implement crossed with an AK-47 on top of it. Dr. Livingstone
discovered Lake Shiwa in what is now this country, also home to the enormous Cahora Bassa. Cities within
this country include Pemba, Chimolo and Inhambane. Along with Tanzania and Malawi, it shares a border
with Lake Nyasa. Aside from South Africa, Swaziland borders only this other country. For 10 points, name
this former Portuguese colony with capital at Maputo that is separated from Madagascar by its namesake
Channel.
ANSWER: Mozambique
Just to the east of this city sit the Elephanta Caves. Much of its drinking water comes from the Vihar
Lake and the Tulsi Lake. This city was built over a group of seven islands including Mahim, Parel, Worli,
and Colaba. The capital of the Maharashtra (MAH-huh-RAHSH-truh) state, its Taj Mahal Palace hotel was
one of the many of its sites targeted in a 2008 terrorist attack. For 10 points, name this city on the Arabian
Sea, the center of the Bollywood industry and largest city in India.
ANSWER: Mumbai [or Bombay]
This city lies south of Thane and was originally built on an archipelago that include Old Woman's
Island. The Elephanta Caves are near this city, which was the site of two terrorist attacks by
Lashkar-e-Taiba. This city is the capital of the Maharashtra state and contains a gateway that was built to
commemorate a visit by King George V and Queen Mary. In 2008 this city was the site of a large scale
terrorist attack orchestrated by Pakistani nationals which include a standoff at the Taj Mahal Hotel. For 10
points, name this home of Bollywood, the largest city in India formerly known as Bombay.
ANSWER: Mumbai [or Bombay before it is read]
On the outskirts of this city, one can look at the ancient Buddhist art in the Kanheri Caves, part of
Sanjay Gandhi National Park. This city originally consisted of seven different islands, which the British
gradually united through land reclamation. This city's waterfront contains the Gateway of India, which
faces its harbor on the Arabian Sea. This capital of Maharashtra state is the home of a notorious Indian
variant of Hollywood. For 10 points, name this most populous city in India.
ANSWER: Mumbai [or Bombay]
Bal Thackeray was a cartoonist active in this city. In 1784, this city was formed from the union of seven
islands by a project called the Hornby Vellard. Dabbawalas deliver food to workers in this city. Marathi
nationalists in the 1960s formed Shiv Sena in this city. An arch made of basalt in this city's harbor was
constructed to commemorate the 1911 visit of George V and Queen Mary. This city, the capital of
Maharashtra, was attacked by Lakshar e-Taiba terrorists in 2008. For ten points, name this most populous
city of India and the home of the Hindi-language film industry.
ANSWER: Mumbai [or Bombay]
A large athletic stadium in this city was built in a pit made by bombs and features acrylic glass canopies
supported by steel cables. Besides the Olympic Stadium, this city is home to the European patent offices
and the Zeiss Planetarium. The Nymphenburg Palace in this city was home to its local rulers, and the
Michaelskirche in this city is the largest Renaissance church north of the Alps. This city's Frauenkirche
features the Devil's Footprint, and the central square of this city is the Marienplatz. A prominent structure
in this city was designed to look like a car tire, the BMW Headquarters. For 10 points, name this third
largest city in Germany and capital of Bavaria.
ANSWER: Munich [or Munchen; or Minga]
The main square of this city is (ma-REE-en-plahtz) Marienplatz, and the (FROW-en-keer-kuh)
Frauenkirche is in this city. In 1255, it became home to the Wittelsbach family, which included Holy
Roman Emperor Louis IV. This city is bisected by the Isar River. Mad King Ludwig brought Richard
Wagner to this city, saving him from destitution. It was home to the Beer Hall Putsch, and Oktoberfest is
held here. For 10 points, name this capital of the state of Bavaria.
ANSWER: Munich [or Muenchen]
A black footprint in a church in this city commemorates Jorg von Halsbach winning a bet with the
devil that he could build a church without visible windows. This city was home to Geiselgasteig film
studios, and it contains the headquarters of Siemens and BMW. This city was the seat of the
Wittelsbach dynasty, who built its Nymphenburg Palace. The Isar and Wurm rivers flow through
this metropolis, once of the home of Der (*) Blaue Reiter. The sixteen "Blood Witnesses" died during the
Beer Hall Putsch here. Operation Wrath of God took revenge on Black September members who murdered
Israelis in this city. Napoleon made this city the capital of the Kingdom of Bavaria. For 10 points, name
this German city, the site of a massacre at the 1972 Summer Olympics.
ANSWER: Munich [or Munchen or Minga]
This country is home to a city that was built by such kings as Anawratha and Kyanzittha. It owns
such as islands as Ramree, Preparis, and Cheduba, and the city of Sagaing is near the point at which
the Chindwin branches off from this country's longest river. Indented by the Gulf of Martaban, its
Shan province is home to the Salween River, and the capital lies on the Sittang River and was
renamed Naypyidaw after it was decided that the former capital, site of the Shwedagon Pagoda, was too
susceptible to American naval invasion. For 10 points each, name this country, the site of cities such as
Mandalay and Yangon, or Rangoon.
ANSWER: Myanmar [or Burma]
Important sites in this region are the fortress at Mariamberd and the monastery at Gandzasar, and it is
possible to cross this region by foot using the Janapar trail. Jerderduz, a meadow outside the town of
Shushi, this region's most important historical city, was once the site of a golf course, but has given way to a
sheep and goat pasture. The ruined city of Agdam, once home to 100,000 people, is only accessible by
illegal taxi, and is home to a defaced Sunni mosque. This region's largest city is still officially known as
Xankandi, but is now known by the name Stepanakert since a 1994 cease-fire which effectively put this
territory under Armenian control. FTP, name this territory disputed between Azerbaijan and Armenia.
ANSWER: Nagorno-Karabakh or Artsakh
A southern variant of this language is the nearly extinct language Pipil. In 2008, Mayor Marcelo Ebrard
recommended all government employees learn this language. It's not a European language, but a text
written in it included twelve books including "The Sun, Moon and Stars, and the Binding of the Years."
The Florentine Codex was written in this language, and a historical chronicle was written using it by
Fernando Alvarado Tezozomoc. The English words "avocado" and "chocolate" come from this language,
which was spoken by the Emperor Montezuma. For ten points, name this language spoken by the Aztecs.
ANSWER: Nahuatl
This city features a reserve for Rothschild giraffes in its suburb of Langata. This city's Banda Street
features its McMillan Library and Jamia Mosque. In August 1998, along with a similar event in city south
of here, an event in this city led to Osama bin Laden being placed on the FBI's Ten Most Wanted after a
bomb was exploded in its United States embassy. For 10 points, what African capital city is the location of
Kenyatta University and is the largest city in Kenya?
ANSWER: Nairobi
This city is the headquarters of the organization that administers Earthwatch, an environmental
information clearinghouse among governments. This home of the United Nations Environment
Program is five miles north of a national park with the same name that includes an "animal
orphanage." This city receives water from the (*) Sasumua (sah-suh-MOO-uh) Dam, which dams the
Tana River. At least sixty-seven people were killed in this city's Westgate Mall by al-Shabab gunmen in
2013. For 10 points, name this capital city of Kenya.
ANSWER: Nairobi
The Karura Forest in the northern part of this city was the focus of a conservation campaign led by
Wangari Maathai. This city is bordered to the west by the Ngong Hills, a former colonial farming
region. A center for rallies and activism in this city is Uhuru Park. This city was originally
established as a railway camp between (*) Kampala and Mombasa. Its proximity to game reserves has led
to this city's nickname of the "Safari Capital of the World." For ten points, name this capital of Kenya.
ANSWER: Nairobi
The cliffs of a national park on the outskirts of this city served as a model for the setting of The Lion
King. It is also the site of the Ngong (in-GONG) Hills, which overlook an old plantation turned into the
Karen Blixen Museum. This city is also home to the massive slum Kibera. Lying just east of Lake
Naivasha, it is one hundred miles to the north of Mount Kilimanjaro on its country's border with Tanzania.
For 10 points, name this largest city and capital of Kenya.
ANSWER: Nairobi
This country's Ekuma River feeds the Etosha pan, an occasional lake that consists largely of salty land. It
also contains Swakop River at the southern boundary of Skeleton Coast. It is named for one of its deserts,
which lies west of the Naukluft Mountains. One of its ports, which contains a man-made Bird Island for
collecting guano, is at Walvis Bay. Many people in its northern region are considered Ovambo, and the
eastern part of this country-including the town of Gobabis-is in the Kalahari Desert. Because European
settlers wanted to give it access to the Zambezi River, it includes the Caprivi Strip. Name this country that
has been controlled by Germany and South Africa, a nation on the Atlantic Ocean south of Angola and with
its capital at Windhoek [VINT-"hook"].
ANSWER: Republic of Namibia [or Republiek van Namibie]
One city in this country was founded as a British colony for the export of guano, and now serves as a
important center for uranium shipments. In addition to the city of Walvis Bay, this country contains the
Ovambo and Herero ethnic groups, and its northern border is defined by the Kunene River. This country
also contains a portion of the Okavango River, which flows through the Caprivi Strip. SWAPO led
resistance to colonial control in this country, and independence occured after a failed invasion of Angola
by South Africa. Formerly the German colony of Southwest Africa, this is, for 10 points, what nation,
whose capital is Windhoek?
ANSWER: Namibia
This country's northwest is home to a coastline named after the beached whalebones and wrecked ships
found there, the Skeleton Coast. Uranium mining in this nation's namesake desert has raised environmental
concerns in its region of Sossusvlei. A small portion of this country currently disputes fishing rights in the
Zambezi River. This nation, which contains the Caprivi Strip, was at the center of the 1904 Herero
Genocide. For 10 points, name this nation with a seaport at Walvis Bay and a capital at Windhoek.
ANSWER: Namibia
Etosha National Park is located in the Kunene Region of this country, in which one can find the
Skeleton Coast and the southern part of the Kaokoveld Desert. Its Ai-Ais Hot Springs are found at
the southern end of Fish River Canyon in its Karas Region, and its Caprivi Strip gives this country
access to the (*) Zambezi River. Containing the cities of Rundu and Walvis Bay, this country's southern
border is formed by the Orange River while its easternmost point borders Zambia, Zimbabwe, and
Botswana simultaneously. For 10 points, identify this former German colony, once called South-West
Africa, with capital at Windhoek.
ANSWER: The Republic of Namibia
Until recently, a main thoroughfare of this African nation's capital city was named after Herman Goring. It
is home to a number of other oddities, including the world's largest underwater lake, located near
Grootfontein, and the largest iron meteorite in the world, weighing sixty tons. Colonized by the Germans, it
was taken over by the South Africans at the end of World War I and remained under its rule until
independence in 1990 at the end of a twenty-four year insurgency led by SWAPO. Name this southwest
African country with its capital at Windhoek.
ANSWER: Republic of Namibia [or Republiek van Namibie]
Brandberg is this country's highest mountain, and it is partially separated from its northern neighbor by the
Kunene River. Its "great white place of dry water", the Etosha Pan, is contained by a national park of the
same name. This country contains the regions of Damaraland and the Kaokoveld in the northwest, and an
area named for the many shipwrecks caused by the rough conditions. The indigenous languages Oshiwambo
and Herero are recognized, along with an official language of English, and other recognized languages of
Afrikaans and German. For 10 points, what is this country, home to the Skeleton Coast, that named after the
desert it contains and has its capital at Windhoek?
ANSWER: Republic of Namibia
The Ugab river flows for several days a year through this country's Damaraland region. It contains Fish
River Canyon, the largest in Africa. The fifth-largest exporter of uranium, its fishing industry is based in the
Kuiseb River delta, in Walvis Bay. Disputes with its eastern neighbor have centered around the Okavango
River, which flows through the Caprivi strip, disputed with Botswana. Its southern border, defined by the
Orange river, is shared with South Africa. For 10 points, name this African country containing a namesake
desert, with capital Windhoek.
ANSWER: Republic of Namibia [prompt on South-West Africa]
This organization provided funding for Robert Ballard's discovery of the remains of JFK's
PT-109. T. Y. Rothenburg studied this organization in Presenting America to the World, exploring in
detail its relationship with nudity. Early heads of this organization included Gilbert Hovey
Grosvenor. Employees of this organization pioneered adding red shirts to scenes to make them more
photogenic. This organization presents medals named for two of its presidents, (*) Alexander Graham
Bell and Gardiner Greene Hubbard. This organization is best known for a publication that featured a Steve
McCurry picture of a young Sharbat Gula with green eyes in a photo titled "Afghan Girl". For 10 points,
name this organization which publishes a popular yellow-framed magazine.
ANSWER: National Geographic Society [or National Geographic Magazine or Nat Geo]
Damaging one of these in Singapore, such as the synagogue Chesed El, will net you a $1000 fine. Ones
located in Arizona to protect native settlements include Tuzigoot, Tonto, (*) and Montezuma Castle.
The Castillo de San Marcos and Fort Matanzas are example of these areas in St. Augustine. Jewel Cave is
located near Rapid City, South Dakota, while other notable ones include Dinosaur, Fort McHenry, Rainbow
Bridge, and White Sands. For 10 points, name these areas, the first of which was Devil's Tower.
ANSWER: national monument (prompt on partial answer, do not accept national park etc)
A precedent for the establishment of these areas was set by a bill introduced by John Conness. Two of
these areas are connected by the John D. Rockefeller, Jr. Memorial Parkway. The Hetch Hetchy Valley can
be be found in ones of these areas. The creation of more of these areas was one of the initial goals of the
John Muir-founded Sierra Club. The first of these areas to be created contains a supervolcano and the
iconic geyser, Old Faithful. For ten points, identify these areas set aside for preservation by the federal
government, which include Yosemite and Yellowstone.
ANSWER: national parks
This tribe believes that dried blood of the giant Ye-iitsoh now appears as lava rock by Mount Taylor, the
southernmost of four Sacred Mountains that serve as boundaries for their area. The other three are Mount
Blanca, Hesprus Mountain, and San Francisco Peak in the west. That area contains the town of Chinle
(CHIN-lee), next to Canyon de Chelly (SHAY), and also contains Monument Valley, home to the Mitten
Buttes. Places like Chaco Canyon hold many ruins from their enemies- ancestors, the Anasazi. For 10
points, identify this Native American tribe with the largest reservation by area in the United States, found in
the Four Corners area with capital at Window Rock.
ANSWER: Navajo (accept Dineh)
This territory's local government consists of 110 "chapter houses" in such settlements as Shiprock and
the town of Chinle. Its inhabitants at Crownpoint suffered a spill from one of many now-closed uranium
mines in this place, which caused high rates of lung disease. Hikers can go into Canyon de Chelly
("SHEY") in this territory, whose self-governing 24-member Council meets in its capital city of Window
Rock. For 10 points, name this federally-designated area which completely surrounds the Hopi reservation,
which is home to its namesake Native American people and contains three of the Four Corners.
ANSWER: Navajo Nation [or Navajo Indian Reservation]
Scott's Bluff National Monument and Chimney Rock are landmarks in this state, which also contains a
replica of Stonehenge made out of automobiles, Carhenge. The headquarters of Boys Town is in a suburb
of its largest city. L. Ron Hubbard was born in this state, and much of its population lives near the Platte
River. Home to many descendants of Czech immigrants, this state contains the headquarters for Berkshire
Hathaway, Warren Buffet's company. For 10 points, name this "Cornhusker State" whose largest city is
Omaha.
ANSWER: Nebraska
The southern part of this state is partly drained by the Republican River. Kimball and Gering are two cities
in the western portion of this state, a river in which flows through the Sand Hills before crossing the area
where Chimney Rock rises. Scottsbluff is the most populous city in this state's panhandle. Its largest city is
the seat of Douglas County and is home to the College World Series. The Platte River was once named after
this state. For 10 points, name this American state lodged between Kansas and South Dakota, with cities
like Lincoln and Omaha.
ANSWER: Nebraska
The site of the Battle of Warbonnet Creek, this state contains the city of Gering near the site of Scotts
Bluff National Monument, as well as most of the Niobrara River, which flows though this state's
largest county, Cherry County. Also home to the Oglala National Grasslands and (*) Panorama Point,
this state contains the cities of Kearney, Fremont, and Grand Island, all of which are found near its longest
river, whose "North" tributary flows through this state's panhandle near Chimney Rock. With an eastern
border formed entirely by the Missouri River, for 10 points, identify this state bisected by the Platte River
with capital at Lincoln.
ANSWER: Nebraska
A major potash fertilizer source is located near the industrial site of Sedom in this area, whose workers
commute from the cities of Arad and Dimona. This area blends into the Har Yehuda in the north and the
Midbar Yehuda in the northeast. Government subsidies were needed in order to convince settlers to move
to this region's port city of Eilat. It is bounded by the Jordan Rift Valley to its east and the Sinai Peninsula
to the west. Agricultural development in this area was revived following the establishment of three
kibbutzim here in 1943, and its main urban center is the city of Beersheba. For 10 points, name this desert
located in the southern part of Israel.
ANSWER: Negev Desert [or Negeb Desert; or Ha-negev Desert]
Friedrich Ludwig Persius designed an orangery that overlooks this river, in a park designed by the
author of Hints on Landscape Gardening. This river flows through the English-style garden at Muskau
Park. The Giant Mountains overlook this river, on which the Museum of Glass and Jewelry may be found
at Jablonec. This river's name is shared by a shorter "Glatzer" river, which, like the main "Lusatian" river
known by this name, flows north from the Sudeten mountains. For ten points, name this tributary of the
Oder, with which this river formed the postwar boundary between Germany and Poland.
ANSWER: Neisse [or Nysa]
The Terai [tuh-RAHY] plains that are located in the southern portion of this nation were partially formed by
the Kosi River, and those plains are south of the Parbat and Pahad. Kali Gandaki Gorge, the deepest gorge
on earth, separates two peaks, the Dhaulaguri and Annapurna, in this mountainous country also home to the
city of Biratnagar [bih-RAHY-nuhg-er]. The Siliguri Corner, also known as the Chicken's Neck, is a narrow
strip of land between this country and Bangladesh. Located in the Himalayas and only bordering China and
India, FTP, name this Asian nation with capital at Kathmandu that is home to eight of the world's ten tallest
mountains, including Mount Everest.
ANSWER: The Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal
This country's capital is home to a tourists' ghetto, called Thamel, and a bazaar called Asan.
The Newars were this place's original inhabitants. After India, this country has the second-most
Hindu population in the world, at up to ninety percent of its population. Shakya, in this modernday
country, is where the Buddha was born. The Annapurna Mountains and Sagarmatha National
Park are located in this country. Jon Krakauer's Into Thin Air details a distaster which took place
in this country. Uniquely, this country's flag consists of two overlapping triangles. For 10 points,
name this country, home to eight of the world's ten tallest mountains, including most of Mount
Everest.
ANSWER: Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal
The southern part of this country consists of the Tarai, and this country's portion of the Siwalik Range is
known as the Churia Range. This country's capital is located in a valley drained by the Baghmati River, and
its capital trades with the city of Hitaura through a U.S.-built aerial ropeway. Citizens of this country vote
based on candidates' party symbols due to this nation's low literacy rate. Prachanda led this country's
Maoist insurgency, and this country's King Birendra and eight other members of its royal family were
killed by Crown Prince Dipendra in 2001. For ten points, name this landlocked country in the southern
Himalayas that is bordered by India and China and has its capital at Kathmandu.
ANSWER: Nepal
This country's capital contains a temple crawling with sacred monkeys near Durbar Square. Its
south is home to the moist Tarai lowlands. Several people die each year in an "icefall" on this
country's Khumbu glacier. Its residents use the name Sagarmatha, or Chomolungma, for a
mountain whose (*) Base Camp is partly staffed by the local Sherpa people. For 10 points, name this
country with a non-rectangular red flag, where the parliament in Kathmandu (KAHT-mahn-do) asserts
control of Mount Everest.
ANSWER: Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal [or Sanghiya Lotantrik Ganatantra Nepal]
This country's Gandaki River flows through the deepest gorge in the world; its other two major rivers
are the Kosi and the Karnali. In this country, the Outer Terai region ends at the Sivalik Hills. This country
still supplies the British army with khukhuri-wielding soldiers called "gurkhas." This country is home to the
Sherpa ethnic group, including Tenzing Norgay, who assisted Edmund Hillary. For 10 points, name this
landlocked nation in-between India and China where Mount Everest is located.
ANSWER: Democratic Republic of Nepal
In this country, the Gandaki River forms a basin within which Dhualagiri rises. The Pahari people live
primarily in this country's Hill Region. A popular tourist destination here is Lumbini, purportedly the site of
a notable birth in 563 BCE. Its namesake language was once called Khaskura and Gorkhali. The Rana
dynasty constructed the Singha Durbar in its capital, which lies on the Bagmati River. This country is
located south of Tibet, and its border with China is the site of Lhotse and Mount Everest. For 10 points,
name this landlocked Himalayan country between India and China.
ANSWER: Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal
This country sits on the eastern side of the Terai grasslands. Rivers in this country include the Kamala
River, the river of seven tributaries, the Koshi, and the Karnali, the longest in this country. The capital of
this country forms a tri-cities region with Lalitpur and Bhaktapur in its namesake valley. The Siliguri
Corridor separates this country's southeast corner from Bangladesh, and this country is bordered on three
sides by India. Its northern border with China sits along the Himalayas. For 10 points, name this southeast
Asian nation with capital at Kathmandu and home to Sagarmatha, or Mount Everest.
ANSWER: Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal [or Sanghiya Loktantrik Ganatantra Nepal]
One colony of this country named its airport after Franklin Delano Roosevelt because his ancestors
lived there in the 18th century. That island, named after Saint Eustace, forms the SSS islands with another
colonized island of this country whose capital is The Bottom, Saba. The tumba is an indigenous form of
music from one colony of this country. Papamiento is spoken in many of this country's colonies. In 2010, it
changed the status of a colonial grouping that included Aruba and Curacao. For 10 points, identify this
former country whose namesake "Antilles" were split into their constituent parts, and which is led by
Queen Beatrix.
ANSWER: Kingdom of the Netherlands
The islands of Saba and Bonaire are a part of this country, and its highest point, Vaalserberg, lies in
the Ardennes in the south. The mouths of the Meuse and the Scheldt lie in this country, and its cities
include Tilburg and Utrecht. This country's area has steadily increased over the years due to use of
polders in land reclamation. This country is home to the world's largest port, (*) Rotterdam, which lies
on the mouth of the Rhine. This country lies mostly below sea level and is home to the Europol and the
International Court of Justice, both of which are located in The Hague. This country borders the North Sea
to the north and Germany to the east, and along with Belgium and Luxembourg, this country forms the Low
Countries. For ten points, identify this country with capital at Amsterdam.
ANSWER: the Netherlands (or Holland)
One city in this country features the Cube Houses designed by Piet Blom, while that same city also
contains the Euromast tower, constructed for the Floriade, a horticultural exhibition in this country.
The West Frisian Islands are separated from this country's mainland by the Wadden Sea, and the (*)
Amstel River terminates in its capital. This nation's Delta Works helps to prevent flooding in provinces like
Zeeland, and its Peace Palace houses the International Court of Justice in The Hague. Featuring numerous
windmills, for 10 points, name this low-lying country with cities such as Utrecht and Rotterdam and whose
capital is Amsterdam.
ANSWER: The Netherlands
This country's city of The Bottom is the capital of the island of Saba, which is home to its highest
peak, Mount Scenery. Arie Slob currently leads this country's ChristianUnion party. From 1994 to
2002, it was led by a coalition which was criticized in the book The Wreckage of Eight Purple Years,
whose author was assassinated just before this country's general election. A filmmaker from this
country was assassinated by Mohammed Bouyeri for criticizing the treatment of women in Islam in his
film Submission. It's not Denmark, but this country's province of Zeeland contains much of the delta
formed by the Scheldt, Meuse and Rhine rivers and borders Belgium to the south. About half of its land
area is at or below the level of the North Sea. For 10 points, what country known for its polders and dikes
has dual capitals The Hague and Amsterdam?
ANSWER: Kingdom of the Netherlands [accept Holland]
This country's series of construction projects known as the Delta Works started after it was flooded by
the North Sea in 1953. This nation's territories include Aruba and a portion of Saint Martin, and its cities
include one often painted by Jan Vermeer, Delft, and the home of the International Court of Justice, the
Hague. For 10 points, name this European nation, with capital at Amsterdam.
ANSWER: Kingdom of the Netherlands [or Koninkrijk der Nederlanden]
According to the American Society of Civil Engineers, this country's Delta Works, built after a 1953
flood, are one of the Seven Wonders of the Modern World. In 2012, a judge from this country ruled that
tourists could be banned from buying products that contain THC from this country's coffee shops, many of
which are located in a city with a famous red-light district. Both the International Court of Justice and the
International Criminal Court are located in this country as it is home to the Hague. This country is famed
for its tulip production, which once sparked a namesake mania. For 10 points, name this country that
contains both North and South Holland.
ANSWER: Kingdom of the Netherlands [prompt on "Low Countries" or "Holland"]
The fortress of Nyenschantz once stood at this question's mouth, but was later renamed Schlotburg and it has
its source in the town of Shlisselburg. After flowing through the cities of Kirovsk and Otradnoye, this question
breaks into Srednaya, Malaya and Bolshaya arms at its mouth. Tributaries of this river include the Mga,
Izhora and Tosna while the bridges of Blagoveshchensky and Liteyny cross its Fontanka, Griboyedov and
Moika canals. Islands in this question include Krestovsky, Kamenny and Vasilievsky and it eventually catches
the flow of the Vuoksi, Svir and Volkhov rivers. The site of the defeat of Birger Magnusson in 1240 after
which Alexander Yaroslavich named himself after this question, for 10 points, identify this Russian river which
forms at Lake Ladoga and flows through Saint Petersburg.
ANSWER: Neva River
A pontoon bridge built across this river named for St. Isaac was rebuilt every summer after the death of
a man who hated bridges and preferred ferries. Vasiliyevsky Island is located in this river's delta. A canal
connects this river to the Svir River, which flows between the two largest lakes in Europe. This river flows
west from Lake Ladoga. The "Bronze Horseman" statue faces this river, around which some inhabitants
celebrate the "White Nights" during the summer. For 10 points, name this river of Europe, which flows
through St. Petersburg.
ANSWER: Neva River
This state contains a mostly man-made geyser surrounded by seemingly painted rock known as
Fly Geyser. A national park in this state contains Lehman Caves and many bristlecone pines. This
state contains Pyramid Lake and the Black Rock Desert. The majority of the Great (*) Basin lies
within this state, which includes a city nicknamed the "Biggest Little City in the World." Lake Tahoe lies
on this state's border with California. For 10 points, name this "Silver State," whose cities include Carson
City and Las Vegas.
ANSWER: Nevada
One town in this state hosts an annual Old Spice festival in honor of its nickname, the "Armpit of America,"
while another town is planned to feature a 10,000-year clock on Mount Washington funded by the Long
Now Foundation. The eastern portion is home to sights like Cave Lake State Park and Steptoe Valley, near
the aforementioned town of Ely. The central portion is fed by the Reese River, which has its terminus at the
town of Battle Mountain, joined in the north of this state by towns like Elko and Winnemucca on the
Humboldt River. This site of Walker Lake and Pyramid Lake is also home to such cities as Paradise and
one known as the "biggest little city in the world." FTP, name this state which boasts Reno and Las Vegas.
ANSWER: Nevada
The largest national forest in the contiguous United States is this state's Humboldt National
Forest. The Truckee River on this state's western border flows out of its Lake Tahoe. Three-quarters
of this state's population lives in its southernmost Clark County, home to the city of (*) Paradise. One
city in this state contains a long, well-lit "Strip" home to the Luxor, Caesars Palace, and the Bellagio. For
10 points, identify this western state home to Carson City and Las Vegas.
ANSWER: Nevada
The northeast part of this state contains the Goshute Valley just east of the Ruby Mountains. A Paiute
Indian Reserve surrounds this state's Pyramid Lake, and its most populous city, which has suburbs like
Sunrise Manor and Henderson, is served by McCarran International Airport and lies west of Lake Mead.
Once the site of the Comstock Lode in Virginia City, this state now houses the "biggest little city in the
world." For 10 points, identify this state that lies on the eastern shores of Lake Tahoe and contains cities
like Reno, Carson City, and Las Vegas.
ANSWER: Nevada
Plans regarding one site in this state are contrasted to a boy's suicide by jumping off of its largest structure
in a nonfiction work that ends with a discussion of how Munch's The Scream may be used to signal danger
to future humans. That site in this state, the subject of John D-Agata's About a Mountain, is located east of
the Amargosa Desert and would have been home to a dry cask storage site. This state's foreclosure rate has
been highest in the nation for 62 straight months. This state, which contains most of the Great Basin, is
home to the Stratosphere, Circus, Circus, and the Bellagio. For 10 points, name this state that contains Las
Vegas.
ANSWER: Nevada
This polity is the home of the literary critic who analyzed William Blake's poetry in Fearful Symmetry.
The artist Alex Colville taught at Mount Allison University in this province. The Mi'kmaq tribe in this
polity built the Augustine burial mound. Northrop Frye is from this province and home of the Tantramar
Marshes, which are located near the Bay of Fundy. This province is bordered by Quebec's Gaspe
(gas-PAY) Peninsula on its north. This province is the only one of Canada's Maritime Provinces that is
constitutionally bilingual. For ten points, name this Canadian province whose largest city is St. John.
ANSWER: New Brunswick
This province's cities of Newcastle and Chatham were merged in 1995 to form a new city named after
the Great Miramichi fire of 1825. This province includes an island group at the head of Passamaquoddy
Bay that includes Grand Manan and Franklin Roosevelt's summer home of Campobello. Point de Bute and
Halls Hill are found near its border with Nova Scotia, while Canada's first university and the "reversing
falls" are also found on the major river of this province. For 10 points, the Saint John also hosts the capital,
Fredericton, of what eastern Canadian province?
ANSWER: New Brunswick
A 1998 accord named after its capital will allow its legislature to call a referendum on independence after
2014 which is unlikely as long as the Future Together party remains in the majority. The plurarity of its
population is Kanak, while other groups predominate on the outlying Loyalty Islands. Its major island, La
Grande Terre, is home to most of its population as well as 1/4 of the world's nickel reserves. For 10 points,
name this Melanesian territory, which is a part of France but not an overseas department, with capital at
Noumea.
ANSWER: New Caledonia
One of the financial hubs of this city is Connaught Place, which was targeted by blasts in
September 2008. A statue of King George V was moved to this city's Coronation Park, but was
initially found under a gate commemorating its country's veterans designed by Edwin Lutyens, chief
architect of this city. Other locations in this city the Red Fort, where a national Prime Minister gives
speeches. Shah Jahan constructed the (*) Old City that bears this city's name. For 10 points, name this
capital of India.
ANSWER: New Delhi
Some of this island's territorial capitals include Kundiawa, Wabag, and Popondetta while other large
cities include Manokwari and Jayapura. Its longest rivers include the Mamberamo, Digul, Sepik and Fly.
Its peaks include the former Carstensz Pyramid in Lorentz National Park of the Sudirman Range, and the
highest point of the Bismarck Range, Puncak Jaya and Mount Wilhelm. For 10 points, name this second
largest island in the world, divided between Indonesia and an eponymous country whose name starts
with Papua.
ANSWER: New Guinea
The Raja Ampat Islands and this island are the last habitats of the Northern cassowary. Michael
Rockefeller disappeared while investigating this island's Asmat region. This island's highest point is Puncak
Jaya, though its Mount Wilhelm is sometimes considered the highest point in Oceania. This island's
western half was once known as Irian Jaya; its eastern half is part of an independent country with capital at
Port Moresby. For 10 points, name this island that includes Indonesia's West Papua province.
ANSWER: New Guinea [do not accept "Papua New Guinea"]
This island's Baliem Valley is home to the Dani people. The Bismarck Range in the eastern part of this
island contains Mount Wilhelm. Lorentz National Park, which can be found on this island, contains the
Asmat Swamp. This island's Puncak Jaya is the highest island peak in the world. Port Moresby is the capital
of a nation found entirely on this island; the western part of this island is the province of Irian Jaya. For 10
points, name this second largest island in the world, which is split between Indonesia and a nation that
precedes this island's name with Papua.
ANSWER: New Guinea
New Britain and New Ireland lie to its northeast, and Ternate and Ambon lie to its southwest. Its highest
point is Puncak Jaya in the Sundirman Range, at the base of which dwell the Dani people, who were in 1938
the last large society to make contact with the rest of the world. In 1828, the Netherlands became the first
European nation to lay claim to a part of it, and it was divided between the Dutch, the British and the
Germans until World War I. Today, the Indonesian portion of it has its capitals at Manokwari and Jayapura
while Port Moresby is the capital of the other part of the island. For 10 points, name this second-largest
island in the world.
ANSWER: New Guinea [or Papua]
During the last half-millennium, people in this landmass's highlands developed large bellies from
protein deficiency after the sweet potato became a staple crop. The HMS Fly names one river on this
landmass, whose west is home to Wilson's bird of paradise. This landmass's languages include Tok Pisin,
and its Fore people ate the brains of their dead, leading to an outbreak of the prion disease kuru. A
tribesman named Yali on this island inspired Jared Diamond to write Guns, Germs, and Steel. Its highest
point is at Puncak Jaya, and cities on its right side include Port Moresby. For ten points, name this island
east of the Malay archipelago, whose western half belongs to Indonesia.
ANSWER: New Guinea [or Niugini; or Papua; do not accept "Papua New Guinea"]
Guns, Germs, and Steel author Jared Diamond is an expert in the birds of this island, which include
Wilson's Bird of Paradise. This island or its offshore waters are where Michael Rockefeller
disappeared, perhaps being eaten by cannibals in 1961 in a part of this island now known as Irian
Jaya. Formerly occupied in part by three Germanic-language speaking European nations, a 2012
study showed that its highlands are the most (*) linguistically diverse place on earth. Larger than Borneo
but smaller than Greenland, it is the second-largest island in the world. For 10 points, name this island
shared by Indonesia and a namesake country.
ANSWER: New Guinea [do not prompt on "Guinea", "Papua New Guinea", or any others]
Dolak Island is narrowly separated from this landmass at its southwestern corner. This island's
western portion is drained by the Digul and Fly Rivers. The Mamberamo River is the longest river in
this island, whose Puncak Jaya is its tallest peak. It contains the (*) Bismarck Range, with prominent
peaks such as Mount Wilhelm. Bordered to the west by the Arafura Sea and separated by Torres Strait from
Australia, this island is home to a nation with capital at Port Moresby. For ten points, name this second-
largest island in the world, whose western half contains Indonesia's Papua province.
ANSWER: New Guinea (do not accept "Papua New Guinea")
The extreme northwest of this island contains the Doberai Peninsula, often referred to as the "Bird's Head."
This island's West contains the Digul and Sepik River. This island's Bismarck range contains Mt. Wilhelm,
and other islands located to its east include the Admiralty Islands, Bougainville, and New Britain. The
western half of this island, called Irian Jaya, contains the peak Puncak Jaya, and this island is divided
around 141 degrees east, with the exception of some of the border formed by the Fly River. For 10 points,
identify this island which contains the capital Port Moresby and is split between Indonesia in the West and
a namesake country in the East.
ANSWER: New Guinea [do not accept "Papua New Guinea"]
One nationalist movement based on this island used the Morning Star Flag. This island has a
namesake singing dog breed. Its northwestern and southeastern points are known as the Bird's Head
Peninsula and the Bird's Tail Peninsula because of its resemblance to a species of bird predominantly
found here, the bird-of-paradise. The Owen Stanley Range on this island can be traversed via the (*)
Kokoda Track. One region on this island was historically called Irian Jaya. The highest point on this island
is Puncak Jaya. This island lies west of the Bismarck and Solomon archipelagos. The Torres Strait separates
this island from Australia. For 10 points, name this second largest island in the world, which is split
between Indonesia and a nation whose name prefixes the name of this island with Papua.
ANSWER: New Guinea [or Papua Island before mention; or Irian Island before mention; accept Papu New Guinea only after "Indonesia" is read and do not accept earlier; do not accept "Irian Jaya"]
One country on this island employs Tok Pisin as its official language. It lies north of the Gulf of
Carpentaria. The Torres Strait separates this island from Cape York Peninsula. The highest point on this
island is Puncak Jaya, also known as Carstensz Pyramid, which is the highest island peak in the world. It is
divided in two at the 141st meridian east. Its eastern half is a former Australian colony with a capital at Port
Moresby, and its western half is a province of Indonesia. For 10 points, name this large island, which along
with "Papua" names an Indian Ocean nation.
ANSWER: New Guinea [do not accept "Papua New Guinea"]
This state's Rattlesnake Hill in the town of Redstone quarried rocks used to build the Library of
Congress and the Willey family tragedy attracted many artists to its Conway Valley. Lonesome Lake
and Greenleaf are high-altitude huts in this state located near glacial tarns atop Mount Lafayette and
Franconia Ridge, which are operated by the Appalachian Mountain Club throughout its (*)
Presidential Range. Crawford Notch was a popular painting subject in this state whose southern lowlands
contain the isolated granite monolith of Mount Monadnock. Its Lake Winnipesaukee drains into the
Merrimack River from the White Mountains. Theodore Roosevelt hosted negotiations to end the RussoJapanese War in this state, which is bordered on its west by the Connecticut River. For 10 points, identify
this state home to Portsmouth, whose largest city is Manchester and whose capital is at Concord.
ANSWER: New Hampshire
This state is estimated to have been continually populated for nearly three thousand years, and the first
European settlers were the Dutch and the Swedes. Its present Governor is Republican but both its Senators
are Democrats, and one of them is the only Senator to have returned to the Senate after retirement. The
main airport in this state is the second-largest hub for Continental Airlines, and its largest city is home to the
Prudential Center. The fifth-smallest state in the US, Elizabeth and Edison are amongst the bigger cities in
this state. FTP, name this north-eastern state, adjacent to New York City, that is home to Newark Airport
and the Nets.
ANSWER: New Jersey
This state is home to Mannington River, the Mullica River, and the Wading River. It contains the
Brendan T. Byrne State Forest, as well as Lake Hopatcong. The mayor of its largest city is former
Rhodes Scholar (*) Cory Booker, a city that is located in Essex County. This state has the United States-
highest population density, and is home to the cities of Elizabeth, Union City, and Gloucester City. It
contains Continental Airlines Arena the home of the Nets, and The Meadowlands, the home of the Jets, and
Giants. For 10 points, name this state whose cities include Cape May, Hoboken, Camden, Trenton, and
Newark.
ANSWER: New Jersey
One of only two North American continental hotspots is located in this state at the Valles Caldera,
and that volcanic complex is responsible for the surrounding Jemez Mountains. The Truchas Peaks
are the second-highest mountains in this state, and they are the source of the Pecos River. A
prominent volcanic intrusion that is a legendary mountain climbing challenge is located in the
northwest of this state; that feature is (*) Shiprock. Abiquiu ("Ah-B-Q") in the north of this state is the
site of the Ghost Ranch, where Georgia O-Keeffe lived for the last 50 years of her life, and this state
includes nineteen of the twenty-one surviving Native American pueblos. For 10 points, name this state
which is home to Los Alamos.
ANSWER: New Mexico
Francisco de Ibarra gave this state its name while searching for gold mines near its Zuni-Cibola complex.
This state's southeastern region contains part of the Delaware Basin. Burnet Cave in this state is near its
Clovis archaeological site. Name this state home to the White Sands National Monument near Alamogordo,
and, for 10 points, Carlsbad Caverns, with capital Santa Fe.
ANSWER: New Mexico
Its newest state monument is south of Socorro on I-25 and tells the story of the Camino Real de Tierra
Adentro. Its state museum of Space History, located in Alamogordo, celebrates the space exploits in
the Tularosa Basin. Taos Pueblo is located in the Sangre de Christo foothills, and the Georgia O-Keefe
Museum is part of the nation's oldest state capital. For ten points, name this Western state, the "Land of
Enchantment" with capital at Santa Fe.
ANSWER: New Mexico
A large effigy called Zozobra is burned during an annual festival in this state's capital city. Virgin Galactic
is headquartered at the Spaceport America near this state's town of Truth or Consequences. Archeological
sites along this state's Trails of the Ancients Byway include Aztec Ruins National Monument and Chaco
Cultural Historical Park, as well as the city of Farmington. This state's White Sands Missile Range was the
site of the 1945 Trinity nuclear test. For 10 points, name this southwestern U.S. state with a capital at Santa
Fe.
ANSWER: New Mexico [accept Santa Fe or Fiestas de Santa Fe until "this state-s"]
This state includes the northern peaks of the Guadalupe Mountains, an ancient reef. It also contains the
western half of the Llano Estacado. Parks in its northwest region include the misnamed Aztec Ruins,
Petroglyph, and Chaco Culture, and Shiprock is a large exposed needle-like rock in this state. Its highest
point is Wheeler Peak, in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, and the Pecos River originates in this state. The
Trinity Site is located in a missile range surrounding its White Sands National Monument, and it also
contains Carlsbad Caverns. Its largest city is Albuquerque. For 10 points, name this U.S. state whose capital
is Santa Fe.
ANSWER: New Mexico
This state is the location of the Mogollon [moh-goh-YOHN] mountains, an important location for the
Mimbres culture one thousand years ago that also inhabited this state's Gila Cliff Dwellings. It also contains
several kiva ceremonial rooms in Frijoles [free-HOH-layss] Canyon in Bandelier [ban-duh-LEER] National
Monument, which has been damaged by the 2011 Las Conchas and 2000 Cerro Grande [SAIR-oh GRAHNday] fires. On July 16, 1945, the Trinity nuclear test took place in this state near Alamogordo. This state is
the origin of the Pecos River, and the Rio Grande enters it after leaving Colorado and before forming the
southern border of Texas. Name this state with largest city Albuquerque and capital Santa Fe.
ANSWER: New Mexico
Suburbs of this city include Gretna and Kenner. Treme is a notable African-American neighborhood in
this city, and the old red-light district was known as Storyville. The Canal Street, Riverfront, and St.
Charles Street lines are all that remains of this city's historic streetcar system. For 10 points, name this city
south of Lake Ponchartrain whose Lower Ninth Ward was devastated by Hurricane Katrina and whose
French Quarter is famous for Mardi Gras.
ANSWER: New Orleans
A 1788 fire during the Spanish rule of this city destroyed over 75% of its buildings and led to the
construction of the Cabildo and the Presbytere. The Sieur de Bienville was responsible for the initial
planning of most of this city. City Park and Lakeview were built after the(*) drainage of much of the
northern part of this city. Near this city's suburb of Metairie is the Lake Pontchartrain Causeway, and this
city is home to the Treme and French Quarter neighborhoods. For 10 points, name this city in which a
notable Mardi Gras celebration occurs, and which was heavily flooded by Hurricane Katrina.
ANSWER: New Orleans, Louisiana
One of these objects was destroyed in 1927 in Caenarvon. Louis Farrakhan says that Mayor Ray Nagin
told him these structures were destroyed in order to dislocate black people. These objects, which were
located at 17th Street and London Avenue, most greatly affected the Plaquemines and Saint Bernard
Parishes. These structures succumbed to overtopping from nearby Lake Ponchartrain. The US Army Corps
of Engineers were blamed for poor design of these structures after their 2005 failure. For 10 points, name
these structures which didn't hold back water from Hurricane Katrina.
ANSWER: New Orleans levee system [or New Orleans flood walls; or levees in Lousiana, on th Mississippi River, etc.]
In this state, the city of Albury is located on the Hume Highway and has a twin city called Wodonga
in another state. This state contains the Jervis Bay Territory, along with Cape Byron on its northeast
coast. In 1813, Gregory Blaxland found a way through the Blue Mountains, which lie to the west of
this state's most populous city, which lies south of Gosford and (*) Newcastle. This state contains one
third of its country's population, and it is located south of Queensland. For 10 points-name this state,
located north of Victoria on the eastern coast of Australia, that has Sydney as its largest city. It is named
after a country in the United Kingdom.
ANSWER: New South Wales
This state's Lake Tear of the Clouds lies on the southern side of Mount Marcy, while Utica lies in the
Mohawk Valley. The Morris Canal connects the Delaware River to this state's longest river, which
flows past cities like Beacon, Yonkers, and Troy. This state contains Lake Ostego, the source of the
(*) Susquehanna River, and Ithaca lies at the tip of Cayuga Lake, one of the Finger Lakes. This is the only
state to border both a Great Lake and the Atlantic Ocean, and contains the northern tip of the Allegheny
Plateau, as well as the Adirondack and Catskill Mountains. For ten points, name this northeastern state that
contains the Hudson River and has capital at Albany.
ANSWER: New York
In this state, barrier islands around Bellport Bay were decimated by the 1962 Ash Wednesday Storm. At the
other end of this state, toxic waste leached from a Hooker Chemical dump site at one of the EPA's first
superfund sites, Love Canal. Its largest city barely avoided a direct hit by Hurricane Gloria, which set a
record for storm surge at Battery Park. In this state, a 1977 blackout, which triggered arson near Crown
Heights, spared the Rockaways. The 1993 Storm of the Century dumped two feet of snow in this state's
Catskills Mountains. For 10 points, name this state, where subway flooding and massive damage on Long
Island were caused by Hurricane Sandy.
ANSWER: State of New York [or New York State]
Nye Mountain is one of the 46 "High Peaks" within this state's largest mountain range. The Saranac river
flows through the largest national park in the contiguous United States in this state, and this state contains
Hemlock Lake and Oneida Lake, part of a group of eleven appendage-like lakes. This state contains the
highest-elevation portion of the Appalachian Plateau. Lake Champlain borders this state and its neighbor
Vermont, and a canal connects Lake Erie to another river in this state, the Hudson. For 10 points, name this
Mid-Atlantic state which contains the Catskill and Adirondack Mountains and has a capital at Albany.
ANSWER: New York
One architectural landmark in this city has a circular hole in its so-called "Chippendale roof" and was
bought by Sony from AT&T. The Circle Line ferry operates in this city, which contains a neighborhood
abbreviates the descriptor "south of Houston Street" and two divisions connected by the long
Verazzano-Narrows bridge. SoHo and TriBeCa are neighborhoods in this city of 8 million people. For 10
points, name this city made of five boroughs, the home of the Empire State Building.
ANSWER: New York City
This city's Little Hell Gate used to run between Wards and Randall's Island, which are joined to
Astoria by the Hell Gate Bridge. Neighborhoods in one of this city's major areas include St. George,
Tompkinsville, and Stapleton, and the Verrazano-Narrows bridge connects that area to another one
that includes Sunset Park. [*] Harlem is an area in one of this city's boroughs, which also include Queens,
Staten Island and one whose namesake Bridge spans the East River. For 10 points, Brooklyn is part of this
most populous city in the United States of America that is home to Manhattan, the Empire State Building,
and Times Square.
ANSWER: New York City [accept NYC; accept "New York, New York"]
This country's sixteen regions were established in 2002 to follow natural watershed boundaries. In
addition, it administers several territories, including the Chatham Islands and Tokelau. Southeast of the
Tasman Sea, it was home to the extinct moa, who were hunted to extinction by its indigenous Maori
peoples. The Cook Strait separates the two main landmasses of this nation also home to the kiwi bird. For
10 points, name this Pacific nation with capital Wellington and largest city Auckland, which has a North
and South Island.
ANSWER: New Zealand
This country's Mount Rapehu serves as the source of the Waikato River, which drains into Lake
Taupo. This country is home to the Fox and Franz Josef Glaciers, and it controls the Chatham
Islands, Tokelau, and Stewart Island. This country's Antipodes Islands are notable for lying near the
opposite side of the earth from London, and its (*) Canterbury Plains are located south of Christchurch.
This country's highest point, Aoraki, lies in its Southern Alps, and it borders the Tasman Sea to the
northwest. Its two parts are separated by the Cook Strait and are known as North and South Island. For ten
points, name this Pacific Island country with largest city at Auckland and a capital of Wellington.
ANSWER: New Zealand
A popular tourist site in this nation consists of a walkway punctuated by a series of blowholes, an
area called Pancake Rocks. This nation owns an island group called the Forty-Fours, part of the
Chatham Archipelago. Viaduct Harbor is found at the shores of this nation's largest city, which is
nicknamed the "City of Sails." Parts of this nation's state of (*) Otago form the southern part of the
Canterbury Plains, which include Christchurch. This nation's highest point lies in the Southern Alps and
shares its name with that of a strait that separates its two sections. Auckland is located in this country, where
The Lord of the Rings was filmed. For 10 points, name this nation that consists of two large islands located
east of Australia, with its capital at Wellington.
ANSWER: New Zealand [or Aotearoa]
This country's Rotorua caldera is a part of the volcanic system named for its largest lake. The Huka
Falls empty that lake, Lake Taupo, into the Waikato River, which names a university in this
country's fourth-largest city, Hamilton. Tauranga lies on this country's Bay of Plenty and this
country's largest (*) island contains both the Southern Alps and the city of Christchurch. The Cook Strait
separates this country's North and South Islands and borders its capital, Wellington. For 10 points, name
this nuclear-free neighbor of Australia, a Pacific country whose largest city is Auckland.
ANSWER: New Zealand
In this country, inventive uses for a commonly-used fencing material led to a saying about its
so-called "Number 8 wire" mentality. The first Standardbred horse to win a million dollars,
Cardigan Bay, was from this country, whose indigenous art often features symbols representing
uncurling silver ferns. In 1893, it became the first modern country to enact female suffrage.
Highly-regarded (*) Sauvignon Blanc is produced in the Marlborough region of this country. A 2011
earthquake in this country caused a period of "Marmageddon", in which locally-made Marmite was
temporarily unavailable. Its non-native settlers are referred to as "Pakeha." For 10 points, name this country
whose inhabitants are known as "Kiwis."
ANSWER: New Zealand [or Aotearoa]
Off the southern tip of this country is Stewart Island. The Bay of Plenty indents the northern end of this
country, which is also surrounded by the Kermadec Islands and the Chatham Islands. Its highest point,
Aoraki, is located in the Southern Alps. This country, whose native name is Aotearoa, houses three-fourths
of its population on its North Island, which is separated from the South Island by the Cook Strait. Its native
people are known as the Maori. For 10 points, name this island nation that contains the cities of Wellington
and Auckland.
ANSWER: New Zealand
This country's Waikato region is home to the Waitomo Glowworm caves while the West Coast region is
home to Fox Glacier and Franz Josef Glacier. This country is located on the boundary of two tectonic
plates, leading to volcanic activity in the Taupo Volcanic Zone and frequent earthquakes, such as the one
that struck Christchurch in February 2011. Most people in this country live on the North and South Islands.
A May 2011 tornado cut a three mile wide path through this country's city of Auckland. For 10 points,
name this country with capital at Wellington.
ANSWER: New Zealand
This country's Antarctic claim is known as the Ross Dependency, which was the home of the World Park
Base. Lake Taupo was formed as a caldera following a supervolcanic eruption in this country, and its city of
Christchurch was rocked by multiple earthquakes in 2010. The highest point in this country, Aoraki, lies in
its Southern Alps, and it is divided into two parts by the Cook Strait. For 10 points, name this country
divided into North and South Islands, whose cities include Auckland and Wellington.
ANSWER: New Zealand
This country's highest waterfall is the Sutherland Falls, while its easternmost point can be found on a
group of islands called The Forty-Fours. The most recent edition of the Corruption Perceptions
Index claims it is the least corrupt country in the world. Its Chatham Islands are found on its border
with the Pacific Ocean, and pohutukawa trees are native to this country. Volcanoes in this country
include Taranaki and Ruapehu. This country's tallest mountain is the Aoraki and is situated in its
Southern Alps. The Maori represent approximately ten percent of the population of this country, whose
large cities include Christchurch and Auckland. For 10 points, identify this nation with a capital at
Wellington.
ANSWER: New Zealand
In this country, the Franz Josef glacier lies on a coast west of the Canterbury Plains. This country owns
the Kermadec Islands and Hawkes Bay. Its tallest point, Aoraki, is part of a non-European mountain range,
the Southern Alps. Marlborough Bay is an extension of the Cook Strait, which separates this country's two
largest components. For 10 points, name this country with a South Island and a North Island, the latter of
which contains cities such as Wellington and Auckland.
ANSWER: New Zealand
The Franz Joseph and Fox Glaciers can be found in this nation, notable for existing at low altitudes. Its
largest lake, found in the caldera of Mount Tauhara, is drained by the Waikato River and is called Lake
Taupo. Its region known as the Canterbury Plains is found to the south of Christchurch, while its tallest
mountain is Mount Cook. Also including the city of Auckland, the Cook Strait separates its two constituent
islands, which are called North and South Island. For 10 points, Wellington is the capital of which island
nation found east of Australia?
ANSWER: New Zealand
Mt. Egmont is a stratovolcano on the west coast of this nation. This nation's largest city lies on the
Hauraki Gulf, and this nation's city of Rotorua lies near the Bay of Plenty and is home to the Lady
Knox and Pohotu Geysers. The Southern Alps of this nation stretch into the Fiordlands of its west
coast. Lake Taupo lies near this nation's (*) Tongariro volcano and the Cook Strait separates two halves
of this nation. For 10 points, name this nation in the Pacific that is home to Auckland and Wellington and is
split into North and South islands.
ANSWER: New Zealand
The discovery of ore in Gabriel's Gully prompted a gold-rush along this country's Clutha River.
The Hundalee Hills mark the northern extent of this country's Canterbury Plains. The Fox and
Franz Joseph Glaciers in this country descend from its Southern Alps. Its tallest mountain is (*)
Aoraki, which comes from an indigenous word for "cloud piercer." This country is mainly centered on
North and South Island, and its largest city is Auckland. For 10 points, name this island country, the home
of the Maori, which is foudn to the east of Australia.
ANSWER: New Zealand
This nation's city of Oban is located on Stewart Island, which is separated from the rest of the nation by the
Foveaux Strait. This country's largest lake is the volcanic Lake Taupo, and its Te Anau cave system is
famous for its glowworms. The capital of this nation is the world's southernmost capital, and this nation is
home to both the Milford Trail and Fjordland National Park. The two largest island of this nation are
separated by the Cook Straight. For ten points, identify this nation which contains the cities of Christchurch,
Auckland, and Wellington.
ANSWER: New Zealand
As of 2002, this country is the largest user of a sodium fluoroacetate-derived pesticide called 1080. The
timber industry in this country was historically driven by logging of its kauri tree. This country is home to
the only living sphenodont, whose survival is threatened by the kiore rat and which has an unusually welldeveloped photoreceptive third eye, complete with lens and retina. That lizard-like "living fossil" is named
for the crested spine on its back. This country, whose only native land mammals are bats, is home to the
reptilian tuatara and an enormous insect called a weta. The extinct Haast's eagle hunted the equally extinct
moa in this country, whose human residents are outnumbered by sheep ten to one. For 10 points, name this
island nation, the home of the kiwi bird.
ANSWER: New Zealand [or Aotearoa]
Although it is not in Scandinavia, Doubtful Sound and Milford Sound are among the many
mountain-ringed inlets in this nation's Fjordlands. Stewart Island is found in the far south of this nation. The
Lady Knox Geyser lies near this nation's Bay of Plenty. The Southern Alps of this nation contain Aoraki, or
Mount Cook, which is this nation's tallest peak. Consisting mostly of North Island and South Island, for 10
points, name this country in Oceania whose major cities include Auckland and Wellington.
ANSWER: New Zealand
One island in this country contains the city of Dunedin and the Southern Alps. Its national
anthems are "God Defend [this country]" and "God Save the Queen." The Foveaux Strait separates
Stewart Island from one section of this country known as (*) South Island. Flightless birds that are
endemic to this nation include the extinct Moa and the still-present Kiwi birds. This country is separated
from its northwestern neighbor by the Tasman Strait. The Maori are the indigenous people of, for 10 points,
what country whose capital is Wellington?
ANSWER: New Zealand
A park in this city is known for being the first county park in the nation and for its cherry
blossoms. Much of city's subway line runs along that park, Branch Brook Park. This city's
Ironbound neighborhood is known for its Portugese population, and the arrest of cabdriver John W.
Smith led to a 1967 race riot here. Neighboring (*) Elizabeth is also home to part of this city's namesake
airport, which had "Liberty" appended to its name after 9/11. For 10 points, name this city eight miles west
of New York, the largest in New Jersey.
ANSWER: Newark, New Jersey
The French possession St. Pierre et Miquelon lies to the south of this island, whose southeastern
portion is the Avalon Peninsula. The Long Range Mountains are found on this island that is
separated from the mainland by the Strait of Belle Isle, which connects the Gulf of St. Lawrence and
the Atlantic Ocean, while the Cabot Strait separates this island from Nova Scotia. For 10 points, name this
island that, together with Labrador, is a Canadian province with capital at St. John's.
ANSWER: Newfoundland [do not accept any mention of Labrador]
This island was reached on the second expedition of Humphrey Gilbert, and it was colonized by John Guy
at Cupids on Conception Bay. This island was home to the extinct Beothuk people, and is home to the
archaeological site L-Anse aux Meadows. This island is home to the Long Range Mountains, and is
separated by the Strait of Belle Isle from the mainland. The islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon are located
south of this island, and the Grand Banks fishing grounds are located to its southeast. This island contains
the Avalon Peninsula, which is home to the city of St. John's. For 10 points, name this Canadian island that
makes up a province along with Labrador.
ANSWER: Newfoundland
An escarpment of this name runs through the Bruce Peninsula. The first safe railway suspension bridge,
built by John Roebling, crossed a gorge of this name, and an Aero Car crosses a whirlpool of this name. A
Lewiston hydroplant is named for "Robert Moses" and this. The Welland Canal bisects a peninsula home to
Hamilton called this. In 1969, a landmark of this name was dammed to clear rockslides. Cave of the Winds
and Goat Island are at that landmark, at which Annie Taylor traveled in a barrel. A river called this, flowing
past Buffalo from Lake Erie, is plied by the Maid of the Mist. For 10 points, give this name for a big
waterfall between New York and Ontario.
ANSWER: Niagara [or Niagara Falls; or Niagara Escarpment; or Niagara Gorge; or Niagara Whirlpool; or Robert Moses Niagara Hydroelectric Power Station; or Niagara Peninsula; or Niagara River]
This American location was where the French performer "Blondin" performed his feats. In the 1800s,
the Caroline was burned and destroyed at this location. It is spanned by the Rainbow Bridge, which was
built after the collapse of the Honeymoon Bridge. Annie Edison Taylor used a barrel at this location in a
daring 1901 publicity stunt. A popular tourist component at this location is named "Bridal Veil" and
descends to the "Maid of the Mist Pool." For 10 points, name this waterfall located on the border between
Ontario and New York.
ANSWER: Niagara Falls
Though it doesn't flow through New York City, this river has a hydroelectric plant named for Parks
Commissioner Robert Moses. This river used to flow over the now-destroyed Cave of the Winds. Henry
Pellatt built another hydroelectric station on this river to power his hometown of Toronto. Goat Island
separates the Horseshoe and Bridal Veil Falls, which are between two identically named towns in Ontario
and New York. For 10 points, name this river on the US-Canadian border that contains the most
voluminous waterfalls in the world.
ANSWER: Niagara River
This country's capital is the location of the Dennis Martinez National Stadium. Madera and Concepcion
are two volcanic cones that form Ometepe Island in a lake named for this country, and Momotombo is a
volcano located on the shores of a lake that shares its name with this country's capital. This country's
cities of Bluefields and Puerto Cabezas are on its Mosquito Coast. The Coco River runs along this
country's northern border with Honduras. For 10 points, name this Central American country that has its
capital at Managua.
ANSWER: Nicaragua
One of this nation's cities celebrates the Palo de Mayo festival and another city contains the tamarind tree of
the Sutiaba and the cathedral of Benito de Baltondano. In addition to Bluefields and Leon, this country
includes the Islas de Maiz to the east, the Tipitapa River which joins its two large lakes, and the Cordillera
Isabella to the north. The San Juan River forms a part of the southern border of this nation, whose city of
Puerto Cabezas is found in a region named for an insect. For 10 points, name this Central American
country, home to the Mosquito coast, that lies between Costa Rica and Honduras with capital at Managua.
ANSWER: Nicaragua
This country was the intervening party in a 1992 ICJ case that stated that the other two parties
recognized its sovereignty in the Farallones Islands in the Gulf of Fonseca. Its two largest
departments are the autonomous regions of the North Atlantic and the South Atlantic. Both of its
Corn Islands were leased to the United States in the 1914 Treaty of Bryan-Chamorro. This country
disputes navigational rights on the San Juan River that makes up its southern border. This country's largest
lake has a namesake species of freshwater sharks and was the site of a proposed Atlantic-Pacific passage
before the Panama Canal was built. For 10 points, name this large Central American country south of
Honduras and north of Costa Rica that has its capital at Managua.
ANSWER: Republic of Nicaragua [or Republica de Nicaragua]
This country contains the ancient footprints of Acahualinca, which were made in volcanic ash, and its
Bosawas Biosphere Reserve protects the Western Hemisphere's second largest rainforest. Diriangen
led the Chorotegas of this country in their resistance to the Conquistador Gil Gonzalez Davila, and
its old capital was destroyed by an eruption of Momotombo. The largest port on the east coast of this
country is named after a Dutch pirate, Abraham Blauvelt, and once served as the capital of its
Mosquito Coast. This nation leased its Corn Islands to the United States in the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty in
1914, and its former capital of Granada served as the seat of government for the filibuster William Walker.
Bordered by Costa Rica and Honduras, for 10 points, name this Central American nation with capital at
Managua.
ANSWER: Republic of Nicaragua
Ometepe and Solentiname are islands in this nation's largest lake, and the Corn islands are found to the east
of this nation. The eastern portion of its border with its northern neighbor is marked by the Coco River,
while the San Juan river makes up this country's southern border. The city of Ocotal is located near the
Cordilera Isabelia mountain range in the northwest of this country, whose city of Matagalpa lies along the
Rio Grande. The chief port of this nation is Bluefields. Puerto Cabezas lies along its Mosquito Coast with
the Caribbean Sea. For 10 points, name this nation that borders Honduras to the north and Costa Rica to the
south, which has its capitol at Managua.
ANSWER: Nicaragua
This nation contains an archipelago called the Corn Islands off of its eastern coast. This country's largest
question of water is the source of the San Juan River and contains the Solentiname Islands as well as Zapatera
and Ometepe. This nation's lowland eastern coast is centered around the city of Bluefields and is known as
the Mosquito Coast, and it is the southernmost of the three nations with coastlines on the Gulf of Fonseca.
Bounded to the north by the Coco River, for 10 points, identify this central American nation situated
between Honduras and Costa Rica with capital at Managua.
ANSWER: Nicaragua
Cities in this country include La Rosita and Bonanza, lying along the Baubana river before it joins with the
Prinzapolca to flow into the Caribbean Sea. The city of San Carlos lies on the San Juan river and the edge
of this country's namesake lake, which is separated by the Amerrique Mountains from the Mosquito Coast.
Leon was the previous capital of this country whose previous president Violeta Chamorro was the first
democratically elected female in the Americas. Led now by Daniel Ortega, for 10 points, name this country
bordering Honduras and Costa Rica, with capital at Managua.
ANSWER: Nicaragua
The Solentiname Archipelago and Zapatera Island are located on this question of water. Mombacho is a
volcano on its western shore, and gold was transported over its Vanderbilt Road. The port of Granada on
this question of water was a hotbed of pirate activity, and much of that city was destroyed by William Walker.
An island in this lake is the location of Concepcion Volcano and is Ometepe Island. This lake is drained
into the Caribbean by the San Juan River, and the Tipitapa River sometimes connects it to Lake Managua.
For 10 points, name this largest lake in Central America, that shares its name with a country.
ANSWER: Lake Nicaragua [or Cocibolca; or Mar Dulce before mentioned]
In the 17th century, a town located on this lake, Granada, was attacked by pirates led by Henry Morgan.
This lake is home to an archipelago on which Father Cardenal built a church and attracted a community of
artists; that archipelago includes San Fernando Island and Mancarron Island. This lake, which contains the
Solentiname Islands and the islands of Zapatera and Ometepe, contains a namesake bull shark and is
connected to the Caribbean Sea by the San Juan River. Early plans for building a canal to connect the
Atlantic and Pacific involved building through the isthmus of Rivas and this lake. For 10 points, name the
largest lake in Central America.
ANSWER: Lake Nicaragua
One volcano in this lake is the source of Mombacho cigars, and two other volcanoes in this lake are
connected by an old lava bridge known as the Tistian Isthmus. An artist colony was set up on this lake's
Mancarron, the largest of the Solentiname Islands, and this lake's largest island is Ometepe. This lake is a
home to bull sharks and other ocean animals, which makes it the only freshwater lake with marine life. This
lake was known indigenously as Cocibolca, and it is drained by the San Juan River into the Caribbean Sea.
For 10 points, name this lake in Central America that shares its name with the country in which it is
located.
ANSWER: Lake Nicaragua
The Sultanate of Damagaram founded the second largest city in this country and The Erg of Bilma
located in this country lies east of the Air Mountains. Zinder, was the site of WWI uprising of
Touareg peoples against French colonialist forces. The (*) Grandee Mosque with its 171-step minaret
lies in the east of its capital city which sits on its namesake river that drains into the Bight of Benin. For 10
points, name this nation bordered by Chad to the east and Algeria to the north with capital at Niamey.
ANSWER: Niger
This river will soon undergo a massive silt removal to ease transportation between the cities of Baro and
Warri. This question of water contains an inland delta with its tributary, the Bani, near the city of Mopti.
Explorer Mungo Park was famous for sailing down this river, which allowed him to visit the cities of Segou,
Djenne, and Timbuktu. The source of this river is in Guinea, and it joins with the Benue River before
emptying into the Gulf of Guinea. For 10 points, identify this chief river of West Africa, the continent's
third longest behind the Nile and the Congo.
ANSWER: Niger River
A major hydroelectricity source along this river is the Kainji Dam. A now dried up river that used to
feed this river is the Azawad, and the region that the Azawad ran through now houses an independence
movement. At the city of Lokoja, this river is fed by the Benue [ben-way] River. Ethnic groups who
live along this river include the Zarma, who, like many people living along this river, speak a Songhai
language. The plateau of Yorubaland bounds this river's delta on the west. This river begins near
the border of Guinea and Sierra Leone, and a wide part of this river is at Macina in Mali. Name this
river that flows to the Gulf of Guinea via a namesake country whose capital is Niamey.
ANSWER: Niger River
The bottom half of this river used to be called the Quorra, and it is fed by the Bani River where it bends at
its inner delta, the Macina. Its actual delta has a region known as the South South Zone and used to be
known as the Oil Rivers, which are formed after it leaves the western end of the Sahel. This long river
begins in the Fouta Djallon (FOO-tah JAHL-on) Mountains in Guinea just like the Gambia and Senegal
Rivers. It goes through Mali and its namesake countries. Name this river of Northwest Africa.
ANSWER: Niger River
The Kondi and Tassakane channels connect this river to Lake Faguibine through the Killi and Kessou
floodplains. The upper part of this river ends at the Sotuba dam, just below Bamako. Port Harcourt lies on
the Bonny River in this river's delta, which was once known as the "Slave Coast" and today is a major
center of oil production. Historical capitals on this river include Gao and the trans-Saharan trade center of
Timbuktu. For 10 points, identify this West African river which names two countries.
ANSWER: Niger River
Formed east of the Loma mountain range, this river's inland delta forms Lake Faguibine north of the
city of Mopti, which lies on this river's confluence with the Bani River. Kainji Lake is formed by a
namesake dam on this river, which flows through the cities of Onitsha and Port Harcourt after being
met by the (*) Benue River. Its delta empties into the Bight of Biafra, and the Songhai Empire was
centered on this river, which flows past the Malian cities of Bamako and Timbuktu. For 10 points, identify
this west African river that flows through its namesake country's capital city, Niamey.
ANSWER: Niger River
When this river floods, it can feed Lake Faguibine, which is located near where the Bani meets this
river to form a namesake "internal delta." Along with the Volta, this river flows into the Gulf of
Guinea. Human rights violations have occurred in the exploitation of its (*) oil-rich delta by Royal
Dutch Shell. This is the third longest river in Africa, after the Nile and Congo. For 10 points, identify this
river in west Africa that gives its name to two countries.
ANSWER: Niger river
This river receives its largest tributary at Lokoja, a former national capital and iron mining center. The delta
of this river is home to the Ijaw people, the victims of the 1999 Odi Massacre, and to the Ogoni people, who
were repressed in the 1990s when they organized massive protests against Royal Dutch Shell. The Cross
River State lies east of this river, while the capital of Rivers State in this river's delta region is Port
Harcourt. Rising in the Fouta Djallon highlands of Guinea, it flows south of Timbuktu and is joined by the
Benue before it empties into the Gulf of Guinea. For 10 points, name this third-longest river of Africa, the
namesake of a country whose capital is Niamey.
ANSWER: Niger River
Moviemaker Jean Rouch was one of a group of three Frenchman to explore the entirety of this question of
water in 1946. Fisherman from the Bozo people are involved in fishing operations on Lake Debo, which is
located on this river. This river's Inner Delta is where it loses nearly two-thirds of its flow between Segou
and Timbuktu. Mungo Park was the first European to explore this river. This river joins with the Benue
River before emptying into the Gulf of Guinea. For ten points, name this third-largest river of Africa.
ANSWER: Niger River
Usman dan Fodio founded the Sokoto Caliphate in this country in the early 19th century, and its
Jos Plateau served as the center of the Nok civilization. Port Harcourt serves as the capital of this
nation's Rivers State, and its city of Kano(*) is the center of its Hausa people. This nation is bordered to
the south by the Bight of Bonny and Bight of Benin, which are parts of the Gulf of Guinea, and the
Republic of Biafra was a secessionist movement here led by its Igbo people. For 10 points, name this
African nation whose largest city is Lagos, and whose capital is Abuja.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Nigeria
Cross Rivers and Kogo are two states in this country. Its eastern portion contains Kukuwa, Yola, and
Mubi, while the Hadeija, Gongola, and Kaduna flow through a plateau once inhabited by the Yok
civilization. Another ethnic group, the Mambila dwell in the Taraba region of this country that is
also home to the Annang. This country has a city that is now the most populous city in Africa.
Bordering Chad, Burkina Faso, Benin, and Cameroon, for ten points name this country that borders the
Bight of Bonny and Gulf of Guinea whose cities include Lagos.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Nigeria
This country's Cross River state boasts the richest diversity of butterfly species in the world, while its
Enugu state became the center of a breakaway region in 1967 led by Emeka Ojukwu. This country's Kano
and Kaduna states saw religious violence as Muslims tried to institute shari-a, but the most recent violence
has centered on its Delta state on the Bight of Benin, where some foreign oil workers have been kidnapped.
Africa's leading oil producer and most populous country, this is, FTP, what country whose capital moved in
1991 from Lagos to Abuja?
ANSWER: Nigeria
A UNESCO World Heritage site in this country is located at Sukur, in its Adamawa state. Royal
Dutch Shell has been accused of human rights violations in this nation's southern oil-producing
region. This country's capital was constructed in the 1980s in its Middle Belt to allay tensions
between the Muslim (*) Hausa, Christian Igbo, and animist Yoruba. This country is one of two named for
a river whose delta is near its eastern border with Cameroon. For 10 points, name this country, home to the
largest population in Africa.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Nigeria
This country's Anambra state was home to an airstrip which delivered food to refugees; its Cross River
State is home to drill monkeys around the city of Calabar, while it contains the majority of the Benue river
as well as the Mambilla plateau. Its northern provinces of Sokoto and Kano are inhabited by the Hausa
people. One brief breakaway state from this country named itself for the Bight of Biafra on its southern
coast. This African country is inhabited by Igbo and Yoruba people. For 10 points, name this oil-producing
African state which moved its capital to Abuja from the massive southern port city of Lagos.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Nigeria
This country contains the Mambilla Plateau as well as the the western end of the Adamawa Plateau,
through which the Benue River flows. Kano is this country's second largest city, and the Bight of
Bonny lies to this country's southwest. This country was home to a breakaway country formed by
native Igbo people, the Republic of (*) Biafra. The Gulf of Guinea lies to the southwest of the country,
which contains the Niger River delta. Lake Chad lies to the northeast of this country, which borders Benin
to the west and Cameroon to the east and whose largest city is Lagos. For ten points, identify this most
populous African country whose capital is Abuja.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Nigeria
This country contains Cross River National Park, after which a critically endangered subspecies of
western lowland gorilla is named. In this country, riots in Kaduna occurred after that state instituted Sharia
Law. Languages spoken in this southernmost African member of OPEC include Yorlish, a hybrid of
Yoruba and English. One of this country's ethnic groups, the Igbo, attempted to set up the breakaway state
of Biafra. For ten points, name this country, the most populous in Africa.
ANSWER: Federal Republic of Nigeria
One section of this river is known as the "Sea of the Mountains" in Arabic and joins another
section at Lake No. The Kiira Power Station lies on this river, as does the Merowe Dam, and cities on
this river include Juba and Jinja. One tributary of this river has its origin at Lake Tana, and meets
another tributary near (*) Khartoum. There are crossings of this river at Luxor and Aswan. For 10 points,
name this African river whose main tributaries are the White and the Blue.
ANSWER: Nile River
The Gezira is a strip of land located between two branches of this river. The Dumyat and Rashid are
two of this river's distributaries. A portion of this river is named for Lake Albert. Another portion of this
river is known as Al-Jabal and drains the Al-Sudd. Part of this river's autumn flood is stored at Lake
Nasser by the Aswan High Dam, and this river includes Blue and White branches. For 10 points, name this
river that annually floods Egypt and is the longest river in the world.
ANSWER: Nile
One tributary of this river meets the Sobat in Malakal. Ernest Hemingway was involved in a plane crash
while attempting to photograph this river's Murchison Falls. The building of the Merowe Dam on this question
of water forced the relocation of members of the Manasir and Amri tribes. Distributaries of this river, the
Damietta and Rosetta, flow into its namesake delta. The Aswan High Dam was built on this river, whose
tributaries include its namesake White and Blue rivers. For 10 points, name this river that runs north
through Egypt.
ANSWER: Nile River
This waterway splits into two dis-tributaries called the "Rosetta" and the "Damietta" at its delta. The
Nyabarongo River that runs near Kigali and the Ruvyironza eventually merge into the Kagera River, which
is thought to be the source of this river. The Kagera flows into Lake Victoria which-along with Lake Tana
and Lake Nasser-is a stop on this river's course. The "Great Bend" of this river crosses through six
different cataracts spanning from Aswan to Khartoum. FTP, name this longest river in the world which ends
near Cairo.
ANSWER: Nile River
This river was almost a thousand miles longer until the Miocene era expansion of the Virunga volcanoes
blocked its extreme upper course. This river has an Albert branch and passes through the Sudd swamp. One
of its sources contains Rusumo Falls, and another is at Lake Tana. A southward bend in this river includes
the fourth of a series of six rapids, its "cataracts." This river, whose Blue and White tributaries join at
Khartoum, is overlooked by the city of Cairo along its banks. For 10 points, name this northeastern African
river, the longest in the world.
ANSWER: Nile River
One tributary of this river gains its name from the clay sediments carried into it above Malakal by the
Sobat River. Another tributary of this river is sometimes called the Abay River and flows out of Lake Tana.
Abu Simbel was forced to relocate when a decision was made to dam up this river. The man-made Lake
Nasser was created by water from this river being diverted by the Aswan High Dam. For 10 points, name
this river with Blue and White tributaries that is the longest in the world.
ANSWER: Nile River [or Bahr Al-Nil; or Nahr Al-Nil]
On the banks of this river, Lord Kitchener won the Battle of Omdurman. An ancient eruption of the
Virunga Volcanoes cut off this river from its former source in Lake Tanganyika. One of this river's
tributaries will be the site of the planned Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. For 10 points, name this
waterway that forms a delta in Egypt and is the world's longest river.
ANSWER: the Nile River
The October 6 Bridge spans this river, whose basin includes the Rurubu and Kagera Rivers. It takes a sharp
turn near Qena after flowing to Armant. The Angereb River is one of its sources. One of its tributaries
crosses through the Sudd wetlands. This river has six cataracts and two colorfully-named tributaries,
"white" and "blue," and flows northward. Its yearly inundations stopped with the 1970 completion of the
Aswan High Dam. Originating in Lake Victoria, it is the longest in the world. For 10 points, name this river
that flows through Sudan and Egypt.
ANSWER: Nile River
The spread of the South American water hyacinth further backed up this river in its swampy Al-Sudd
region. The farthest source of this river is the Kagera River, and it was called the Black River in ancient
times due to the sediments it carried when it flooded. This river is dammed by the Aswan High Dam,
creating Lake Nasser, and its watershed ends at the Ethiopian Plateau, where one of its two "colored"
tributaries begins. Those tributaries, the White and the Blue, join in the Sudan. For 10 points, name this
longest river in the world which drains into the Mediterranean Sea through its Delta in Egypt.
ANSWER: Nile River
The Rusumi Falls and Bugali falls are part of this river known as the Abbay in some sections. It
drains the as-Sudd swamp, and cities along its route include Juba, Kosta, and Atbara. Its sources
include Lake Tana and Lake Victoria, and Lake Nasser was formed by its Aswan High Dam. Its Blue and
White branches meet in Khartoum. For ten points, name this river, flowing through Luxor, Giza, and Cairo,
which is in fact a river in Egypt.
ANSWER: the Nile ( Take White Nile before Abbay)
The Bahr Yussef canal once connected this river to Lake Moeris, and one feeder to it is the Kagera River.
Towards the end of this river's path, it splits into two distributaries, the Rosetta Branch, and the Damietta
Branch. One tributary of this river begins in Lake Tana, while the other begins in Lake Victoria. It flows
over six cataracts, and its Blue and White Branches meet in the Sudanese city of Khartoum. For 10 points,
identify this African river that flows through eleven countries, the longest river in the world.
ANSWER: Nile River
This question of water was the focus of a planned debate that was cancelled after John Speke died in
a mysterious hunting accident. Speke had argued over the source of this river with Richard Burton.
One part of this river flows out of Lake Tana. Its two major tributaries are named (*) "White" and
"Blue," which meet near Khartoum, the capital of Sudan. The Aswan High Dam is built on it. For 10
points, name this long river whose floods provided much sustenance to the peoples of ancient Egypt.
ANSWER: Nile River [or Blue Nile; or White Nile]
The now-shrunken Lake Moeris was once connected by the Bahr Yussef canal into this river The farthest
reaches of this river are the infamously corpse-infested Akagera River and the Coptic-Church monastery
paradise of Lake Tana. The later is the source of a "Blue" namesake of this river, which possesses six
regions of rocky rapids known as Cataracts, the very first of which is at the sight of Aswan. For 10 points,
identify this river that flows through Upper and Lower Egypt.
ANSWER: Nile River [or iteru; or H'pi; or phiaro]
One of this river's two major tributaries goes through Lake Tana. John Speke was the first European to
find this river's source, which he named for the queen of England. It forms a delta when it splits into the
Rosetta and Damietta branches. The Aswan High Dam prevents the annual floods around the delta that
provided irrigation that allowed Egyptian civilization to flourish. For ten points, name this river that flows
from Lake Victoria into the Mediterranean, the longest in the world.
ANSWER: Nile River
The al-Sudd marsh is formed by the primary tributary of this river, which is known as the "Albert"
branch before it reaches Nimule. Another tributary of this river is also called the Abbay and
originates in Lake Tana. Eventually, this river splits into the [*] Rosetta and Damietta branches, and
this river's summer floods were ended by the construction of the Aswan High Dam. This river's two major
tributaries are its "Blue" and "White" branches, which combine near Khartoum. Originating in Lake
Victoria, for 10 points, name this river that flows through Sudan and Egypt, the longest in the world.
ANSWER: Nile River
One section of this river flows over the Fula [fuh-lah] rapids and through the Al Sudd swamp. That section
is the Bahr al-Jabal, which joins the Sobat at Malakal. Another (*) tributary flows through Al-Duwaym and
Lake Victoria before joining the other major tributary, which begins at Lake Tana in Ethiopia. Those major
tributaries are named White and Blue. Name this river that empties
ANSWER: Nile River (accept White Nile until (*))
The modern day name of this river comes from Greek, but in the countries where it actually flows through,
it has been called "great river" or simply "the river". From 8000 BC to 1000 BC, this river had a third
tributary, named Yellow, that followed through eastern Chad. The two sources for this river are Rwanda and
Ethiopia, and these two tributaries meet at Khartoum. Following construction of the Aswan High Dam in
1970, this river has ceased to be used for irrigation, but it is still an important source of transportation. FTP,
name this longest river in the world, which flows by the Pyramids and the Sphnix.
ANSWER: Nile River
At its delta, this river splits into Rosetta and Damietta branches. This river exits Lake Victoria at the site of
the submerged Ripon Falls. The Lake Tana-sourced river "Blue" version of this river converges with its
"White" version at Khartoum. The building of the Aswan High Dam on this river ended its flooding in one
country and created Lake Nasser. The Giza Plateau's namesake Great Pyramid lies on the west bank of this
river. For 10 points, name this African river that empties into the Mediterranean Sea and flows through
Cairo, Egypt, the world's longest.
ANSWER: Nile River
This river's farthest tributary, the Kagera River, forms the boundary between Tanzania and Rwanda.
Another tributary, the Gazelle River, is its chief western tributary forming the wetlands of the Sudd. The
Gezira scheme uses this river's eastern branch for irrigation, which begins at Lake Tana. The creation of the
Aswan High Dam attempted to control this river, forming Lake Nasser, and this river's western source
arises out of Lake Victoria. For 10 points, name this river with White and Blue tributaries, the longest in the
world, that flows through Egypt.
ANSWER: Nile River
During the Revolutionary War, the only major building to survive in this city was Saint Paul's Episcopal
Church. One of the tourist attractions in this city is the USS Wisconsin, and it is also home to the Chrysler
Museum of Art and Town Point Park. The second most populous city in the Hampton Roads region, it is at
the mouth of the Elizabeth River. It contains Sewell's Point, which is part of the largest naval station in the
world. Name this city located near Virginia Beach.
ANSWER: Norfolk, Virginia
During the War of 1812, this city was saved from a British invasion due to Robert Taylor's successful
defense of nearby Craney Island, and its annual International Azalea Festival is held in honor of NATO.
This city is the home of the Nauticus National Maritime Center, and the architect Pier Luigi Nervi designed
this city's multipurpose Scope Arena. Located on the Elizabeth River across from the city of Portsmouth, it
is home to Douglas Macarthur's tomb and Old Dominion University. Often grouped in a metro area with
Newport News and Virginia Beach. For 10 points, name this city in Virginia that is home to the world's
largest naval base.
ANSWER: Norfolk
This region contains a fortified tidal island named for Saint Michael, as well as granite cliffs in the west and
limestone cliffs in the east. Its highest point is the massif Signal d'Ecouves. It is divided into an upper and
lower portions, and is famous for its distinctive bocages, a feature shared by Devon, consisting of mixed
pasture and woodland. Situated next to Picardy, cities in this region include Cherbourg and Caen, while its
largest city is Rouen on the Seine River. Settled by Vikings, it borders a chalk plateau that extends to Dover
across the English Channel. For 10 points, identify this northern region of France.
ANSWER: Normandy
Ethereal phenomena in this state include the so-called "Brown Mountain Lights." Maya Angelou was
awarded this state's prestigious Order of the Long Leaf Pine as she taught at a university here for much of
her life. The Uwharrie Mountains can be found in this state, and one place in this state is called the
"Graveyard of the Atlantic." The Smokies straddle the border between this state and its western neighbor.
This state's highest point is found at the summit of the tallest of the Appalachians, Mount Mitchell. This
state is home to Cape Fear and Cape Hatteras. For 10 points, identify this state home to cities like Charlotte
and Raleigh, which is just south of Virginia.
ANSWER: North Carolina
This state was the location of Black Mountain College. The region of this state's three major universities
is known as the Research Triangle. A large number of shipwrecks have occurred in this state's Outer Banks,
which is nearby this state's tourist destination Cape Hatteras. Nicknamed the "Tar Heel state," its large
cities include Winston-Salem, Durham, and Greensboro. For 10 points, name this state whose capital is
Raleigh.
ANSWER: North Carolina
A recent boom in oil extraction in the western part of this state has created a massive need for workers and a
housing shortage in its town of Williston, where the NBA's Phil Jackson played high school basketball
before playing for the University of [this state]. The plains of the Red River Valley dominate the eastern
portion of the state, while White Butte, located north of Theodore Roosevelt National Park, is this state's
highest point. Its largest city abuts this state's eastern border, across from Moorhead, in neighboring
Minnesota. FTP Fargo is the largest city in what state with capital at Bismarck?
ANSWER: North Dakota
This country's city of Rason is a directly governed city on the border of Primorsky Krai. Two of this
country's main ports are Nampho and Wonsan, while Hamhung is an important center for its
chemical industry and is its second most populous city. This country's maritime holdings are
delimited by the Northern Limit Line. The provinces of Jilin and Liaoning are connected to this
country by bridges that were rebuilt after all but one was (*) destroyed when the area was known as
"MiG Alley"; those bridges cross the Yalu River. In November 2010, this country caused an international
incident when it shelled the island of Yeonpyeong. For 10 points, name this country north of the
demilitarized zone along the 38th parallel.
ANSWER: North Korea [or Democratic People's Republic of Korea; or DPRK]
The Dogger Bank forms a shallow area near the center of this question of water, which contains the islands of
Sylt [SOOLT], Texel, and Helgoland, and receives water from rivers like the Ems, Glomma, and Humber.
Ports around it include Cuxhaven, Great Yarmouth, Kristiansand, and Dundee, and it is connected to
another question of water by the Kiel Canal, as well as the Skagerrak and Kattegat. Having lost a small amount
of surface area to land reclamation along its southern shore, it remains a major center of offshore oil drilling
most heavily exploited by the United Kingdom and Norway. FTP, name this question of water surrounded by
Great Britain, Scandinavia, Jutland, and mainland Europe.
ANSWER: North Sea
An estuary that is part of this sea, fed by the Nene (NEN) and Great Ouse (OOZ) rivers and
known as "the Wash," has been the subject of land reclamation projects. The city of Stavanger,
which is located on this sea, relies economically on the oil wells in it, including the offshore Ekofisk
oil field. Fishing boats in this sea often congregate near Dogger Bank. (*) Dundee is a port on the Firth
of Tay, which feeds into this sea. This sea is at the western end of the Kiel Canal. The busiest port in
Europe by tonnage, Rotterdam, can also be found on this sea. For 10 points, name this sea that borders
England, Norway, Germany, and the Netherlands.
ANSWER: North Sea
In this question of water, the Devil's Hole trench causes the loss of many trawling nets. Stavanger is a town on
this sea, which is made shallow by a large underwater moraine and former landmass called Doggar Bank.
The Bates family controls an abandoned pontoon base with a helipad in this sea, where they demand
national recognition as the Principality of Sealand. The western end of the Skaggerak empties into this sea
whose southern part, the Wadden sea, is north of the Frisian islands and the Zuiderzee. It contains profitable
oil rigs at Statfjord. For 10 points, name this sea abutting the English Channel between Great Britain, the
Netherlands, and Norway.
ANSWER: North Sea
The western border of this question of water is partially formed by island groups which include the cities of
Kirkwall and Lerwick. Underwater features in this question of water include a sandbank known as central
Dogger Bank, and its southeastern portion includes the Wadden Sea. This sea is connected to another sea to
its east by the artificial Kiel canal, and it is connected by the (*) Strait of Dover to the English Channel.
Site of the mouths of the Thames and Rhine, for ten points, name this European sea bordering Britain,
Scandinavia, and the Netherlands.
ANSWER: North Sea
Its features include the Silver Pit trench, and it contains a shallow area called Dogger Bank. Receiving the
Elbe River, this question of water is connected in the east by Kattegat and Skagerrak to the Baltic Sea, and it
borders the Shetland and Orkney Islands. The Strait of Dover connects it to the Atlantic. For 10 points,
identify this sea found between Great Britain and Denmark, named for its position relative to the European
mainland.
ANSWER: North Sea
At over twice the size of the one in Maine, this region's city of Bangor is the world's largest by
that name. One of its population centers, located on the River Foyle, is often called Londonderry.
The Stormont government of this place attempts to strike a balance between the interests of the (*)
Orange Order and the "provisional" wing of another group. Often called "Ulster" by one side, this place's
existence was once disputed by the IRA. For 10 points, what is this constituent country of the United
Kingdom, whose capital and largest city is Belfast?
ANSWER: Northern Ireland [prompt on Ulster before it is read; do not accept or prompt on "Ireland"]
This territory contains the Barkly Tableland, as well as the Arnhem Land, in its northern sections. South of
its Tanami Desert are the Macdonnell Ranges, which include its highest peak, Mt. Ziel. Its southeastern
corner is home to the Simpson Desert. North of this region is the Van Diemen Gulf, while Groote Island is
located in the Bay of Carpentaria. Alice Springs is the largest town in its southern section, while its
territorial capital is Darwin. FTP, name this division of Australia, which contains Ayers Rock.
ANSWER: Northern Territory
Separated from another polity on the west by the largest gulf named after a Bonaparte, islands off the coast
of this territory include Melville Island, Bathurst Island, and Groote Eylandt. The southwestern part of this
polity contains a formation of 36 weathered rocks called the Olgas. The Katherine River flows southwest to
the Daly River, and other rivers in this polity include the Finke River and the Todd River, the latter of
which disappears into the Simpson Desert. The MacDonnell Ranges are a system of mountains here and
contain an alluvial plain in which its second-largest city, Alice Springs, is located. Also containing Uluru, or
Ayers Rock, for 10 points, name this Australian territory that has its capital at Darwin.
ANSWER: Northern Territory
The town of Tennant Creek is located in this region's Barkley Tableland, and this area is separated
into political units called Land Councils. Its Top End contains the Kakadu National Park and the city
of Katherine and borders the Arafura Sea. This area's second largest city is north of the MacDonnell
Mountains and is divided by the Todd River. The Tanami and Simpson deserts are located in this
territory, and natural formations here include Kata Tuja, or the Olgas, and a large sandstone monolith. For
ten points, name this political subunit of Australia that contains Alice Springs and Uluru with capital at
Darwin.
ANSWER: Northern Territory
This country, which at two referendums has rejected EU membership, owns the volcanic islands of Peter I
and Bouvet. This country experienced economic growth in the 1970s when oil at Ekofisk field was
discovered, leading to the creation of the state oil company Statoil. Cities on this country's coast include
Bodo, Trondheim, and Bergen, though this country's capital is found inland, slightly north of the strait of
Skagerrak. With two-thirds of its area covered by the Scadanavian mountains, for 10 points, name this
northern European country, well known for its fjords, with a capital at Oslo.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Norway
This country's southwestern region contains a large peneplain located at the Hardanger Plateau. In the
Jotunheim Mountains lies this country's highest point, Galdho Peak. At the southern end of the Gudbrands
Valley lies this country's largest lake, Mjosa. Hydroelectric power is provided by this country's longest
river, the Glomma. The Royal Society of Sciences is located in this country's port of Trondheim and the
historic wooden structures of Bryggen are located in Bergen. It is largely bordered to the east by Sweden
and separated by the North Sea from Denmark. For 10 points, name this country in which the Nobel Prizes
are presented in its capital city, Oslo.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Norway [or Kongeriket Norge]
Each Christmas, a large Christmas tree in London's Trafalgar Square is a gift from this country, as thanks
for assistance during the Second World War. Its current ruling monarch is King Harald V and its currency is
the krone. One of the least densely-populated countries in the world, it is home to only 4.8 million people.
Despite this small size, it is given the honor of picking the Nobel Peace Prize winner each year. Famous
people from this country include writers Henrik Ibsen and Roald Dahl, and the composer Edvard Grieg.
FTP, name this northern European country, with capital at Oslo.
ANSWER: Norway
This nation contains the largest inland river delta in Europe, formed by the Glomma. The city of Alta in this
nation was used to study the Aurora Borealis. It is home to the Globus II radar, which has caused tensions
with Russia. It is one of the most mountainous countries in the world with almost one-third of its area above
the tree line, but that demarcation of vegetation is also partly due to its high latitude. It is also home to the
northernmost town in the world with population over 5,000, Hammerfest, located in Finnmark. Owner of
the island group Svalbard, name, FTP, this northern European nation with capital at Oslo.
ANSWER: Norway
This province's Tobeatic Game Reserve and Kejimkujik National Park inspired Albert Paine's The Tent
Dwellers. It includes the town of Truro, near Cobequid Bay, which is part of the Minas Basin. This
province includes Sable Island, as well as another island connected to the mainland by the Canso Causeway.
That island contains the Bras d-Or Lake as well as the city of Sydney. The Cabot Trail runs through this
province's Cape Breton Highlands National Park, and its town of Yarmouth lies near the mouth of the Bay
of Fundy. FTP, name this Canadian Maritime province with a capital at Halifax.
ANSWER: Nova Scotia
Its highest point is North Barren Mountain, which is located in the "Highlands" National Park of its largest
island. Among its other points of interest are Kejimkujik National Park, Sable Island, and the town of
Annapolis Royal, which was its first capital as well as it's nation's oldest continuously-inhabited European
settlement. This province's largest question of freshwater is Bras d'Or Lake, which is located west of Sydney
and the historical fort of Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island. This province is also the site of Alexander
Graham Bell National Historical Park, and the Chignecto Isthmus connects it to New Brunswick. Once
known as Acadia, for ten points, identify this Maritime Province with capital at Halifax.
ANSWER: Nova Scotia (accept "Cape Breton Island" until Kejimkujik)
A news story about one site in this province reported about a glowing dog and low quality of life on
Frederick Street in a city's Whitney Pier neighborhood. This province is home to North America's largest
toxic waste site at its Sydney tar ponds. The oldest surviving lighthouse in North America is located on this
province. Like its neighbors, this province experienced White Juan, just a few months after the Sambro
Island Lighthouse was damaged when this province bore the brunt of Hurricane Juan in 2003. For 10
points, name this Canadian province on the Atlantic coast that also experienced hurricane damage to its
capital, Halifax.
ANSWER: Nova Scotia
This political division saw limited economic activity at the Lupin gold mine. Containing a small minority
from the First Nations group, this region's first commissioner was Helen Maksagak. Among the many
islands this territory administers are the Sverdrup, Parry, and Belcher Archipelagoes. The capital of this
territory is at the head of Frobisher Bay, located on the southern portion of its largest island, which is the
fifth largest island in the world. That capital, Iqaluit, is a few degrees south of the Arctic Circle on Baffin
Island. FTP, name Canada's northernmost territory, created from the eastern portion of the Northwest
Territories in 1999.
ANSWER: Nunavut, Canada
A flurry of new spending projects in this region in 2011 will include the construction of a deepwater port at
Nanisivik and a new atmospheric research laboratory at Eureka. Since the 1962 closure of a nearby nickel
mine, this place's second largest city of Rankin Inlet has been beset by unemployment, and that city
understandably lost a 1995 plebiscite to be this place's capital. This territory includes one island in James
Bay and the eastern half of Victoria Island, and Frobisher Bay was the old name of its capital city, Iqaluit,
which is located on Baffin Island. For 10 points, identify this majority-Inuit Canadian territory that in 1999
split off from the Northwest Territory.
ANSWER: Nunavut
The name of this location means gathering place in its native tongue. Shark's Cove is one of the best dive
sites on this island, although Hanauma Bay is also popular. The television show Lost was filmed on a beach
on the north shore of this island, which is also home to the Banzai Pipeline at Ehukai Beach Park. Snakes on
a Plane opens with a view of Diamondhead on this island. The Beach Boys sang a song referencing this
island's Waimea Bay, which is home to a surfing contest in memory of Eddie Aikau. This island is the
birthplace of Barack Obama and home to the USS Arizona Memorial. For 10 points, name this island, the
location of Pearl Harbor, Waikiki, and Honolulu.
ANSWER: Oahu
Just east of this city's downtown is Lake Merritt, the US's first official wildlife refuge. In Everybody's
Autobiography, Gertrude Stein coined the phrase "there is no there there" to refer to this city. A pub
frequented by many sailors before their long sea voyages, named Heinold's First and Last Chance Saloon,
is found in the Jack London Square in this city. In this city, Oscar Grant was killed by a BART police
officer. The eastern terminus of the Bay Bridge, this city was the site of an Occupy protest in which
demonstrators were tear-gassed en masse. For 10 points, name this violent Northern California city
opposite of the bay from San Francisco.
ANSWER: Oakland
American surfers have recently flocked to La Jolla Beach in this state, near its port city of Salina
Cruz. Inhabitants of this state celebrate the annual Guelaguetza festival, and other cities include
Juchitan. Along with Guerroro (*) and Puebla, it was controlled by the Mixtec before Europeans arrived,
and it's also home to Monte Alban, a Zapotec site in this state. Bordering Veracruz and Chiapas, for 10
points, name this Mexican state on the southern Pacific coast, birthplace of Benito Jaurez.
ANSWER: Oaxaca
Some of its tributaries include the Tom and Sosva, and it is formed where the Biya and Katun rivers come
together after beginning in the Altai Mountains. Another of its tributaries, the Ket, as used as part of a canal
system in the 1800s to connect this river with the Yenisei, but this failed due to the superiority of the TransSiberian Railroad. It empties into a namesake gulf in the Kara Sea, and some cities along its length include
Barnaul, Salekhard, and Novosibirsk. For 10 points, identify this Western Siberian river, which forms a
system with the Irtysh.
ANSWER: Ob river [or Obi]
These regions are the target of a plan involving machines called "sifters" and "booms," devised by
19-year old Dutch student Boyan Slat. Project Kaisei studied areas of this type. The largest of these areas,
east of the Kuroshio current, was discovered when Charles Moore was returning home from a boat race and
alerted Curtis Ebbesmeyer. They are largely composed of neustonic material invisible to the naked eye,
such as photodegraded polymers, and sit at the middle of large gyres. For 10 points, name these regions
whose "Great Pacific" example is east of Hawai-i, and which are large deposits of human debris.
ANSWER: oceanic garbage patches [or patches of marine debris; or marine litter; accept clear equivalents; prompt on ocean gyres]
This state, that is not Massachusetts, was the home of an experimental college in Yellow Springs run by
Horace Mann from 1853 to 1859, known for not having grades. That college, in this state, was Antioch
College. The Kokosing River flows through this state's village of Gambier, the location of Kenyon College.
It's not Georgia, but a state university here is located in Athens, and it's not Florida, but this state's town of
Oxford is the location of Miami University. For 10 points, Case Western Reserve University is located in
the city of Cleveland in what state?
ANSWER: Ohio
A city in this state was the first to implement the kindergarten through twelfth grade education
system. At a convention in this state, Sojourner Truth delivered the "Ain't I a Woman" speech. It's
not Kentucky, but a poet from this state wrote in his poem "Sympathy" that "I know why the caged
bird sings." In this home state of Paul Lawrence Dunbar, I.M. Pei built the (*) Rock and Roll Hall of
Fame. The Pro Football Hall of Fame is located in this state's city of Canton. This state's largest cities
include Cincinnati and Cleveland. For 10 points, name this "Buckeye state."
ANSWER: Ohio
This state controls Johnson's Island, a Union prisoner-of-war camp, in its north. Its northwest was
home to the Great Black Swamp, which it drained for farmland, and still houses the delta of the Maumee
River. Connecticut ceded the Western Reserve to what became this state. In 1968, its heavily-polluted
Cuyahoga river caught fire. Its people are often known for a poisonous nut that grows in this state on the
buckeye tree. For ten points, name this state containing Dayton, Akron, and Cleveland.
ANSWER: Ohio
In 2012, this state's capital announced a beautification project that would remove the Main Street Dam from
its Scioto River. One river in this state was described as "ooz[ing] rather than flow[ing]" and having "no
visible life" in a Time magazine article written after it caught fire; that river is the Cuyahoga. The western
border of this state is defined by the Miami River, and the southern border of this state is formed by a river
which meets the (*) Allegheny and Monongahela just east of this state. For ten points, name this state, the
namesake of the largest tributary of the Mississippi River.
ANSWER: Ohio
The highest point in this state, Campbell Hill, is located in its town of Bellefontaine, which is also the home
to Court Avenue, the first concrete paved road in the United States. This state's unfortunately named city of
Sandusky is home to the second oldest operating amusement park in the United States, Cedar Point. One of
this state's rivers had so much garbage in it that it caught on fire in the 1970-s; that river is the Cuyahoga.
This state's namesake river is the largest tributary of the Mississippi. For 10 points, name this state that
contains cities like Toledo and Cincinnati.
ANSWER: Ohio
The mouth of this river is located between Ballard County, KY and Cairo, IL and has its deepest and widest
point located at the city near the McAlpine Locks and Dam. Tributaries of this river include the Wabash,
Kentucky, Saline, and Cumberland Rivers. Its source is formed by the confluence of the Allegheny and
Monongahela Rivers near Pittsburgh, PA. Other cities located on this river include Louisville and
Cincinnati. For 10 points, name this tributary of the Mississippi River, which forms the southern boundary
of the state that has its capital at Columbus.
ANSWER: Ohio River
Neville Island is the largest island within this river by area, though the most populous island within it is a
gambling mecca that is accessible by the Fort Henry Bridge. This river receives the Big Sandy and the
Wabash as tributaries. Cairo, Illinois is located near its mouth, and its largest tributary is the Tennessee
River. It is formed by the confluence of the Monongahela and Allegheny Rivers in Pittsburgh. For 10
points, name this river that flows through Louisville and is the largest tributary by volume of the
Mississippi.
ANSWER: Ohio River
This river's 1937 flood caused the Black Sunday Fire and required thousands of WPA workers for aid.
This river is formed from the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers. It flows through Wheeling, Louisville,
and Pittsburgh. For 10 points, name this river that forms the northern borders of Kentucky and West
Virginia.
ANSWER: Ohio River
One tributary of this river is the Licking River. During the Civil War, this river was nicknamed the River
Jordan, and it also served as an unofficial extension of the Mason-Dixon Line to the west. Its tributaries
include the Wabash and the Allegheny, and its confluence with the Mississippi is near Cairo, Illinois. Cities
on this river include Pittsburgh and Cincinnati. For 10 points, name this river whose namesake state has its
capital at Columbus.
ANSWER: Ohio River
The Treaty of Fort Stanwix involved acquisition of land south of this river. In the late 1700s, this river
was the southern boundary of the Northwest Territory. The mouth of this river is located in Cairo, Illinois
and this river flows through such cities as Wheeling and Evansville. The Wabash is one of the largest
tributaries of this river. In the heart of Pittsburgh, this river is formed by the joining of the Monongahela
and Allegheny rivers. For 10 points, name this river which as its name suggests forms the southern border
of a state with capital at Columbus.
ANSWER: Ohio River
Thomas Jefferson claimed this river to be "The most beautiful on Earth," and major tributaries of this river
include the the Cumberland River, the Licking River, and the Little Miami River. In the nineteenth century,
this river served as the southern boundary of the Northwest Territory. The confluence of the Allegheny and
Monongahela rivers at Point State Park in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania mark the origin of this river. For 10
points, name this river, a large tributary of the Mississippi River that also demarcates the border between
Kentucky and its namesake state.
ANSWER: Ohio River
A small portion of this river's watershed extends into Virginia via the Big Sandy and Tug Fork Rivers. The
cities of Parkersburg and Wheeling lie on this river. This river's main tributary is spanned by the Fort
Duquesne Bridge and its secondary tributary is spanned by the Fort Pitt Bridge. Those two rivers are the (*)
Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers respectively and confluence just feet from the two aforementioned
bridges in Pittsburgh to form this river that discharges at Cairo. For 10 points, name this largest right
tributary of the Mississippi River, from which the state containing Cleveland derives its name.
ANSWER: Ohio River
Despite not flowing through Virginia, Thomas Jefferson described this river as the most beautiful in the
United States in his Notes on the State of Virginia. Cities on this river, which served as the southern
boundary of the Northwest Territory, include Paducah, Evansville, Louisville and Wheeling. Flowing 981
miles from western Pennsylvania to its mouth in Cairo, Illinois, for 10 points, identify this river that forms
the northern border of Kentucky and West Virginia and the southern border of its namesake state.
ANSWER: Ohio River
This river is fed in close proximity by Duck Creek, Muskingum River, and Little Kanawha River
near the town of Parkersburg. Fort Anderson on this river was the site of a successful raid by
Confederate General Nathan Forrest that became known as the Battle of Paducah. This river
flows past Wheeling in the northern panhandle of West Virginia. After being fed by the Wabash
River, this ends near Cairo [KAIR-oh], Illinois, where it feeds the Mississippi. This is fed by the
Monongahela [muh-NAWN-guh-HAY-lah] and Allegheny [aal-uh-GAY-nee] Rivers in Pittsburgh.
Name this river that forms the border between its namesake state and Kentucky.
ANSWER: Ohio River
The McAlpine Locks and Dam were built on this river, which flows past Angel Mounds. A city
situated next to this river celebrates the Tall Stacks festival with many steamboats. Cities on this
river include Evansville, and this river is formed from the confluence of the (*) Monongahela and
Allegheny rivers. It joins a longer river at Cairo, Illinois, and cities lying on it include Louisville and
Pittsburgh. For 10 points, name this river, a tributary of the Mississippi that flows past its namesake state in
Cincinnati.
ANSWER: Ohio River
The Marble Hill Nuclear Power Plant is situated on this river, and other towns on this river include
Lewisport and Wheeling. The McAlpine Locks and Dam can be found on this river, and the Green River
and the Cumberland River both feed into it. The Great and Little Miami Rivers also empty into this river,
and The Forks historically possessed great strategic value. Kanawha River is a major tributary, while its
only rapids is located at Louisville, Kentucky. It is formed by the confluence of two other rivers at Point
State Park. For 10 points, name this largest tributary by volume to the Mississippi, which forms from the
Allegheny and Monongohela in Pittsburgh.
ANSWER: Ohio River
This river is spanned by the oldest suspension bridge still in use in the United States. One of the
oldest railroads in the United States is named for Baltimore and this river. Tributaries of this river
include the Kanawha river and Big Sandy. This river is formed by the confluence of the (*) Allegheny
and Monongahela rivers in Pittsburgh. It meets the Mississippi river at Cairo, in Illinois. For 10 points,
identify this largest tributary, by volume, of the Mississippi.
ANSWER: Ohio river
A plot of land along this river was to be the site of the John Papworth and William Bullock proposed
utopian city of Hygeia. Ships traveling this river can bypass its falls through the McAlpine Locks and
Dam complex. The climactic battle of Lord Dunmore's war occurred near where a tributary of this
river joins it and that site of confluence, Point Pleasant, is the home of the (*) Mothman. Wheeling
Island in this river is home to a casino. Owensboro is located along this river. Its major tributaries include
the Cumberland and Wabash rivers. This river is formed from the Monongahela and Allegheny at
Pittsburgh. For 10 points, name this river that joins the Mississippi at Cairo, Illinois and forms the between
Kentucky and same named state.
ANSWER: Ohio River
Cave-in-Rock, a large cave on the banks of this river, was a hideout for river bandits. The
Shawnee Lookout site on the banks of this river is an important archeological site, and the city of
Paducah was a strategic locations on this river at the start of the Civil War. Tributaries of this river
include the Licking and Kanawha, as well as the Big and Little (*) Miami Rivers. Major cities located
on this river include Louisville. For 10 points, identify this river formed by the confluence of the
Monongahela and Allegheny Rivers at Pittsburgh.
ANSWER: Ohio River
One group against the production of this commodity is MEND, which draws heavily from a country's
Ijaw population and operates around Port Harcourt. In 1956, this commodity was found at Oloibiri
in the Niger delta. Much of this commodity is transported along the Strait of Hormuz. Cuba receives
this good for free from (*) Venezuela, which exports a poorer quality version of this commodity than
countries. The price of this good hit $147 per barrel in July 2011. For 10 points, Saudi Arabia, a member of
OPEC, is famous for exporting large amounts of what fossil fuel that is commonly retrieved through
drilling?
ANSWER: crude oil [or petroleum]
Harold Ickes pushed for two of these systems, known as "Big Inch" and "Little Big Inch," to be built
during World War II. Another one of these systems built during World War II connects Montreal with
Portland, Maine. The "Seaway" and "Spearhead" ones meet at Cushing, Oklahoma, which is a major nexus
for them. The longest one of these systems in North America has a major junction point at Clearbrook,
Minnesota and is owned by Enbridge. The "Trans-Alaska" one connects Prudhoe Bay and Valdez. The
decision over extending one of these systems to reach the Gulf Coast was delayed until 2013. For 10 points,
the proposed "Keystone XL" is an example of what systems used to transport a certain natural resource?
ANSWER: oil pipelines [or petroleum pipelines; prompt on pipelines]
Torry, Ritta, and Kreamer islands lie in this question of water, the namesake of the 1928 San Felipe Segundo
hurricane. Fed by Taylor Creek and the Kissimmee River, this question is the namesake of an 1837 victory for
Zachary Taylor over Bowlegs that sought to enforced the provisions of the Treaty of Payne's Landing. It
spans several counties, including Hendry, Martin, and Palm Beach, and is second only to Lake Michigan in
size among US freshwater lakes. For 10 Points, identify this lake which comprises the headwaters of the
Everglades, located in Florida.
ANSWER: Lake Okeechobee [prompt on the Lake or the Big O]
The so-called "Rim Canal" is built around the edge of this question of water. It has a series of dikes, levies,
and locks to prevent catastrophic flooding, like it saw with two consecutive hurricanes in the 1920s, which
were the inspiration for an event described in There Eyes Were Watching God. Along the southern shore is
the town of cabbage-growing town of Belle Glade, a cradle of college football stars. With a name meaning
"big water" in Hitchiti, FTP identify this enormous lake in South Florida.
ANSWER: Lake Okeechobee
This state's highest point is located on a volcanic plateau in its northwestern corner while the peaks of the
Witchita Mountains are the highest by prominence and the Kiamichi Mountains are an extension of the
neighboring Ouachitas. One city in this state is dominated by Mount Holmes and experienced severe racial
riots in 1921 in the aftermath of an oil boom. Major rivers in this state include the Cimarron, Canadian, and
Arkansas and this state also includes the city of Talehquah, which serves as capital of the Cherokee nation.
FTP, identify this state with a namesake capital, known as the Sooner State.
ANSWER: Oklahoma
The Arbuckle Mountains are located in this state, and it contains the Gypsum Hills, which are
sometimes called the Glass Hills due to their appearance. David Payne and William (+) Couch were
two people who attempted to colonize this state, which was formerly designated as the (*) "Indian
territory." The Arkansas River forms Zink Lake in its city of Tulsa, and its namesake territory was opened
to a land run in 1889. For 10 points, name this state where a 1995 terrorist attack by Timothy McVeigh
destroyed a building in the namesake capital.
ANSWER: Oklahoma
The Tallgrass Prairie Preserve is located in this state, and it contains the Arbuckle and Ouachita
Ranges. Its biggest lakes include Lake Texoma and Eufaula Lake, and its highest point its Black
Mesa. The Glass Mountains rise in this state whose western border is near the Canadian River, along
which the Antelope Hills lie. One of its well-known features includes Beaver (*), Cimarron, and Texas
Counties, and some of its cities are Lawton and Norman. For 10 points, name this state including Tulsa that
lies north of Texas and has a panhandle.
ANSWER: Oklahoma
This state's city of Clinton is the location of the "World's Largest Curio Cabinet" at its Route 66
Museum. A museum in Sallisaw commemorates the fact that this state has flown fourteen different flags.
Beaver and Cimarron are two of the three counties that make up its western extension, also known as this
state's panhandle. For 10 points, name this state bordered on the north by Kansas and across the Red River
from Texas.
ANSWER: Oklahoma
This city's Stage Center was once called the Mummers Theater. I.M. Pei designed a namesake plan for
this city's downtown that resulted in the Myriad Botanical gardens. This city was founded during the Land
Run of 1889. Each quadrant of this city contains a park, the largest of which is named for Will Rogers. This
city's only pro sports team plays at the Ford Center. A tragedy in this city is commemorated by a memorial
that shows a field of empty chairs and was perpetrated by Timothy McVeigh. For 10 points, name this
capital city of a state that also contains Tulsa and the home of the NBA's Thunder.
ANSWER: Oklahoma City
Hats worn during this event are made of real or imitation goat hair. A right-wing geology student
detonated an explosive at this event in 1980, injuring hundreds. This event is held on a field named for
Princess Therese, whose marriage to Ludwig I was the basis for the first one. In one of its thirty-four tents,
the mayor ceremonially yells "It's tapped!" after the first beer keg is opened. For 10 points, name this
Munich festival which takes place on the first week of a fall month.
ANSWER: Oktoberfest
Peaks in this landmass- namesake range include Mount Anderson, Mount Constance, and The
Brothers. The Quinault Rainforest is located in Grays Harbor County on this landmass. Arthur Dodwell
and Theodor Rixon mapped it for logging purposes in 1898, ending its status as the last unexplored place in
the continental U.S. Including the cities of Sequim, Forks, and Port Angeles, it is bordered on the north by
the Strait of Juan de Fuca. For ten points, name this peninsula across the Puget Sound from Seattle, the
northwesternmost portion of the contiguous 48 states.
ANSWER: Olympic Peninsula
This seat of Douglas County was founded at the site of the Lone Tree Ferry. Ranked by Kiplinger's as one
of the 10 best U.S. cities, Offut Air Force Base is located 20 miles south of its center. Attractions in this
city, served by Eppley Airfield, include a namesake Community Playhouse and the Henry Doorly Zoo. The
Qwest Center here hosts the annual meeting of Berkshire Hathaway, and is home to Creighton's men's
basketball team. Baseball fans know this city because it hosts the Collegiate World Series. Located near
the junction of the Platte and Missouri Rivers, this is, for 10 points, what largest city in Nebraska?
ANSWER: Omaha
The seat of Douglas County, landmarks in this city include the Henry Doorly Zoo. Including the
Quest Center, which hosts college hockey's Mavericks of the CCHA, this city also features corporate
headquarters like the Union Pacific Railway and ConAgra. The original home of Boys Town, it is a
former meatpacking center. For ten points, name this city, the headquarters of Berkshire Hathaway and
Warren Buffett, whose Rosenblatt Stadium annually hosts the College World Series, the largest city in
Nebraska.
ANSWER: Omaha
This city was the founding place of the Jewish youth association Aleph Zadik Aleph. It is home to
both the history Old Market district and the world-famous Henry Doorly Zoo. This city is known as
the "Gateway to the West" because it is the starting point of the Union Pacific Railroad, which was
supposed to begin in the nearby Iowa city of Council Bluffs. Its Johnny Rosenblatt Stadium is the
annual home of the College (*) World Series. This is the largest city in a state with capital Lincoln. For 10
points, name this largest city of Nebraska.
ANSWER: Omaha
One exclave of this nation, the Musandam peninsula, sees the beginning of the Al-Hajar mountains,
which further south divide this nation into 2 regions, called Al-Batinah, meaning "The Belly", and
Ad-Dhahirah, meaning "The Back." Another of this nation's exclaves is Madha, which features an
enclave of a neighboring nation called Nahwa. A major city in the Southern part of the country is (*)
Salalah, located in the state of Dhofar, while major cities in the more populous north include Muttrah and
Sur. This nation shares its name with a Gulf to its North which is bounded to the West by the Strait of
Hormuz. FTP, name this Arabian peninsula nation, bordered by the UAE, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen, whose
capital is Muscat.
ANSWER: Oman
One river in this province, Albany River, flows into James Bay and is used as a boundary between the
Kenora District and the Cochrane District. This province also contains the town of Tobermory, in which
one can take a ferry from Bruce Peninsula to Manitoulin Island on Lake Huron. Another lake in this
province, which is shared with Minnesota and Manitoba, is the Lake of the Woods. Bordered to the
northeast by Quebec, this province contains both its nation's largest city and capital. For 10 points, name
this most populous province of Canada that contains the national capital Ottawa, with largest city Toronto.
ANSWER: Ontario
This location is home to the world's largest fresh water sand bar and dunes system, Sandbanks Provincial
Park. Although not Jamaica, Kingston is a city in this region. Most of this province's area is located east of
the Lake of the Woods, and the city of Thunder Bay is located in this province. Other notable cities in it
include Mississauga and Windsor, and the Golden Horseshoe is its most densely populated area. It is
bordered to the west by Manitoba. The CN tower in Toronto is located in, For 10 points, name this most
populous Canadian province that contains Ottowa.
ANSWER: Ontario [prompt on Canada before "province"]
This province includes Lake Saint Joseph, which feeds the Albany River that flows past regions
populated by the Mushkegowuk, who are part of the Nishnawbe Aski First Nation. Its southern
boundary includes the Rainy and Pigeon Rivers towards the west and the Saint Clair River further
east. One of this province's towns on the Saint Marys River is Sault Ste. Marie [soo "saint" mah-ree].
Its Point Pelee is the southernmost point in mainland Canada, extending into Lake Erie. This
province also includes Windsor, which is very close to Detroit, and borders Niagara Falls. Name this
most populous province of Canada that includes Ottawa and Toronto.
ANSWER: Ontario
Point Pelee and the Golden Horseshoe are located in this province, which contains Lake Simcoe,
Rainy Lake, and Lake Nipigon. The western half of James Bay is located in this province, and it
contains Manitoulin Island and Georgian Bay. Its cities include (*) Thunder Bay, Hamilton, and
Mississauga, while Kingston lies upstream from the Thousand Islands. Windsor lies near Lake St. Clair in
this province, which borders four of the Great Lakes. For ten points, name this Canadian province located
between Manitoba and Quebec which contains the cities of Ottawa and Toronto.
ANSWER: Ontario
Several rivers in this province, including the Albany River, flow north and empty into James Bay. Cities
in this province include Sudbury and London, and bodies of water within it include Lake Nipigion
(NIP-ee-GEE-an) and Georgian Bay. This province borders Manitoba to its west and Quebec to its east.
Part of its border with the United States runs through a Great Lake of the same name. For 10 points, name
the most populous province of Canada, whose capital is Toronto.
ANSWER: Ontario
Several religious summer camps in this province are located around the shore of its Skeleton Lake. Over
two-thirds of this province's population is located in an area called the Golden Horseshoe. Territory in this
province provides the western shore for the James Bay, and the Rainy River forms part of the southeastern
border of this province. The long-running Niagara Escarpment overlooks this province's city of Hamilton.
One city in this province is home to the tallest building in the country; that building is the CN Tower. For
10 points, name this province that gives its name to a Great Lake, and also contains the capital of Canada,
Ottawa.
ANSWER: Ontario
Early maps of this question of water identified it as Lac Frontenac. The largest island in this question of water,
Wolfe Island, is part of an archipelago that spans its northeast corner, the Thousand Islands. The primary
outlet of this question of water is the widest river in the world, and drains into the Atlantic Ocean. This question,
which is drained by the St. Lawrence River, receives its water from the Niagara River via the Niagara Falls.
For 10 points, name this question of water that is east of Huron and Erie, a Great Lake that shares its name with
Canada's most populous province.
ANSWER: Lake Ontario
Arab Bassenian named a housing project full of American-style buildings north of Beijing after this
county. This county contains the house of a prominent Shakespearean actress in her eponymous Modjeska
Canyon. The Saddleback Valley contains Mission Viejo within this county, which also has one of the
world's largest organs in the Crystal Cathedral. The Nixon Museum is located in this county's city of
Yorba Linda. Santa Ana is a notably liberal city within this mostly-conservative county, the site of Knott's
Berry Farm and Disneyland. For 10 points, name this county in southern California in which Anaheim is
located.
ANSWER: Orange County
A county of this name contains the Santa Ana River's mouth. A county of this name is bordered on the east
by the St. John's River and is home to Universal Studios Florida and Sea World. Another county of this
name contains Laguna Beach and is bordered by Los Angeles and San Diego Counties. Anaheim and
Disneyland are in the California county of this name, while Disney World is located in Orlando, the seat of
the Florida county of this name. For 10 points, name these counties named for the same citrus fruit.
ANSWER: Orange County [or OC]
This river lies south of the Karas Region, and near its mouth it is blocked by impassable rapids. Dams on it
include the Gariep, named for the indigenous term for this river, as well as the Vanderkloof. The former
dam is connected to the Great Fish River by a tunnel, so that this river's water can alleviate shortages
elsewhere. The Augrabies Falls lie on it, and it empties into the Atlantic at Alexander Bay. This river flows
south of Kimberley before meeting its largest tributary, the Vaal River. For 10 points, name this large river
of Southern Africa.
ANSWER: Orange River
The Rogue River originates in this state's portion of the Siskiyou Mountains. The Wallowa
Mountains lie in the eastern part of this state, near Hells Canyon. Multnomah Falls lies near a river
in this state that runs through The Dalles and the Bonneville Dam. Mount (*) Hood is a glaciercovered stratovolcano in this state, and its cities of Eugene and Salem lie in the Willamette Valley. For 10
points, name this state that is home to Portland and is separated from Washington by the Columbia River.
ANSWER: Oregon
This state is near the hydrothermal vent chimney nicknamed Godzilla. It also contains Blue Basin, which is
part of the John Day Fossil Beds National Monument. This state also contains Broken Top, which is near
the Three Sisters and contains Bend Glacier. Many of its cities, such as Lake Oswego and Corvallis, lie
along the Willamette River. This state also contains Sacajawea Peak and Mount Hood. Name this home of
Crater Lake National Park whose capital is Salem, located north of California.
ANSWER: Oregon
In this state there are a city, a dam, a river, and a national monument named for John Day, a scout of the
Astor overland expedition of 1811. That river flows through the Deschutes-Umatilla Plateau and into a
much larger river near the inland port of The Dalles. A portion of this state's northeastern border is formed
by the deepest gorge in North America, Hells Canyon. Its western region contains Crater Lake and this
state's most populous cities are located in the Willamette Valley, whose namesake river flows into the
Columbia River near Portland. FTP, identify this large northwestern state with its capital at Salem.
ANSWER: State of Oregon
A landmark in this state features a tree stump that is over a hundred years old and is thus known as the Old
Man of the Lake. That landmark in this state includes features like Phantom Ship and is found in the caldera
of Mount Mazama. This state's most populous region is located north of the Calapooya Mountains and east
of another range that contains volcanoes like the Three Sisters and Mount Hood. This state also contains the
deepest lake in the United States, Crater Lake. Most of this state's northern border is along the Columbia
River. For 10 points, name this Pacific Northwest state that contains the Willamette valley and is thus home
to cities like Eugene, Salem, and Portland.
ANSWER: Oregon
From this state's city of Medford, one can visit a lava formation known as the Upper and Lower Table
Rock. A fungus located in this state is said to be the world's largest organism. A national park in this state is
named after a feature that formed from the caldera of Mount Mazama. The Willamette river valley is home
to a large portion of this state's population. That valley includes its largest city, from which one can see
Mount Hood. This state is home to Crater Lake. For 10 points, name this state south of Washington, home
to cities such as Eugene, Salem, and Portland.
ANSWER: Oregon
This state's John Day Fossil Beds are the source of brontothere specimens. Eagle Cap Wilderness
is located in this state's Wallowa Mountains, part of a national forest that contains the southern part
of Joseph Canyon and adjoins the western side of Hells Canyon. In this state, Wizard Island lies in a
lake that was formed when the eruption of Mount (*) Mazama caused a caldera to fill with water. Crater
Lake and Mount Hood are landmarks in this state's section of the Cascade Range. For 10 points, the
Willamette Valley of what northwestern state was the destination of 19th-century pioneers who traveled on
a cross-country trail?
ANSWER: Oregon
This state is where Joseph Diller first observed the Old Man of the Lake, a vertically floating log,
in a lake that is also home to Wizard Island. This state is home to the (+) Three Sisters volcanoes,
which are its three of its highest points in one mountain range. That range, the Cascades, is the
location of a caldera formed from the destruction of (*) Mount Mazama and this state's highest point at
Mount Hood. For 10 points, name this state of Crater Lake that had its territorial capital at Corvallis before
moving to Salem.
ANSWER: Oregon
This state contains the beginner mountain-climbing destination of South Sister, one of its Three Sisters. The
John Day Fossil Beds National Monument is located in this state, whose northwestern-most point contains
Fort Clatsop, where a major river flows into the ocean. The eruption of Mount Mazama created a lake in
this state's only national park, which includes Wizard Island. Almost 70 percent of this state's population
lives in the Willamette River Valley in the shadow of its tallest peak, Mount Hood. For 10 points, name this
state that contains Crater Lake, shares the lower course of the Columbia River with Washington, and is
home to the cities of Salem and Portland.
ANSWER: Oregon
A lake in this state contains Wizard Island and is located within Mount Mazama. The Wallowa
Mountains cut through its northeastern corner, while its western half is dominated by the (*)
Willamette River Valley. In its southern part, the Klamath River cuts through the Cascades. This state's
landmarks include Mt. Hood and Crater Lake. For 10 points, name this state in the Pacific Northwest with
cities such as Salem and Portland.
ANSWER: Oregon
This state's namesake outback contains lakes formed from the streams of the Great Basin, such as the
Warner Lakes. Its largest city has an extinct cinder cone volcano named Mount Tabor. A national park in
this state has the "Old Man of the Lake," a tree stump bobbing upright. That lake in this state formed from
the collapse of Mount Mazama. In this state, the Deschutes River joins a river at The Dalles. Another
tributary of that river forms a basin that contains most of this state's population. Those rivers in this state
are the Willamette and Columbia. The tallest peak in this state is Mount Hood, and it is home to Crater
Lake. For 10 points, name this state with capital at Salem.
ANSWER: Oregon
In 2007 this polity passed Measure 49, which modified and overturned parts of a controversial 2004
initiative which expanded the definition of "regulatory taking", Measure 37. That measure was
opposed by this state's 1000 Friends organization, who sought to preserve Governor Tom McCall's
1973 land-use ordinance, the first in the nation to mandate urban growth boundaries. This state's
only light-rail system, (*) TriMet, extends to Gresham in the east and Hillsborough, running through
Beaverton, in the west; that system serves this state's largest city, which is part of an elected regional
metropolitan government encompassing the counties of Washington, Clackamas, and Multnomah. FTP,
name this state bordered on the north by the Columbia River, whose Wilamette Valley includes the cities of
Eugene and Portland.
ANSWER: Oregon
This river's source is located near Mount Delgado Chalbaud, and its delta extends from Pedernales to
Barima Point on the Boca Grande. A mile-long bridge crosses this river at Ciudad Bolivar. Much of this
river's basin north of the Guaviare River is composed of plains called the Llanos (YAH-nos). The Apure is
one tributary of this river, and one of this river's tributaries, the Caroni, is the location of Angel Falls.
Alexander von Humboldt led an expedition that proved that the Casiquiare River joins this river with the
Amazon. For ten points, name this river that flows from the Guiana Highlands to the Atlantic Ocean and is
largely located in Venezuela.
ANSWER: Orinoco River
Its source was located from the air by Joseph Grelier and Risquez Iribarren in 1951 as being near a
mountain that would be named for the president of the nation where this river meets the Atlantic. Dredging
has allowed passage by ocean-going vessels from the mouth to where it meets the Caroni River at Puerto
Ordaz. The 712-m Angostura Bridge that crosses it at Ciudad Bolivar is still the longest bridge in South
America, and it flows in to the Atlantic at Amacuro. The northernmost of South America's river systems and
part of the border with Columbia, for 10 points name this Venezuelan river.
ANSWER: Rio Orinoco
The Schomburgk Line placed the mouth of this river under British control, but it was ceded to another
country after arbitration initiated by Grover Cleveland. This river is connected to a more southerly river
system by the Casiquiare (COSS-eek-ee-AH-ray) canal. The Columbus Channel separates this river's delta
from the island of Trinidad to its north. For 10 points, name this river of northern South America, whose
watershed covers most of Venezuela.
ANSWER: Orinoco River
Its delta names a state with capital at Tucupita, and it forms the beaches of San Fernando de Atabapo. The
Ature and Maipures cataracts divide this river, which contains the Llovinza Falls. The biggest waterfall in
its upper portion is called Salto Libertador, while it is connected to the Amazon via the Casiquiare and
Esmerelda, which form the Rio Negro. It flows from Delgado Chalbaud mountain to the Delta Amacuro
into the Gulf of Paria, and to its south is the plateau Auyantepui, which features the highest waterfall in the
world, Angel Falls. Flowing through the Llanos and forming part of the border with Columbia, for 10
points, identify this chief river of Venezuela.
ANSWER: Orinoco River
This river is home to its namesake goose Neochen jubata and the crocodile Crocodylus intermedius.
The Guahibos and Atures rapids are located on this river and its river system is linked to a much
larger river system by the Casiquiare Canal. This river's tributaries include the Apure river and the
Meta. The Maipure and Warao live around this river. This river is the site of one of the largest
deposits of (*) tar sands outside of Canada. This river's name means "a place to paddle." This river flows
through the Llanos and it has a large delta. Cities along this river include Puerto Ayacucho and Ciudad
Bolivar. For 10 points, name this large river of Columbia and Venezuela which gives its name to a work of
Aphra Behn.
ANSWER: Orinoco river
A highly endangered species of crocodile is restricted to the basin of this river as well as that of the
Meta River. Tributaries of this river include the Caura, the Atabapo, and the Apure, as well as the Arauca.
Another tributary of this river joins it near a waterfall whose name is Spanish for "drizzle." That tributary,
whose source is in the Guiana Highlands, is the Caroni River. The Casiquiare Canal connects this river to
the Rio Negro, thus connecting it to the Amazon system. For 10 points, name this river of Venezuela.
ANSWER: Orinoco River
This city, which was formerly known as Fort Gatlin and Jernigan, is the home of educational museums
in Lack Haven Park and a public transit system known as SunRail. The Lake Eola fountain is a landmark in
this metropolis, which calls itself "The City Beautiful." Though it's not in California, it is the seat of Orange
County. Census statistics group it as the largest city of a region that also includes Sanford and Kissimmee.
For 10 points, name this Florida city, the home of the University of Central Florida, Universal Studios and
Walt Disney World.
ANSWER: Orlando
One attraction in this city is actually one story above ground level, since it is built on a massive grid of
utility tunnels. Another theme park in this city features live reenactments of the Crucifixion and is called
The Holy Land Experience. The first Wet 'n Wild was founded in this city. It's neither San Diego nor San
Antonio, but another institution in this city has been attacked by documentaries like The Cove and
Blackfish. A theme park in this city includes a geodesic sphere called "Spaceship Earth," and is named
Epcot. This city is home to easternmost SeaWorld and the best-known Universal Studios Resort. For 10
points, identify this location of Disney World.
ANSWER: Orlando, Florida
Due to a labor shortage in the 1970s, this European city's second-most populous minority consists of
Pakistanis who moved to this city as guest workers. One area of this city, Bygdoy, houses the schooner
Fram and Oscarshall Castle. Works such as Monolith, which is a tower of human bodies, and Wheel of Life
are contained in this city's Frogner Park, which features other stone and bronze statuary by Gustav Vigeland
[VEEG-land]. Other attractions in this city include the Kon-Tiki Museum and St. Hallvard's Cathedral. For
10 points, name this city, formerly called Christiana, the capital of Norway.
ANSWER: Oslo [accept Christiana before mention]
Scenic byways in this city include Colonel By Drive, which runs along the Rideau Canal, and the
Rideau River terminates in this city. In 2001 it amalgamated with its suburbs such as Nepean and
Gloucester. This city lies along its namesake river across from Gatineau(*), and landmarks within this
city include the Peace Tower, Macdonald-Cartier International Airport, Confederation Boulevard, and 24
Sussex Drive, whose current resident is Stephen Harper. For 10 points, name this second most populated
city in Ontario, the capital city of Canada.
ANSWER: Ottawa
Several landforms in this region used to be a part of a larger structure called Wokokon. This
region contains Jockey's Ridge. During the Civil War, a failed Confederate offensive in this region
led to the Chicamacomico Races. Feral horses live on this region's Ocracoke Island. One division of
this region contains the towns of Frisco and Buxton. U-85 was sunk near Bodie, which is an island in
this place. The waters off the coast of this region are known as the (*) Graveyard of the Atlantic. The
Wright Brothers conducted their first flight in Kitty Hawk, which is located in this region. For 10 points,
name this group of barrier islands including Hatteras, which lies off the coast of North Carolina.
ANSWER: Outer Banks, North Carolina [prompt on "North Carolina"; prompt on "Atlantic Coast"]
A wildlife refuge in this region gained its name from the beans of lavender-like flowers that snow geese
fed upon during the winter. This location, home to Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge, is also home of a
breed of feral horses that can be found in areas such as Ocracoke Island. On one island in this location, the
word "Croatoan" was found carved into a tree following the disappearance of a colony. This region was the
site of the first flight, as the Wright brothers worked in this region's Kill Devil Hill and Kitty Hawk. For 10
points, name this area of barrier islands located in eastern North Carolina.
ANSWER: Outer Banks
This city is the setting of a novel in which a duke's death is heralded by owls perching on the battlements
of Tankerton Hall. Nicholas Ridley was burned at the stake in this city. Matthew Arnold called it the "city
with her dreaming spires" in his poem "Thyrsis," and Roger Bannister ran the first mile in less than four
minutes in this city. Its most famous institution has a science library called the Radcliffe Camera and a
museum named for Augustus Pitt Rivers. For ten points, name this city in England, home to the oldest
university in the English-speaking world.
ANSWER: Oxford
Caves found within this mountain range include Blanchard Springs, Crystal Dome, and Mystic Caverns.
Located north of the Ouachita Mountains, which Mount Magazine is generally considered part of, this range
features the tourist attraction of Peel's Ferry, which crosses Bull Shoals Lake. Its regions include Boston
Mountains, Springfield Plateau, Salem Plateau, and the Saint Francois Mountains. Its highest peak is often
listed as Turner Ward Knob, and part of this range is in Mark Twain National Forest. A small part of this
range is in Kansas, and the southwestern part is in Oklahoma. Name this mountain range located primarily
in Missouri and Arkansas.
ANSWER: Ozark range [or Ozarks; or Ozark plateau]
Its extensions include the Springfield and Salem plateaus and the Cookson Hills. Lakes Taneycomo and
Table Rock were formed by damming up a waterway which begins in this range, the White River. The
Sac River and the Pomme de Terre, a tributary of the Osage River, both form in this range, and the Bell
and Taum Sauk peaks are among the highest in its Saint Francois subrange. With prominent peaks
including Turner Ward Knob and Mount Magazine, for 10 points, name this parent range of the Boston
Mountains, found in Missouri and Arkansas.
ANSWER: Ozark Mountains
People living in this region are the subject of The Shepherd of the Hills by Harold Bell Wright. This
region is often combined with the Ouachita Mountains. One mountain range in this region contains the
Mina Sauk Falls and is the Saint Francois Mountains. The highest peaks in this area are found in a division
called the Boston Mountains, which are the source of the White River. A large man-made reservoir named
for, and located in, this area was created when the Bagnell Dam was built on the Osage River. For 10
points, identify this highland region of the central United States.
ANSWER: Ozarks [or Ozark Mountains; or Ozark Plateau; prompt on Saint Francois Mountains]
Pissing in the Snow" was a national bestseller collection of folklore from this highland region. Although
often referred as a mountain range, it is a plateau that covers an area of 47,000 square miles. Its name most
likely originates from a French abbreviation that means toward a trading post that was located in an area
above the convergence of the White River with a major river. Another possible explanation is that the name
is a toponym of the French term for the dozens of natural bridges found in this area, including the Alume
Cove in St. Francis National Forest. FTP, name these central highlands that include the southern half of
Missouri and northern Arkansas while extending westward towards Oklahoma and southeast Kansas.
ANSWER: Ozark Mountains (accept The Ozarks or Ozark Plateau)
Project Kaisei was launched to explore and rehabilitate this region, which was also the subject of the
JUNK raft and has led to the finding of contaminants in almost all Laysan albatrosses on Midway
Atoll. Perpetuated by a subtropical gyre, it was first "discovered" by a sailor on the Transpac race in
1998, but despite its name is not visible from space due to the suspension of particles in the upper water
column. For 10 points-name this swirling mess of marine debris in the largest of the oceans.
ANSWER: Great Pacific garbage patch
On Bali, priests bless subak to maintain these things. In Japan, family names containing the syllable
"ta" refer to these areas. In the Philippines, a set of these areas in the mountains of Ifugao are referred to as
the "eighth wonder of the world," since they are made from an elaborate system of terraces carved into the
mountains. Water buffalo are raised to plow these strips of land, which are surrounded by earthworks so
that they hold rain during the monsoon season. For ten points, name these flooded allotments of land used to
grow rice in Asia.
ANSWER: paddy fields [or rice paddies]
A 1930s film titled for this desert marked the first time Clark Gable acted in a talkie. This desert
extends past Cameron and can be accessed from Holbrook. In this desert, the Chinle rock formation is
exposed, revealing its bands of yellow, red, and white sediment. It extends from the southeast corner of the
Grand Canyon to the Petrified Forest. Joseph Ives coined the name of its desert in reference to its beautiful
sandstones and shales. For ten points, name this desert on a plateau in Arizona.
ANSWER: the Painted Desert
The southeastern part of this country, including the city of Jacobabad, is the province of Sindh. The
western side of this country includes the Balochistan region, which includes the Toba Kakar Mountain
Range and the Bolan Pass. Its city of Peshawar is also near its western boundary by the Khyber
Pass, and on its northern border with China this country includes Mount Godwin-Austen, or K2. Its
most populous city, located on the Arabian Sea, is Karachi, and this country includes most of the
Indus River Valley. Name this country that has had several disputes with India over the status of
Jammu and Kashmir.
ANSWER: (Islamic Republic of) Pakistan
The city of Gwadar in this country was once an Omani colony, and the Hunza and Nagar valleys are
known for the longevity of their residents. Chitral and Gilgit are major cities in this country's north, and
the colonial legacy can be seen in city names such as Abbottabad and Jacobabad. Kalat and Quetta are
large cities in this country's portion of Baluchistan, and Muzaffarabad is the administrative capital of
Azad Kashmir. It is home to cities such as Rawalpindi, Multan, Karachi and Lahore. For 10 points, name
this country whose capital is Islamabad.
ANSWER: Pakistan
The Hunza District in this country is particularly prone to landslides. The southern coast of the country has
numerous oceanside escarpments and may be accessed along the Makran Highway, which allows access to
the port of Gwadar. The lengthy Baltoro Glacier passes by a number of 8,000 meter peaks in this country
including Hidden Peak while the Potohar Plateau contains the snake-infested Margalla Hills. The Seraiki
people inhabit the Thal desert in this country with a long northwestern border defined by the Durand Line.
Its Chagai Hills contain Ras Koh, a nuclear testing site. Also including the city of Rawalpindi, parts of the
Karakoram Range, and K2, for 10 points identify this country whose main port is Karachi and whose capital
is Islamabad.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan [or Islami Jumhuri-ye Pakistan]
This nation contains Mt. Sikarim, while the Tilla Jogian and Sakaser are mountains in the Salt
Range. Another mountain range in this nation sees Concordia, a joining of the Godwin-Austin and
Baltoro Glaciers. This nation's smallest state contains the Kohalla Bridge over the Jhelum, while The
Ravi River and Chenab river help form the state of Punjab. Another state contains Thatta, and borders
different country's Rajasthan, while the largest state is home to the Suleyman Mountains and Bolan Pass.
Sindh and Balochistan can be found in, for ten points, what country home to the Khyber Pass, and
Islamabad?
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Floods in this country are controlled by the Tarbela and Mangla Dams. The Khojak and Broghol Passes
connect this country with its northwestern neighbor, whose border with this country also contains the
Sulaiman Mountains. This country, which is demarcated from its northwestern neighbor by the Durand
Line, contains the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province, which share a
capital at Peshawar. Its highest point is located in the Karakoram Mountains and is named Mount GodwinAusten, or K2. For 10 points, name this South Asian country that disputes control of Kashmir with India
and contains the cities of Karachi and Islamabad.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan [or Islami Jumhuri-ye Pakistan]
This country contains the eastern half of the region of Makran, and its city of Quetta lies southeast of
the Bolan Pass. This country is home to the Pothohar Plateau, which lies north of the Salt Range and
contains the cities of Jhelum and Attock. The Baltoro Glacier is located in its province of GilgitBaltistan, while its southwest is dominated by Balochistan Province. Its city of (*) Peshawar lies
southeast of the Khyber Pass, while its city of Lahore lies west of the Thar Desert and is the capital of
Punjab Province. K2 lies on its border with China, and its city of Karachi lies on the Arabian Sea near the
mouth of the Indus River. For ten points, name this country with capital at Islamabad.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
The only two eight-thousander mountains never climbed in winter are in this country. One of those
mountains in this country was the site of a 2013 terrorist attack and is Nanga Parbat; the other is
occasionally known as Godwin Austin. The seaport of Gwadar in this country's southwest was only
ceded to it by Oman in 1958. Major floods in 2010 in this country affected provinces such as one formerly
known as the North-West Frontier Province, and is now the namesake of the Khyber Pass connecting
Peshawar it to its western neighbour. Former capitals of this country include Rawalpindi and Karachi. For
10 points, name this country with capital Islamabad.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan [or Jamhuryat Islami Pakistan]
This country is located directly to the South of the Wakhan Corridor which prevents it from
bordering Tajikistan. Its name derives from an acronym, and it lost over 10% of its land area during
the 1970's. Poet Allama Iqbal first envisioned this country's inception and the founder of this country
espoused the two-nation theory. Some prominent leaders from this country include (*) Yahya Khan,
Zia-ul-Haq, and Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto. This country is currently in conflict with India and China over the
Kashmir region. FTP, name this country currently led by Asif Ali Zardari and Yusuf Gilani, with capital at
Islamabad.
ANSWER: Pakistan
In 2000, this nation recently lowered its voting age to 18 for the December elections. Sites within this
country include Harappa, known as the "Bronze-Age" city, and Mohenjo-[*] Daro. Though its capital
has a population of over 1.7 million people, its main cultural center is Lahore, where many Westerninfluenced shops and restaurants, as well as the University of the Punjab, are located. Headed by President
Asif Zardari and still reeling from the assassination of Benazir Bhutto, for 10 points, name this country
whose largest city is Karachi and has its capital at Islamabad.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
One of this country's cities contains the Mazar-e-Quaid, a mausoleum named for this country's
founder. Another of this country's cities contains Food Street in its cultural haven, Gawalmandi, as
well as this country's film industry, Lollywood. This country is divided into four provinces, including
(*) Sindh and Balochistan, and contains the peak K2. The Khyber Pass connects Afghanistan with this
country, whose largest cities are Lahore and Karachi. For 10 points, name this nation, whose capital is
Islamabad, and which disputes the territory of Kashmir with India.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
The Sulaiman Mountains extend into the northwestern part of this country. The strategic Bolan Pass through
the Toba Kakar Range connects the cities of Jacobabad and Quetta in this country. Rawalpindi, located just
south of this nation's capital, is the home of this nation's military headquarters. (*) South Waziristan is part
of the FATA [Fah-Tah] in this nation that also has divisions named Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, named after a
well known mountain pass, and Punjab. This nation's Sindh province, with capital Karachi, is home to the
Indus River delta. For 10 points, name this western neighbor of India with capital Islamabad.
ANSWER: Pakistan
The country's Potwar Plateau is home to large deposits of rock salt. A large geographical region of this
country is the endorheic Sistan Basin in the south, which is bordered by the Sulaiman Mountains. This
country is demarcated on its north by the British-established Durand Line. The Swat valley is located in its
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in the north, which also contains the city of Abbottabad. This country is
home to the state of Balochistan and the city of Lahore. For 10 points, Peshwar and Karachi are both in
what South Asian country with capital at Islamabad?
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
The city of Gwadar in this country was an exclave of Oman until 1958 and the language isolate of
Burushaski is spoken in the northern valleys of Yasin, Nagar, and Hunza. Other former princely states here
include Swat, and the ruins of Taxila were once an important trading center. Modern day cities include
Chitral and Gilgit, bases for a current search, and Quetta (kwe-tuh) and Multan. The Sahiwal district
recently refused to allow an amusement park to be built on the ruins of Harappa. With former capitals
including Rawalpindi and Karachi, FTP, name this South Asian country led by Pervez Musharraf.
ANSWER: Pakistan
Cape Monze and the peninsula of Menora are located near this country's largest city, which is locally
known as the "City of the Quaid." The Zhob and Sutlej are rivers that run through this country, and
the cities of Gwadar and Pasni are found along the Arabian Sea in this nation's province of (*)
Baluchistan. The Spin Ghar Mountains are cut by the Khyber Pass on this country's western border, and it
shares the mountain K2 with China. This country's largest city is Karachi, and it has a noted territorial
dispute with India over the region of Kashmir. For 10 points, name this South Asian nation whose capital is
Islamabad.
ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Most of the sheep farming in this region occurs in the cool zone between Mar del Plata and Tandil.
Heavy Italian immigration helped settle this region's Cordoba, Santa Fe, and Mendoza provinces. At its
north, this region abuts the desert known as the Gran Chaco, while its south runs into the semi-arid plateau
Patagonia. It is the setting for a characteristic romantic literature about the duels of honor fought by the
gauchos. For 10 points, identify this region which is home to Buenos Aires and comprises the open plains
of Argentina.
ANSWER: the Pampas [or La Pampa]
This area is home to the Ombu, a tree known as a "lighthouse" to the inhabitants of this flat region, while a
ratite indigenous to this region is the Greater Rhea. Bounded to the south by the Colorado river and Bahia
Blanca and including the province of Entre Rios, this region west of the Espinal includes the city of
Rosario, on the Parana river. Named from the Quechua word for "flat surface", FTP, this Argentine region
containing Buenos Aires is home to the gauchos.
ANSWER: Las Pampas
The ombu is a tree-like bush which thrives in this geographical region, as frequent fires there regenerate its
roots. The capital of this area's namesake province is Santa Rosa, but it covers areas in three different
nations, including the state of Rio Grande del Sul. Characterized by vast fertile plains known for
agriculture, it still contains the large city of Buenos Aires. Covering nearly all of Uruguay is, FTP, what
area of grasslands in South America, home to the gauchos?
ANSWER: La Pampa or Las Pampas
An indigenous people named the Kuna reside in this nation, where they produce artful textiles called
molas. This country was the target of a failed Scottish colonization scheme, the Darien plan. This
present-day country was sacked by Henry Morgan when it was the wealthiest colony in New Spain. Water
from the Chargres River formed this country's artificial Lake Gatun, which lies near its port of Colon. For
10 points, name this isthmus country between Costa Rica and Colombia.
ANSWER: Republic of Panama
This nation elected the first Jewish president in the Western Hemisphere, Eric Arturo Delvalle, in 1985.
Banana farming is prominent here in the area surrounding Portobelo, and shrimp are harvested in the waters
between La Palma and Isla del Ray, which is near the Pearl Islands to the south of this country's mainland.
Its north is indented by the Gulf of Mosquitos. The damming of the Chagos River here created Lake Gatun
just south of Chagos and Fort Sherman. It shares the Darien Gap with its southern neighbor, Colombia. One
geographical feature in this country empties near Balboa and was administered by the United States at least
in part until 1999. For 10 points, name this Central American nation along an isthmus whose namesake
canal links the Caribbean Sea to the Pacific Ocean.
ANSWER: Republic of Panama [or Republica de Panama]
San Blas was the name of a region in this country that is now called Guna Yala, home of the Guna
people who produce blouses called "molas." A province in this country is the namesake of the Darien
Gap. In 1999, this country received full control of a formerly extraterritorial area through the (*)
Torrijos-Carter Treaty. That area in this country includes Gatun Lake, where one of three locks is located
on a waterway between the Caribbean and Pacific. For 10 points, name this Central American country
found on an isthmus, where a namesake canal connects the Pacific to the Atlantic.
ANSWER: Republic of Panama [or Republica de Panama]
This nation's port cities include Cristobal and Almirante, while its main mountain range is alternately
known as the Cordillera de Talamanca and the Serrania de Tabasara. Its most notable geographical feature
utilizes the Miraflores and Gatun Lakes and features extensive locks near both those bodies of water. For
10 points, name this Central American country that borders Colombia and is home to a namesake canal.
ANSWER: Republic of Panama [or Republica de Panama]
This nation owns the islands of the San Blas Archipelago, Taboga, and Coiba Island, home to a namesake
species of howler monkey. Its southern portion extends along the Azuero Peninsula, featuring the fishing
town of Pedasi and a region dubbed Arco Seco or the "Dry Arc." Its highest point is at Baru volcano, while
the Bocas del Toro region in the northwest is home to indigenous Ngobe-Bugle or Guaymi peoples. It is
indented by the Gulf of Chiriqui near its city of David, while native Choco peoples inhabit its eastern
province of Darien, on its namesake gulf. That gulf sits east of the Pearl Islands of this nation, as featured
on the TV show Survivor. FTP, name this country sandwiched between Costa Rica and Colombia, the site
of a famous canal.
ANSWER: Panama
This nation contains the southern portion of the La Amistad International Peace Park, in the Cordillera de
Talamanca. Punta Mariato is the southernmost point of this nation, on the Azuero Peninsula which is bound
by the Pacific Ocean and a gulf of the same name as this nation. The Chagres River flows from this nation's
Gatun Lake, and the Darien Gap is in the eastern portion of this nation and is the only break in the PanAmerican Highway. For 10 points, name this nation on an isthmus, southeast of Costa Rica and north of
Colombia and home to a canal connecting two oceans.
ANSWER: Republic of Panama
A $5.25 billion plan to overhaul this structure, championed by Martin Torrijos and approved by a
national referendum in 2006, caused Savannah and Charleston to seek federal money for dredging
projects. That overhaul began with improvements to this structure's Gaillard Cut, which is crossed
by Centennial Bridge and which joins up with the Chagres River. This structure makes use of the
Miraflores and (*) Gatun Lakes, and at its northern terminus is the Colon Free Zone, a center for
transshipment. The Bridge of the Americas near Balboa crosses, for 10 points, what isthmus-traversing
waterway that saves ships the treacherous journey around Cape Horn by cutting through Central America?
ANSWER: Panama Canal [or Canal de Panama]
It runs parallel to the Boyd-Roosevelt Highway from Colon to Balboa, and parts of it depend on the
drainage of Lake Miraflores and Lake Gatun, fed by the Chagres River. This structure crossed by the
Centennial Bridge includes the Gaillard Cut. Using locks to aid movement between Limon Bay and the
Pacific, it allows ships to avoid rounding Cape Horn. For 10 points, name this artificial waterway that runs
through a namesake Central American country.
ANSWER: Panama Canal
This structure runs parallel to the Boyd-Roosevelt Highway. This structure required the creation of the
Gaillard Cut in Gamboa. This structure includes Gatun Lake, Miraflores Lake, and the Chagres River on its
path. This structure is crossed over by the Centennial Bridge and the Bridge of the Americas. For 10 points,
name this man-made structure that opened to traffic in 1914 and connected the Atlantic to the Pacific
through a Central American isthmus.
ANSWER: Panama Canal [or Canal de Panama]
Bahia Limon is located at the north end of this structure, and the twin cities of Cristobal and Colon are
located at one of its termini. The Gaillard Cut is located at this structure, which was created by the
damming of the Chagres River at Gatun Lake. Balboa Heights was the administrative headquarters of a
namesake zone that governed this entity, whose completion was aided by Walter Reed's discovery that
yellow fever is transmitted by mosquitoes. For 10 points, name this man-made waterway that was the
subject of a treaty signed by Omar Torrijos and Jimmy Carter that connects the Atlantic and Pacific oceans
in its namesake Central American nation.
ANSWER: Panama Canal
Lake Gatun provides over a billion gallons of water each day to this geographical feature, on the eastern
side of which is Soberiana National Park. An update to the namesake max vessel using this waterway will
allow more than double the current twenty-foot equivalent unit capacity through it in 2014. The work of Dr.
Walter Reed to eradicate Yellow Fever greatly impacted the construction of this feature. Utilizing three
locks to account for changes in sea level is, FTP, what man-made waterway connecting the Caribbean Sea
and the Pacific through a namesake country?
ANSWER: Panama Canal
Workers in this region were racially segregated into "gold" and "silver" payrolls. Riots that broke out in
this region in 1964 are commemorated on Martyrs' Day. This region has two districts named after
Christopher Columbus and Vasco Nunez de Balboa. This region contains the Culebra Cut and Lake Gatun.
This birthplace of John McCain was made neutral by the Torrijos-Carter Treaties. For ten points, name this
region of Panama that was administrated by the United States until 1979.
ANSWER: the Panama Canal Zone
One of these regions was almost combined with the area around Spokane to form the state of Lincoln, while
another one tried to become the state of Jefferson in 1915. That latter region, which contains Palo Duro
Canyon and whose largest city is Amarillo, borders a similar region once cut off by the 100th meridian from
the Indian territory to its east. West Virginia is the only state with two of these regions, while the largest
American city located in one is Tallahassee. FTP, identify these protrusions particularly associated with
Idaho, Texas, and Oklahoma.
ANSWER: panhandles
The Rabaul Caldera is located in New Britain in this country, which also contains Manus and the Admiralty
Islands. Part of this country's western border is made up of the Fly River, which connects via the Strickland
River to this nation's largest lake, Lake Murray. Its official languages include Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu. This
country is separated from its former owner by the Torres Strait, and during the 1990s a civil war occurred
that made it grant autonomy to Bougainville. Formerly ruled by Australia, for 10 points, name this Pacific
nation with capital at Port Moresby which shares the second largest island in the world with Indonesia.
ANSWER: Independent State of Papua New Guinea
In Guns, Germs, and Steel, Jared Diamond relates in the prologue a conversation he had with a politician
from this country, Yali. The Kokoda Trail runs through this country's Owen Stanley Ridge and was the site
of fighting between Japanese and Australian troops during World War II. Secessionist movements have
come from its Bougainville Island, which is part of a semi-autonomous region. Bronislaw Malinowski
studied the kula ring in a group of islands now part of this country, the Trobriands. Its capital is Port
Moresby. For 10 points, name this country which takes up the eastern half of an island it shares with
Indonesia.
ANSWER: Papua New Guinea [do not accept or prompt on partial answer]
This country's second and third largest cities lie on Huon and Astrolabe Bays. The Boluminski Highway
links the provincial capital of Kavieng and the smaller town of Namatanai, spanning the eastern coast of this
country's New Ireland province. The southern plain of this nation is named for the Fly and Digul rivers
which run through it, and most of the production of the country takes place in its capital and in Lae, but a
majority of the coastline and much of the mainland are dominated by mangroves and swamp. For 10 points,
what is this country in the South Pacific, which occupies the Eastern half of its namesake island, and whose
capital is at Port Moresby?
ANSWER: The Independent State of Papua New Guinea
The Drehet Language is spoken on Manus Island, a holding of this nation, whose second largest city
lies on Huon Gulf. That city, Lae, sits in the Morobe Province of this nation, whose southern plain is
named after the Digul and Fly Rivers that flow through it. Bismarck Range is home to its highest
point, Mount (*) Wilhelm, and its longest river is the Sepik (SEE - pick), which briefly flows west of the
141st east meridian line separating this country from its western neighbor, Irian Jaya. With capital at Port
Moresby, for 10 points, identify this South Pacific country that occupies the eastern half of the namesake,
second largest island in the world.
ANSWER: Independent State of Papua New Guinea [do not accept or prompt on "New Guinea"]
Unserdeutsch is one of these systems that has developed in this particular place during the colonial
period, although fewer than 100 native speakers remain. Out of over 850 of these in this place,
representing the greatest diversity on the planet, only a handful are expected to survive the intrusion
of the three official ones, such as Tolai, used on the Gazelle Peninsula. Among the most widely used
non-official systems are Enga and Huli, found in the eastern highlands, although these have begun
incorporating loans from the dominant systems in recent years. These systems in this place include Hiri
Motu, formerly the most widely-spoken lingua franca, which has been declining in recent years due to the
prestige of English, despite it still only being utilized by 1-2% of the population. FTP, what are these
systems of a particular country, the most widely-used of which is Tok Pisin, a creole with distinct dialects
developing in the Highlands, north coast, on New Britain, and on Bougainville Island?
ANSWER: Languages of Papua New Guinea
Like its southern neighbor, this country also has a Colorado Party, which dominated national politics until
2008. The Itaipu Dam, on the border between this nation and Brazil, was built in 1984. In a victorious war
against Bolivia, this country had to forfeit territorial gains aside from Chaco for peace, and its president
Francisco Lopez started and lost the War of the Triple Alliance to Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay. For 10
points, identify this landlocked country in central South America with capital at Asuncion.
ANSWER: Republic of Paraguay or Republica del Paraguay
In this country, placed named for people include the city of Doctor Pedro P. Pena and the
department of Presidente Hayes. Capiata and San Lorenzo are two of its three largest cities. Its
capital is where the Pilcomayo joins this country's (*) namesake river, which bisects the country north to
south. Its southeastern border is formed by the Parana, separating it from Argentina and Brazil along with
the Itaipu Reservoir. For 10 points, name this landlocked country whose capital is Asuncion.
ANSWER: Paraguay
The Ivai and another system that includes the Tibagi all flow into this river. Cities on its banks
include Diamante and Ramallo, and its largest waterfall occurs at Iquazu Falls before it flows
through Rosario. The Corpus Christi dam is one of many hydroelectric generators on this river that
have erased natural features like the Sete Quedas waterfall, which was flooded after the construction
of the (*) Itaipu Dam on this river. Forming the Brazil-Paraguay border before entering Argentina, this
river joins with the Uruguay before its most famous feature. For 10 points, identify this South American
river that empties into the Rio de la Plata.
ANSWER: Parana River
This city operates the second-largest bike sharing system in the world, known as Velib. Eighteen of the
twenty districts of this city were represented in a multi-director cinematic collaboration titled for this city's
name and a phrase meaning "I love you." This city houses a major business district called "The Defense,"
which sits at the westernmost point of the "historical axis." This city also contains the Latin Quarter and
includes a public square called the Place (PLAHS) de la Concorde, which sits at one end of the
Champs-Elysees (SHAMP elise). For 10 points, name this city, home to the Louvre (LOOV) and Eiffel
Tower.
ANSWER: Paris
One suburb of this city is Meudon, and its Meudon Telescope is in an observatory easily seen from this
city's Luxembourg Gardens. In the 1980s, the Arab World Institute was built in this city, as was a square
structure called the Grand Arch, and during the same decade a famous train station was converted into an
art museum. This city also holds a large modern art museum, the Pompidou Centre, and its more famous art
museum is decorated by pyramids designed by I.M. Pei. Name this city on the Seine River, the capital of
France.
ANSWER: Paris
This city's Park of Princes lies near its Gate of St. Cloud in its southwestern Boulogne [boo-lohn-yuh]
district. The "Peripheral Boulevard" surrounds this city and connects it to six national
"autoroutes". This city's northern suburb of St. Denis [sawn deh-nee], nicknamed the 'red city-,
has a significant African Muslim population. The Grand Arch is actually a square-shaped
building located in this city's business district called La Defense, which is connected to this city
by the Champs-Elysees [shawn zeh-lee-zay]. The garden of the Tuileries [twee-lur-ee] is adjacent
to the Seine [sen] River and Louvre museum in this city, which also features the Cathedral of
Notre-Dame [noh-tray dahm]. Name this French capital.
ANSWER: Paris, France
This city contains the Luxor Obelisk, and its parks include the Luxembourg Garden and the Tuileries
Garden, which shares its name with a palace in this city. I.M. Pei designed a glass pyramid outside of one of
its museums, while one of this city's major avenues is known as the Champs-Elysees. Lying along the river
Seine (SENN), this city possesses such landmarks as the Notre Dame Cathedral, the Arc de Triomphe, and
the home of the Mona Lisa, the Louvre. For 10 points, name this location of the Eiffel Tower, the capital of
France.
ANSWER: Paris, France
Located west of the city center, the modern business district of this city is notable for its Grande Arche and
is called La Defense. The tallest point in this city is the Sacre Coeur Basilica on Montmartre. The university
area of this city is known as the Latin Quarter. This city is bisected by the Seine River and features the
Louvre, the Champs-Elysees, and the Eiffel Tower. For 10 points, name this capital and largest city of
France.
ANSWER: Paris [accept La Defense early]
Oscar Wilde is buried in this city's Pere Lachaise Cemetery. Its business district is known as La Defense,
and Montparnasse Tower is found in this city near the Lafayette Shopping Center. The Chatelet Theatre is
located in this city, whose museums include Pompidou and the Orsay. Sacre Coeur stands atop this city's
hill of Montmartre. This city's Fauborg St. Antoine is home to the Bastille, while the Seine River runs
through this city. For 10 points, name this French city which features such landmarks as Notre Dame
Cathedral and the Eiffel Tower.
ANSWER: Paris
In 1871, a populist government led by Louis Auguste Blanqui was established in this city, known as this
city's "commune." It's not located in England, but this city is mentioned in the title of George Orwell's first
full-length work about his own experiences in poverty: Down and Out in this city and London. This city
shares its name with the mythological figure who killed Achilles with an arrow to the heel. Divided into
twenty arrondisements, this city is the capital of a country that had a regime in World War II centered in
Vichy. Name this city on the river Seine that is the most populous city in France.
ANSWER: Paris, France (accept Paris commune)
This city has a theater that opened in 1989 and was a prize-winning creation of the Uruguayan designer
Carlos Ott. The Holy Innocents' Cemetery is a defunct graveyard here, where corpses were once studied by
Andreas Vesalius. This city features the international headquarters of the U.N. agency in charge of
promoting education, science, and culture. The headquarters of UNESCO are in this city, which has such
departements as the Hauts-de-Seine (oh-day-SENN). For ten points, name this French city, the site of the
Elysee Palace and the Arc de Triomphe.
ANSWER: Paris
Most of this city's tallest office buildings are in its suburban Defense district, and it was remade in the
1860s with twelve grand avenues by Baron Haussmann. Its fourteen-line subway system is known for
stations designed by Art Nouveau architect Hector Guimard and is known as the Metropolitan. Its notable
parks include the Bois du Bologne and Jardin du Luxembourg, and its oldest portion is the Ile de la Cite, a
small island in the Seine River. For 10 points, name this capital of France.
ANSWER: Paris
The Historical Axis is a road of monuments in this city, whose avenues were widened by Baron
Haussmann. Bone piles are in the catacombs below this city, whose Latin Quarter is part of the 5th
and 6th (*) arrondissements [ah-ROHN-dee-suh-MOHN]. Its Left and Right Banks are separated by the
Seine River, and its Champs-Elysees [shawm-ZAY-lee-ZAY] ends at L'Arc de Triomphe [lark duh treeOMF]. Home to the Louvre, for 10 points, name this capital of France.
ANSWER: Paris
The original settlement on the site of this city was named Lutetia by the Romans. Montmartre
(mo-MAR-tuh) is a hill in this city that is the site of Sacre Coeur Cathedral. The Pont-Neuf bridge connects
the Ile de la cite (EEL day la SEE-tay) to the mainland in this city. The Left Bank in this city includes the
Latin Quarter, which is the location of the Sorbonne. The Right Bank area of this city includes the Tuileries
and Louvre Palaces. For 10 points, name this home of Notre Dame cathedral.
ANSWER: Paris
A scaled-down replica of the Statue of Liberty is in this city's "Isle of the Swans." The Boulevard
Peripherique (PER-uh-FER-eek) runs along its border. This city is divided into twenty administrative units
which spiral out from the center and are called arrondissements (ah-RON-diss-montz). The Boulevard
Saint-Germain (son jur-MON) runs through its Latin Quarter and was built during Baron Haussmann's
renovation. For 10 points, name this city that contains the Arc de Triomphe and Eiffel Tower.
ANSWER: Paris, France
A major commuter rail system in and around this city is the RER. Its current mayor is Bertrand Delanoe,
and it is the only city to host both the Olympics and the World Cup twice. Due to height restrictions, the
main core of this city is actually outside the city limits, in the La Defense neighborhood. Leading from that
neighborhood through the center of this city is the "Grand Axis," on which is situated a monument to
commemorate the Battle of Austerlitz. That structure, the Arc de Triomphe, lies at the western end of the
Champs-Elysees. For 10 points, name this capital of France.
ANSWER: Paris
This city was originally founded as Lutetia and contains a large business district called La Defense.
Baron Haussmann (HOUSE-man) redesigned much of this city in the mid 1800s, including its sewer
system that dates back to the 1300s. This city's sights include the Orsay art museum, built on the site of a
former train station, and another large art museum which is home to a glass pyramid designed by I.M. Pei.
For 10 points, name this European city whose attractions include the Champs-Elysees (shomp zel-ee-SAY),
the Louvre (LOOV), and the Eiffel Tower.
ANSWER: Paris
A poet of the language of this ethnic group is Khushhal Khan Khatak. The son of the chief of the
Popalzai branch of these people is the current head of state in the country in which this group is a majority.
Mohammad Najubullah was a member of this ethnic group and replaced Babrak Karmal as president of a
country. The Khalil and Mandan branches of these people live in the Vale of Peshawar. The tradition of
these people holds that they are descended from the grandson of King Saul of Israel, and approximately
twenty-five million of these people live in Pakistan. For ten points, name this ethnic group that constitutes
the majority of the people of Afghanistan.
ANSWER: Pashtun [or Pushtun; or Pakhtun; or Pathan; prompt on Afghans until it is read]
These people are divided into clans called aziiz. They traditionally descend from Qais Abdur
Rashid, the first of these people to make the hajj. The Khudai Khidmatgar agitated for independence
for these people, who were split by the 1893 Durand Line. Elders of this people meet in the jirgah. In
one country, they-re concentrated in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and the (*) North-West
Frontier Province. A member of this ethnicity succeeded Mullah Omar as president of a country once home
to the Northern Alliance. For 10 points, name these people of northwest Pakistan and Afghanistan.
ANSWER: Pashtun People [or Pushtun or Pakhtun or Pathan; prompt on "Afghan"]
This region contains one of the largest expatriate communities of Welsh speakers, in and around the town of
Rawson. The region is volcanically active, as its inhabitants were reminded by the eruption of the Chaiten
volcano in 200. The rugged, glaciated, and heavily indented terrain along the region's main mountain chain
has made border demarcation difficult-at one point requiring Papal arbitration in the 1980's to settle a
dispute over the Beagle Channel. Due to its extremities and dogged resistance by the native Mapuche and
the atypically tall Tehuelche, it was one of the last regions on the continent to be occupied by Europeans;
Punta Arenas was not founded until 1843. For 10 points, name this region first discovered by Magellan and
named for the giants supposedly living there, located in the extreme south of Chile and Argentina.
ANSWER: Patagonia
The largest city in this region is located near the base of Chenque Hill. In this region, Mount Chaitlen and
the Puyehue-Cordon Caulle lie beside Nahuel Huapi Lake. The Chubut flows through this region, which
contains the San Jorge Gulf. Mount FitzRoy is the tallest mountain in this region, which contains the Perito
Moreno Glacier in Santa Cruz Province. East of this region lies the lowest point on its continent, the Valdes
Peninsula. The Strait of Magellan and Tierra del Fuego lie south of this region, which is itself south of the
Pampas. For 10 points, name this region of South America that encompasses Chile and Argentina.
ANSWER: Patagonia
The Limay and Neuquen rivers join to form the Rio Negro, a major river in the northern portion of this
region.The village of El Chalten is located near Mount Fitzroy, the highest mountain in this region. Its
largest city, Comodoro Rivadavia, is the largest oil production center of one of the countries that make up
this region. A major tourist destination in this region is the Perito Moreno glacier, which is fed by its
namesake Southern Ice field, through which the border between the two countries that make up this region
runs. For 10 points, name this region of southern Chile and Argentina.
ANSWER: Patagonia
About 50,000 inhabitants of this region have Welsh descent because, in the 19th century, the Welsh
established a colony in its Chubut Valley. Ruben Carolini discovered a Giganotosaurus skeleton in
this region, which contains the city of (+) Ushuaia. Tourists attractions of this region include Torres
del Paine National Park and the Perito Moreno (*) Glacier. This region received its name when
Ferdinand Magellan exclaimed at the giant footprints its natives made in the snow. For 10 points, name this
region of southern Chile and Argentina.
ANSWER: Patagonia [prompt on Argentina]
This region is home to a race of giants described by Antonio Pigafetta. The Punta
Tombo Peninsula in this region is a major gathering ground for Magellanic penguins.
The Neuquen River runs through the province of Rio Negro in this region, which is
the site of Viedma glacier in its Los Glaciares National Park. This region's north
includes the drainage basin of the(*) Colorado River. The Valdes Peninsula is part of this
mountainous region, whose south includes the Tierra del Fuego islands. For ten points, name this
vast South American highland region that includes southern Argentina and Chile.
ANSWER: Patagonia
The largest sauropod dinosaur to be discovered was found in this region and is named for the principal
country in which this region is found. The lowest point in the Western hemisphere, at the Laguna del
Carbon, is found here. Historically paired with Araucania, this region has an economy based on oil
production and sheep farming, especially in its province of Magellanes. This region was named by
Magellan after the giant natives he expected to find here. This region extends down to the Tierra del Fuego
and consists of thirteen progressively higher plateaus. For 10 points, name this region located south of the
Pampas in the south of Argentina and Chile.
ANSWER: Patagonia
This range is comprised of "Millstone Grit" and limestone, which has formed several caverns such as
Rowten Pot and Ingleborough Cave. The Tyne Gap separates this range from the Cheviot. This range is
split by a gap which is defined by the Ribble and Aire rivers, below which it comprises the "Peak District"
that contains Kinder Scout. Above the gap, its northern section contains Whernside and Cross Fell. The
northern extent of this range runs coterminous with Hadrian's Wall. For ten points, identify this Derbyshire
and Northumberland range of modest mountains, comprising the "backbone" of the island of Great Britain.
ANSWER: the Pennines
Cities in this state include California and Indiana. Its town of Reading is near the Five Corners, just
southwest of Emmaus. In this state's northeast, Wilkes-Barre sits down Route 81 from (*) Scranton.
Featuring rivers like the Susquehanna and the Allegheny, in addition to Erie, this state's other cities
include a famously flooded city, Johnstown, and Valley Forge. For 10 points, identify this state where
the battle of Gettysburg was fought and whose largest city is Philadelphia.
ANSWER: Pennsylvania
This state is home to a river whose west branch joins its northern branch near Northumberland. The
Lackawanna river in this state joins another river that originates in Otsego Lake. Erie County is
located in this state, and many [*] Amish people live in this state's namesake "Dutch" region. This state's
most populous city is home to the Comcast Center and Independence Hall. In this state, home to Scranton
and the Susquehanna river, the Monongahela River joins with the Allegheny River in the "Steel City." For
10 points, name this state whose cities include Harrisburg, Pittsburgh, and Philadelphia.
ANSWER: Pennsylvania
Blair, Tioga, and Schuykill counties are in this state, whose largest metropolitan area includes the East
Falls, Chestnut Hill and Southwark neighborhoods . Two of this state's most significant historical industries
are associated with the cities of Bethlehem and Titusville. York is one of the main municipalities of its
south-central "Dutch" region along with Lancaster County. Point State Park in this state's second-largest
city marks the formation of the Ohio River from the Monongahela and Allegheny Rivers near the site of
Fort Duquesne. For 10 points, name this sixth most populous US state which is governed from Harrisburg
and contains Pittsburgh and Philadelphia.
ANSWER: Pennsylvania
This state's northeastern corner contains the Endless Mountains, and this state's Laurel Highlands contain
its highest point, Mount Davis. Wilkes-Barre is on the Susquehanna River in this state, and major cities
include the Lehigh Valley's Allentown and Erie. Lancaster County is home to this state's namesake
"Dutch". For 10 points, name this state with capital at Harrisburg, home of Pittsburgh and Philadelphia
ANSWER: Pennsylvania
Chris Carney represents this state's 10th district in congress, which includes Snyder and Wyoming counties.
It is home to the nation's first zoo, and houses the Harry Houdini museum. It has the eastern hemlock as its
state tree, the ruffed grouse as state bird, and Bloomsburg is the only officially incorporated town in this
state. Its highest point is at mount Davies, and it includes Raystown Lake; the Monongahela ends in this
state, where it meets the Allegheny river. Allentown and Reading are two of the larger cities in this
commonwealth, and Bethlehem gave its name to a large steel company here. Scranton is the center of the
coal mining industry in this rustbelt state, which is the starting point of the Ohio river. Also known as the
Keystone state, and with capital at Harrisburg, FTP what northeastern state has Philadelphia as its
metropolis, and is named after its Quaker founder?
ANSWER: Pennsylvania
One island in this question of water held the Unknown Fate Statue, but that artifact is now lost. Popular tourist
destinations in this question of water include Failaka and Kish Islands. It contains an island nation, where a
political campaign titled "We Have A Right" was organized to protect civil liberties. Next to that island,
one of the wealthiest countries in the world is a peninsula into this question of water. The eastern end of this
question is the Strait of Hormuz, and it gets water from the Tigris and Euphrates. The war named after this
question of water is commonly referred to as Operation Desert Storm and took place in 1990 and 1991. Name
this question of water bordering Bahrain, Qatar (KUTur), Kuwait, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Iran.
ANSWER: Persian Gulf [prompt on Arabian Gulf or Gulf of Arabia; do not prompt on "Arabian Sea"]
One island in this question of water includes the locales of Darren and Alzour. In addition to containing Tarut
Island, it bordered the early Dilmun and Lakhmid civilizations on its south shore, and the port of Siraf was a
notable Sassanian port which served its north shore. Its west end is marked by the Shatt al-Arab, while its
east end is separated from the Gulf of Oman by the Strait of Hormuz. Qatar juts into, for 10 points, what
sea, containing the Tigris delta, which shares its name with the former name of Iran?
ANSWER: Persian Gulf [prompt on Arabian Gulf; do not accept The Gulf]
A proposed $2.3 billion causeway across this question of water from near Askar to Zubarah would be
the world's longest causeway and would link two countries that continue to dispute the Hawar
Islands. This question of water is home to the Safaniyyah Field and to the nearby port of Dhahran,
where a 1996 bombing killed 19 American Air Force personnel. The Arvand Free Trade Zone
surrounds (*) Abadan, another port on this question of water, which can be accessed via the Strait of Hormuz.
Other cities on it include the former site of the Pearl Roundabout, Manama, as well as Dubai and Abu
Dhabi. For 10 points, name this oil-rich question of water bordered by such countries as Iraq, Saudi Arabia,
Qatar, and Iran.
ANSWER: Persian Gulf [or Arab Gulf; accept Gulf of Bahrain before "Safaniyyah" is mentioned]
The Shatt al-Arab (shaht ahl-uh-RAHB) flows into this question of water after the confluence of two rivers
at al-Qurnah. Basra is one nation's main port on this question of water. The Strait of Hormuz connects this
question of water to the Gulf of Oman. Its pearl trade centers on Abu Dhabi, and it contains the island of
Bahrain. For 10 points, name this question of water which contains two-thirds of the world's oil reserves and
borders Iraq, Kuwait, the Arabian peninsula, and its namesake country, Iran.
ANSWER: Persian Gulf [or Gulf of Iran]
The Trucial States along this question of water were a British protectorate until 1971. Bandar Khamir is a port
city on this question of water just ten miles from its largest island, Qeshm Island. This site of a 1932 pearl
divers- riot is home to a deepwater port at Umm Qasr and is the current home of the United States Fifth
Fleet. In January, the USS Abraham Lincoln passed into this question of water despite threats, going through
the Strait of Hormuz connecting this question to the Gulf of Oman. For 10 points, name this site of Bahrain, a
question of water between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
ANSWER: Persian Gulf
Operations Earnest Will and Praying Mantis occurred in this question of water during the 1980s. The
Marsh Arabs live in a delta north of this question of water, which contains the Hawar Islands. The (+)
Shatt-al-Arab empties into this question of water, which also contains Bahrain and is connected to the
Gulf of Oman. This question of water names a war undertaken during Operation (*) Desert Storm to
protect Kuwait from Iraq, both of which border this gulf. For 10 points, name this gulf west of the Strait of
Hormuz that borders Iran and Saudi Arabia.
ANSWER: Persian Gulf
In 2007 15 British soldiers were captured by another nation for allegedly infringing on that nation's claims
in this question of water. Cities lying on this question of water include Al Manamah and Busheher. The question of
water that drains it is named for Ahura Mazda. The Shatt al-Arab empties two large rivers into it at the city
of Abadan. Islands in it include Tarout, Kish, and Bahrain. FTP identify this question of water that drains into
the Gulf of Oman via the Strait of Hormuz, along which lie the nations of Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Qatar,
and Iran.
ANSWER: The Persian Gulf
One island in this question of water has a name literally meaning "the land of Moses," Abu Musa. The
economy of one island country in this question of water was fueled almost entirely by the pearling
industry. In this question of water the Clarence Strait separates Qeshm Island from the mainland. The
(*) Shatt-al-Arab feeds this question of water, which is connected to the Gulf of Oman by the Strait of
Hormuz. For 10 points, name this Middle Eastern question of water that borders Bahrain, Qatar, and Kuwait
and forms the northern boundary of the Arabian Peninsula.
ANSWER: Persian Gulf [prompt on "Arabian Gulf"]
The island of Bubiyan is located in the extreme north of this question of water. The eastern end of this question of
water contains Qeshm Island, which is often used as a refueling station. This question of water contains the
disputed Hawar Islands, and the region once known as the Trucial States lies on this question of water. This
question of water is bounded on the East by the Musandam Peninsula, and the artificial Palm islands extend
into this question of water. This home to the King Fahd Causeway is bounded on the east by the Straight of
Hormuz. Containing the island of Bahrain, for 10 points, identify this question of water surrounded, among
others, by Qatar, Iran, and Saudi Arabia which is known for its oil reserves.
ANSWER: Persian Gulf
An island country in this question of water was called Tylos by the Greeks when it was part of the
Achaemenid dynasty; the modern-day country on that island has capital Manama. The (*) Shatt alArab drains into this question of water, which is connected by the Strait of Hormuz to the Gulf of Oman and the
Arabian Sea. Bahrain lies in, and Qatar, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates lie on, for 10 points, what
Middle Eastern gulf?
ANSWER: Persian Gulf
Ica and Tacna are regions of this country. The archaeological site of Chan Chan was constructed by the
Chimu culture in this country. A canyon twice as deep as the Grand Canyon was carved out by the Colca
River in this nation, which sometimes lends its name to the Humboldt Current. The westernmost source of
the Amazon River is in this country. Its second-largest city is Arequipa (ah-ray-KEE-pah). Lines
resembling monkeys and lizards were created by the Nazca culture in this country. For ten points, name this
South American country home to Macchu Picchu.
ANSWER: Republic of Peru
This country's Sanctuary of Las Nazarenas is the site of the mural Lord of Miracles. In this country,
one room featuring three trapezoidal windows is located near the Temple of the Condor. In 2010, Yale
agreed to return artifacts taken by Hiram Bingham from a site located in this country. Many Quechuans live
on a lake that this country shares with Bolivia. Lake Titicaca is located in this country. For ten points, what
country is home to Cuzco, the Incan capital city?
ANSWER: Republic of Peru [or Republica del Peru]
This country is the location of Chan Chan, the largest adobe city in the world, near its city of Trujillo.
The Moche civilization was based in this country, and Chiclayo in this country is the site of a Moche tomb
for the Lord of Sipan. A set of ruins in this country is located above the Urubamba Valley and was found in
1911 by Hiram Bingham. This country, that contains the western half of Lake Titicaca, also has the former
capital of an empire at Cuzco. For 10 points, name this South American country that is the location of
Machu Picchu and was once ruled by the Incan Empire.
ANSWER: Republic of Peru [or Republica del Peru]
The active stratovolcano El Misti overlooks this country's second most populous city, Arequipa
(arr-ey-KEE-pah). Massive pictorial arrangements called the Nazca lines can be found here. The part of the
Andes that runs through this country is home to ancient Incan sites at Cuzco and Machu Picchu. This
country is bordered to the north by Ecuador and Colombia, and shares Lake Titicaca with its eastern
neighbor, Bolivia. For 10 points, name this South American country that has its capital at Lima.
ANSWER: Republic of Peru [or Republica del Peru]
The country's capital is the largest city by far in the country, with over 9 million people, whilst the second
city, Arequipa, has only a million. It boasts an amazing array of diversity, including the Amazon rainforest
town of Iquitos, and the Andean antiplano, a plateau with the world's highest navigable lake, Lake Titicaca.
Attractions in this country include the Colca Canyon, the world's second deepest canyon, and the Nazca
lines, a collection of large animal carvings made by an ancient civilization. FTP, name this South American
country, home to the Incan sites of Cuzco and Machu Picchu, with capital city Lima.
ANSWER: Peru
This country's Sechura Desert is crossed by the Cascajal and Piura Rivers. This country's highest peak is
Mount Huascaran, and notable archaeological sites in this country include the Huaca del Sol and Sipan,
ruins of the Moche civilization. Visitors to this country can see the Amazon Rainforest in Iquitos, travel to
the cities of Cajamarca and Arequipa, and row to Taquile Island, which lies 13,700 feet above sea level on
this country's side of Lake Titicaca. The battles of Junin and Ayacucho were fought in this country, which
contains the ruins of Machu Picchu. For 10 points, name this country west of Bolivia and north of Chile,
whose capital is Lima.
ANSWER: Peru
This country is home to the Madre de Dios river that runs through the Manu Bioreserve. Important
cities in this country include Arequipa and Tacna, both in the Sechura Desert. This country also
contains the most inland port of the world, (*) Iquitos. This country's highest point is Nevado Huascaran.
One famous religious site in the country contains the Condor Temple. Its chief seaport is the city of Callao.
A recent study showed that this country contains the source for the longest river in the world. This country
also shares the the highest navigable question of water at Lake Titicaca. For 10 points, name this South
American country home to Machu Picchu, with a capital of Lima.
ANSWER: Peru
This country's second largest city is known as "the white city," because its buildings are made from
sillar, and is named Arequipa. Its highest point is mount Huascaran, and along with Bolivia, it controls the
world's highest lake, Titicaca. Ruins in this country are found at its ancient capital of Cuzco and in the
hidden city of Machu Picchu. It borders Ecuador and Colombia to the north, and Brazil to the east. For 10
points, name this South American country with capital at Lima.
ANSWER: Republic of Peru [or Republica de Peru]
This country is the birthplace of a kind of seafood dish marinated in lime, ceviche. Huge drawings of
hummingbirds, monkeys, and spiders that can be seen from the sky were created in this country by the
Nazca culture. A zigzagging bus ride from Aguas Calientes allows tourists to reach a lost city in this
country that was rediscovered by Hiram Bingham. It shares control of the world's highest navigable lake,
Lake Titicaca, with its eastern neighbor Bolivia. For 10 points, name this Andean country that contains
Machu Picchu and other Incan ruins.
ANSWER: Peru
Because one part of this site has many tombs with false entrances, it is known as "the Street of
Facades." This site contains two clay water pipes with tapered ends, preceding a modern innovation by
hundreds of years. Although it is not Mecca, this site contains a temple to its goddess al-Uzza. This home
of the Urn and Corinthian Tombs contains a monastery known as "The Deir" as well as a Roman
amphitheater on its outskirts. The most famous building at this site is "The Treasury," which consists of
five statues, two rows of columns, one on top of a pediment, all hewn into a sandstone cliff. For 10 points,
name this Nabaetean capital city in Jordan, known for its rock-cut architecture.
ANSWER: Petra
The world's oldest location of this kind is located near Gilboa Dam in central New York. The most
famous location of this kind is home to a Phytosaur fossil unearthed at Blue Mesa. That location of this
kind is found south of the Painted Desert, is the site of a roadside diner in a Robert Sherwood play, and is
home to many Late Triassic fossils. These area form when lignin and cellulose decay anaerobically and are
replaced by waterborne minerals. For 10 points, name these places, including a national park in Arizona,
home to fossilized tree trunks.
ANSWER: petrified forests [prompt on partial answer; or fossil forests]
Areas that only meet some of the requirements of this classification include the life forms at Alex Heiberg
Island, which are often compared to a mummy. The largest example of this type of entity in the world can
be found in the towns of Eressos and Antissa on the island of Lesbos. In the U.S., a national park named
after one of these features contains the Monitor Butte of the Chinle Formation. That national park named
after this type of place can be found on Navajo Land in Arizona. Broadly speaking, these regions are
created after vegetation has undergone permineralization. For 10 points, identify this type of location, in
which one can find hardened vegetation.
ANSWER: petrified forests [accept any reasonable equivalents, such as petrified woods, or places where you can find stone wood, accept fossil forests, or equivalents. DO NOT ACCEPT OR PROMPT on forests]
This city contains Fairmount Park, and the USS Olympia, Society Hill, and its namesake naval shipyard lie
on this city's waterfront on the Schuylkill River. This city's City Hall is the largest Second Empire building
in the United States, and its tallest buildings are the Comcast Center and One Liberty Place. Carpenter Hall
and the Liberty Bell Center lie in this city's Independence National Historical Park, which also contains
Independence Hall. For 10 points, name this city set upon the banks of the Delaware, the largest city in
Pennsylvania.
ANSWER: Philadelphia
This American city is home to the first restaurant opened by Iron Chef contestant Masaharu
Morimoto. This city's Chestnut Hill neighborhood is bordered by the gorge of Wissahickon Creek.
The Reading Terminal Market is located in its (*) Center City district. This city was the terminus of a
Main Line of a railroad that built stations in Baltimore and New York. This city lies on the Schuylkill and
Delaware Rivers. For 10 points, name this Pennsylvania "city of brotherly love".
ANSWER: Philadelphia
This city's tallest building, completed in 2001, is the 974-foot Comcast Center, and Lancaster Avenue runs
through this city's "Main Line", including its suburbs of Wayne and Bryn Mawr. Universities in this city
lying along the Delaware and Schuylkill (SKOO-kull) Rivers include Drexel, Temple, and the University of
Pennsylvania. For 10 points, name this fifth-largest city in the United States, the "city of brotherly love" and
cheesesteaks which is home to Independence Hall and the Liberty Bell.
ANSWER: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
This country's popular folklore figures include Lazy John, who lays underneath the branches of a guava
tree with his mouth open and waits for the fruit to fall into his mouth. Remy Presas founded this country's
national martial art, which uses a twenty-eight inch rattan stick, and is called Modern Arnis. This country's
folk dances include Carinosa and Tinikling, and a popular dessert in this country is halo-halo. This country
is symbolized by Juan de la Cruz, who wears a wide-brimmed sakalot and a barong, which was introduced
by its president Ramon Magsaysay. For 10 points, name this country whose natives speak Tagalog on the
islands of Visayas, Mindanao, and Luzon.
ANSWER: the Republic of the Philippines [or Republika ng Pilipinas]
In this country, Vulcan Point is an island in the crater lake of the Taal Volcano, itself on Volcano
Island in Taal Lake, which can be viewed from Tagaytay Ridge. The Chico, Magat, and Ilagan rivers
drain into the country's longest river, which empties into the ocean at Babuyan Channel. That river
is the Cagayan River. Mount (*) Apo, this country's highest point, is a volcano with a small crater lake.
The Visayan Islands, which include Panay, Bohol, and Leyte, lie between the larger islands of Mindanao
and Luzon. For 10 points, identify this country whose national languages include a standardized form of
Tagalog [tuh-GAA-lug], which has its capital at Manila.
ANSWER: Republic of the Philippines
Lesser known islands in this group include Palawan, Masbate, Panay, Cebu, and Bohol, the latter of which
features enormous, distinctive Chocolate hills, which are formed somewhat like cindercones. The Sulu
Archipelago lies in the question of water bordering it to the south, the Celebes Sea, and Visayas sits between its
two main islands. Mount Apo, its highest peak, sits on the island of Mindanao which, with Luzon, is one of
the two largest islands of, FTP, what Pacific country that Douglas MacArthur swore to return to, with its
capital at Manila?
ANSWER: The Philippines
Conservation efforts in this country have failed to get people to stop frying the endangered ludong fish;
other unique animals in this country include the monkey-eating eagle and the bleeding-heart pigeon. All of
those species live along its Cagayan River. This country includes speakers of Ilocano and Cebuano, though
is most prominent indigenous language is Tagalog. Mindanao and Luzon are among its major islands. For
10 points, name this Southeast Asian archipelago-state, the home of Quezon and Manila.
ANSWER: Republic of the Philippines [or Republika ng Pilipinas]
The Batanes and Babuyan Islands are located in a strait north of this nation, whose center is governed by
the Visaya administrative region. Containing such rivers as the Pasig and Cagayan, its highest point, Mt.
Apo, is located on its second largest island. A better-known peak, however, is a volcano whose 1991
eruption was the second largest of the 20th century. Most its population lives on the islands of Mindinao
and Luzon, which contains the aforementioned Mt. Pinatubo. For 10 points, name this Asian nation with its
capital at Manila.
ANSWER: Republic of the Philippines
The Moro Islamic Liberation Front has fought for independence on this country's island of Mindanao.
One of the most active volcanoes in this country is Mount Mayon. One of the largest volcanic eruptions of
the twentieth century occurred at this country's Mount Pinatubo. Its largest and most populous island is
Luzon. The South China Sea separates this country from the mainland. For 10 points, name this island
nation in southeast Asia, whose capital is Manila.
ANSWER: Republic of the Philippines [or Republika ng Pilipinas]
The Mystery Castle is located in this city, which was originally called Pumpkinville. The Superstition
Mountains are east of this city, and the nearby city of Apache Junction is thought to contain the Lost
Dutchman's gold mine. This metropolitan area is home to Frank Lloyd Wright's winter home, Taliesin
West. Located near the confluence of the Salt River and the Gila River, this city is the seat of Maricopa
County. Home to the US Airways Center and an airport called Sky Harbor, this Western city's metropolitan
area contains Mesa, Tempe, Scottsdale, and Glendale. For 10 points, name this capital of Arizona.
ANSWER: Phoenix
The Theodore Roosevelt Dam was constructed northeast of this city on the Salt River. Near this state
capital, Frank Lloyd Wright built his winter home, Taliesin West, which is located in Scottsdale. This seat
of Maricopa County was the birthplace of Barry Goldwater. For 10 points, name this most populous state
capital, located in Arizona.
ANSWER: Phoenix, Arizona
In this city, a Thanksgiving 1942 boxing match between a black unit's champion and a white unit's
champion turned into a riot. This city's urban area of Ahwatukee is bordered on the north by South
Mountain. Phillip Duppa suggested the name of this city, which was founded near the Salt River's
convergence with the Gila (HEE-luh) River by Jack Swelling. The landmark of Tom's Thumb is located in
the McDowell Mountains, which are located northeast of this city. This city's metropolitan area is known as
the "Valley of the Sun," and politicians from this city include Sandra Day O'Connor and John McCain. For
the point, name this largest city in Arizona.
ANSWER: Phoenix
Edwin James completed the first recorded ascent of this mountain. The Fifty-Niners flocked to this
mountain in search of gold. There is an annual car race to the top of this mountain. This mountain was
renamed from "El Capitan." Katharine Lee Bates wrote a song after ascending this mountain. That song is
"America the Beautiful." For 10 points, identify this mountain in the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains,
located next to Colorado Springs, and named after the first American explorer who encountered it.
ANSWER: Pike's Peak
This mountain features The Incline, one-time site of a cable car line, and now a popular and brutal hill
workout for elite athletes. The peak of this mountain can be reached via the Barr Trail, and it makes a
beautiful vista as viewed from nearby Garden of the Gods. The small resort town of Manitou Springs sits at
its base, and the view from the top of this mountain inspired teacher Kathie Lee Bates to pen "America the
Beautiful." Towering over Colorado Springs is, FTP, what mountain named for an explorer with the first
name Zebulon?
ANSWER: Pike's Peak
One island in this city was renamed because it was allegedly reached by George Washington after his
raft capsized. An island in this city with a generating station that cannot be directly reached by cars is
Brunot Island. Riverboats operating in this city include those in the Gateway Clipper Fleet. A riverside path
in this city is called the Eliza Furnace Trail in honor of Jones and Laughlin. This city has a "Golden
Triangle" that is marked by the 36 acre Point State Park, which sits across a river from PNC Park and
Heinz Field. For 10 points, name this city situated on the point where the Ohio is formed by the Allegheny
and Monongahela Rivers.
ANSWER: Pittsburgh
Jane Jacobs criticized this city's neighborhood of Chatham Village for creating a homogenous
community separate from the rest of the city. A university in this city contains the tallest educational
building in the Western Hemisphere, the Cathedral of Learning. The Duquesne Incline on Mount
Washington is one of its two funicular railways. The Clayton mansion in this city's Point Breeze
neighborhood once belonged to Henry Clay Frick, who was chairman of the Carnegie Steel Company.
Andrew Carnegie founded a university here now also named for Andrew Mellon. For ten points, name this
city in western Pennsylvania.
ANSWER: Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
A "black" type of this food is made in Old Forge, Pennsylvania, with black pepper. Another variation on
this food is sometimes named after Steubenville or the Ohio Valley. The Quad Cities-style of this food
includes malt mixed into its base. A common version of this food may have been invented by either Ike
Sewell, Ric Riccardo, or Rudy Malnati at a restaurant that spawned a second location called Due. This food
served at Unos can come with pineapple and ham in its Hawaiian style. For 10 points, name this food that
can be found as a deep dish in Chicago or a thin crust in New York.
ANSWER: pizza
The main question of this river is fed from the north by the Loup River, which irrigates the small town of
Genoa. One of its principal tributaries flows through towns like Julesburg and Sterling after the initial
course takes it through Waterton Canyon and an impound at Chatfield Reservoir. Its other main tributary
passes through Gering and Scottsbluff and is impounded by Kingsley Dam, which results in Lake Ogallala
and Lake McConaughy, its state's largest lake. This river flows south of the Sand Hills grassland region,
underneath major cities like Grand Island, Fremont, and Columbus. FTP, name this river which meets the
Missouri River south of Omaha, the major watershed of the Great Plains of Nebraska.
ANSWER: Platte River (do not accept North Platte or South Platte)
This geographic feature was analyzed with sewer epidemiology in 2005 and found to have a high
amount of benzoylecgonine, a by-product of cocaine use, implying a high level of drug use in the
surrounding area. That aforementioned study by Dr. Ettore Zuccato was done on this question of water
whose (*) delta has five mouths. The Adda River is a tributary of this river which once contained trade
channels called "navigli" which are now mainly derelict, and is now controlled by dikes known as "argini"
in the country where it terminates. It runs from the Cottian Alps to the Adriatic Sea. Padus was the Roman
name of, for 10 points, what river that passes through the cities of Milan and Turin, Italy's longest?
ANSWER: The Po River [accept Padus before mention]
One province in this nation is Podlasie, which is home to one of the last patches of Europe's primeval
forest, Bialowieza Forest, home to some of Europe's last wisent. Sites in this country bordered on the east
by the Bug River include the Masurian Lakes as well as the town once known as the "Jewish Oxford,"
Lublin. This nation is south of the exclave of Kaliningrad Oblast, and this nation's principal seaport is
Gdansk, a city in this nation's region of Pomerania. Rivers in this country include the Oder and Neisse on
its western border and the Vistula which flows through its city of Krakow. For 10 points, name this Eastern
European nation south of the Baltic and west of Belarus with capital at Warsaw.
ANSWER: Republic of Poland
In the northwest part of this nation one will find the island of Wolin, whose southern shores border
the (ZE - chin) Szczecin Lagoon. Founded by the Piast Dynasty ruler Mieszko I, this country's
southern border is defined by the Tatra Mountains, the highest range in the Carpathians. Found
south of the (*) Kaliningrad Oblast, this country's western border is partly defined by the Oder River,
while its chief river, the Vistula, empties into the Baltic Sea near the city of Gdansk. Notably partitioned
three times in the 18th century, for 10 points, identify this Central European nation whose capital is Warsaw.
ANSWER: Republic of Poland
The highest point in this country's Beskid Mountains is Mount Babia in its southeast, and Mount Rysy, this
country's highest point, lies in the High Tatras Mountains in the southwest. Among this country's sixteen
provinces is Masovia, and a city formerly known as Breslau is the capital of the Lower Silesia province.
The western border of this country is known as the Oder-Neisse line, and the Carpathian Mountains make
up this country's southern border. The Vistula River is found in, For 10 points, what Central European
country which borders Germany on the west and contains the cities of Krakow and Warsaw.
ANSWER: Republic of Poland
The Bay of Puck indents the coast of this country, and its southern border features the Western
Tatras mountains. The Russian exclave of Kaliningrad has this country on its southern border. Part
of this country's western border is formed by the (*) Oder River, and its longest river is the Vistula,
which flows into the Baltic Sea near Gdansk. For 10 points, name this country that lies east of Germany
with capital Warsaw.
ANSWER: Republic of Poland (accept Rzeczpospolita Polska)
Salt mines in this country at Wieliczka and Bochnia active since the 13th century were named one of
the first UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 1978. This country shares the Bialowieza (bia-wo-veeezha) Forest with an eastern neighbour. The Tatra Mountains subrange of the Carpathians forms its
border with Slovakia, while the Outer Western Carpathians divide it from the Czech Republic. The Bug
River forms part of this country's border with Belarus and Ukraine, while its western border is defined by
the Oder-Neisse line. The Vistula flows through its capital before entering the Baltic at Gdansk. For 10
points, name this Eastern European country with capital Warsaw.
ANSWER: Republic of Poland [or Rzeczpospolita Polska]
This country controls the island of Wolin. Mount Rysy lies in its Tatra Mountains, which, along with
the Sudetes, forms much of this country's southwest border. This country lies south of Kaliningrad
Oblast and across the Western Bug from a neighboring country's city of Brest. The Masurian Lake
District is located in this country, and its city of Stettin lies on the Bay of (*) Pomerania. Its cities
include Krakow, Lublin, and Gdansk, and it contains Auschwitz. This country's western border is formed
by the Neisse and Oder Rivers, and the Vistula flows through this country before draining into the Baltic
Sea. For ten points, name this country with capital at Warsaw.
ANSWER: Republic of Poland
In the 11th and 12th centuries, the city of (PLOTSK) Plock was the capital of this country, where
Mazovia is one of the sixteen voivodeships. The baptism of (MEESH-koh) Mieszko I, a member of the
Piast dynasty, started this country's tradition of Catholicism. The Oder-Neisse line forms the western
border of this country, which, in the 16th through 18th centuries, formed a commonwealth with Lithuania.
The Vistula River, this country's longest, flows through Gdansk and Krakow. For 10 points, name this
country, the site of Warsaw.
ANSWER: Republic of Poland
The northeast part of this lake features Eden Isle, which is near the town of Slidell. Its southern
shore features the towns of Gentilly, Kenner, and Metairie, and its northern shore is the site of
Fontainebleau State Park. The eastern end of this lake is crossed by the Chef Menteur Highway,
which is close to where the Rigolets connect it to Lake Borgne, which in turn takes its water to
Chandeleur Sound and the Gulf of Mexico. The Bonnet Carre Spillway diverts Mississippi River
floodwaters to this lake, which is home to many pelicans. Name this lake that surged over its levees
in 2005 during Hurricane Katrina, flooding the city of New Orleans.
ANSWER: Lake Pontchartrain
The Boring Lava Field underlies this city, home to such spans as the Glenn L. Jackson Memorial Bridge.
One suburb of this city, Beaverton, is the home of Nike's corporate headquarters. This seat of Multnomah
County is located near the confluence of the Willamette and Columbia Rivers. For 10 points, name this
"City of Roses," the home of the NBA's Trail Blazers and Oregon's largest.
ANSWER: Portland, Oregon [do not accept "Portland, Maine"]
This city's "Swan Island" was the site of one of Henry Kaiser's World War II-era shipyards. Dispute
over its name was settled by a namesake penny flipped by Francis Pettygrove and Asa Lovejoy. The
fictional character Ramona Quimby lives on a real street in this city, Klickitat Street. Weird locations in
this city include the Velveteria Museum of Velvet Paintings and the 24 Hour Church of Elvis. It lies on top
of the Boring Lava Field, and it was named for the Maine hometown of a founder. This "city of Roses"
straddles the Willamette River and is nearby Mount Hood. For ten points, name this most populous city in
Oregon.
ANSWER: Portland
This country used to include the town of Vilarinho [vee-lah-REEN-yoh] da Furna, which was submerged
to build a reservoir. That town is in this country's only national park, Peneda-Geres [PAY-nay-dah
ZHAIR-ayss]. That park is in the northern part of this country, which includes the city of Braga.
The southern part of this country, its Algarve region, includes the city of Faro. While most of this
country is on continental Europe, it also controls the archipelagos of Madeira and the Azores. This
country includes the mouth of the Tagus River. Name this country with its capital at Lisbon, which
shares the Iberian Peninsula with Spain.
ANSWER: Portugal [or Portuguese Republic]
This language was made its country's official tongue by the "Farmer King" Dinis. A variant of this
language, "Fala," is spoken in a neighboring country. It is not Chinese, but it is the official language of the
special administrative region of Macau. This language is spoken in the former African colonies of
Mozambique and Angola. "Carioca" and "Caipira" are words in this language used to refer to citizens in
Brazil. For 10 points, name this language spoken in a namesake Iberian country.
ANSWER: Portuguese [or portuguesa]
A 1990 Orthographic Agreement attempted to unify this language in the two main places where it is spoken.
A notable characteristic of this language is the loss of the intervocalic l and n and a language mixing it with
local Southeast Asian languages is known as kristang, while other creole forms of this language include one
that mixes in Spanish, Dutch and English, a language known as Papiamento that is spoken in the Caribbean.
In the most populous nation that speaks this language, it contains a Mineiro dialect spoken in Minas Gerais
and a Gaucho dialect spoken in Rio Grande do Sul. Originating as Galician, FTP, name this Romance
language spoken in Angola and Brazil.
ANSWER: Portuguese
Mallows Bay along this river's estuary contains a massive ship graveyard, and a quarrying site along its
banks was the namesake for the Seneca Stone Ring Scandal. Its South Branch contains a large valley called
the Trough, and it is crossed by Boetler's and Pack Horse Ford near Shepardstown. The "sixth passenger"
saved several people from the Air Florida Flight 90 crash into this river, which is paralleled by the
Chesapeake and Ohio Canal and has its Great Falls upstream from its meeting with the Anacostia. For the
point, identify this river that forms much of the Virginia-Maryland border and passes through Washington,
D.C.
ANSWER: Potomac River
This river passes through the Mather Gorge after it gains speed descending Great Falls. One of this
river's tributaries is the Monocacy River. A 1910 Supreme Court case set this river as the border between
West Virginia and Maryland. This river meets the Shenandoah River at the town of Harpers Ferry. This
river, with North and South branches, flows into Chesapeake Bay. For 10 points, name this river that passes
through Washington, D.C.
ANSWER: Potomac River
One branch of this river has its headwaters north of Hightown and was the namesake of the Wappocomo
plantation. One of this river's main tributaries is spanned by the John Philip Sousa Bridge and joins this
river at Buzzard Point; that tributary is the Anacostia River. Another tributary of this river passes through
Frederick and is called the Monocacy. Its tributaries include Antietam Creek and the Shenandoah River, and
it passes by Harper's Ferry and Arlington on the way to Chesapeake Bay. Forming the border between West
Virginia and Maryland, this is, for 10 points, what river that flows past Jefferson Memorial and the White
House?
ANSWER: Potomac River
A story about this city's name says that it originated after a "thunderous noise" and voice told a ruler
that treasure here was "destined for other masters." Manuel Belgrano once threatened to blow up the Casa
de la Moneda here. A Spanish saying that means "to be of a great value" is "to be worth" this city. This
city's major export was taken by llama to the Pacific coast, where it eventually made its way to Panama
City and then Spain. It lies at the foot of the "Cerro Rico" or "rich mountain," which is said to have been
made out of ore. For ten points, name this city in Bolivia that was once the location of the Spanish colonial
mint and silver trade.
ANSWER: Potosi [do not accept "San Luis Potosi"]
The most important work of Mathieu d'Arras is located in this city; that work is the Gothic St. Vitus's
Cathedral. John of Nepomuk drowned in this city after being thrown from a bridge that now links the Old
Town to the Lesser Town and spans the Moldau. It's sometimes called the "city of a hundred spires" due its
many church towers. This city contains the oldest university in central Europe, Charles University. Both
that bridge and that university are named for Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV. For ten points, identify this
capital of the Czech Republic.
ANSWER: Prague
This city's Great Strahov Stadium is located on its Petrin Hill. A giant functional metronome is located
in this city's Letna Park. This city's Pisek Gate and Church of Our Lady Victorious are both located in its
Lesser Town. Its Charles Bridge is located near Old Town Square. This city's St. Vitus- Cathedral stores
its nation's crown jewels. This city is home to a work of Frank Gehry, Dancing House, and its New Town
is home to Wenceslas Square. For 10 points, name this Bohemian city, the capital of the Czech Republic.
ANSWER: Prague
A large metronome in this city towers above Letna Hill. The Lennon Wall in this city became a famous
hotspot for dissident graffiti. The two twisted cylinders of Frank Gehry's modernist Dancing House are in
this city. Hitler intended to build a Jewish museum in this city at the conclusion of the Holocaust, and its
Jewish cemetery in the Josefov is the oldest in Europe. This city, located south of the Charles Bridge,
contains Saint Vitus Cathedral as well as Wenceslas Square, and lies along the Vltava River. For 10 points,
name this historical center of Bohemia, which is now the largest city in the Czech Republic.
ANSWER: Prague [or Praha]
This city has a six hundred year old Orloj, or astronomical clock, on its Old Town City Hall. The Ginger
Rogers and Fred Astaire-inspired Dancing House was built in this city by architect Frank Gehry. A bridge
in this city with 30 statues along its sides was started in 1357 and became known as the Charles Bridge.
That bridge crosses the Vltava River (VOL-tah-vah) in this city. For 10 points, name this city in Eastern
Europe that is both the largest in and the capital city of the Czech Republic.
ANSWER: Prague [or Praha]
A statue of Jesus on the cross in this city had the words "kadosh kadosh kadosh adonai tzevaot" added to it
as an insult to the local Jewish population. This city's Lucerna Palace contains a statue of a man on an
upside-down horse. The quintennial Spartakiads were once held in this city's Strahov Stadium. One
structure in this city resembles the Eiffel Tower, but stands at a higher elevation despite being smaller than
the Eiffel Tower. That lookout tower sits atop this city's Petrin Hill, while a building here designed by
Frank Gehry was originally named after Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers and is called the Dancing House.
The aforementioned equestrian statue parodies that at one end of this city's Wenceslaus Square. Its castle
complex contains St. Vitus Cathedral. For 10 points, name this city bisected by the Vltava River, which is
crossed by the Charles Bridge, the capital of the Czech Republic.
ANSWER: Prague [or Praha]
On Mars, this entity is defined by the crater Airy-0 (airy zero); on Venus, it is defined by the central peak in
the crater Ariadne. Its current designation on Earth dates back to 1884 when President Arthur assembled 41
delegates from 25 nations to establish a worldwide standard. In the Northern Hemisphere, ground access to
this location exists in the UK, France, Spain, Algeria, Mali, Burkina Faso, Togo, and Ghana, but there is
none in the Southern Hemisphere other than Antarctica. In conjunction with the International Date Line, this
line divides the earth into the Eastern and Western hemispheres. Name this line that passes through the
Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England.
ANSWER: Prime Meridian [or International Meridian; accept Greenwich Meridian before "Greenwich"; prompt on meridian]
This place was once known as New Ireland, and it was first colonized by French settlers at Port la Joie.
The second-largest city in this province is located along Bedeque Bay and is Summerside. A native of this
place wrote a series of books about an orphan who lives with the Cuthbert siblings in this polity. A
conference named for its capital was the first of a group of meetings that led to the creation of the
Dominion of Canada, and this place was the home of Anne of Green Gables author Lucy Maud
Montgomery. A nine-mile long Confederation Bridge connects this location to New Brunswick. For the
point, name this Canadian maritime province with its capital at Charlottetown.
ANSWER: Prince Edward Island [or P.E.I.; or Abegweit]
Malpeque Bay is a wetland region found in the northwest portion of this province, commonly
nicknamed the "Garden of the Gulf". This province, whose capital was named after the consort of
George III, is the primary setting for Lucy Montgomery's Anne of Green Gables and was named for
the Duke of Kent who fathered Queen Victoria. This province lies north of Northumberland Strait
and east of Cape Breton Island. Charlottetown is the capital of, for 10 points, what smallest Canadian
province north of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia that consists primarily of one island?
ANSWER: Prince Edward Island (do not accept just "Prince Edward", since the province name is being asked for, the full name is needed)
Nicknamed the Million-Acre Farm and the Birthplace of Confederation, this polity was originally known as
St. John's Island. This polity's eastern half contains the cities of Miminegash, Tignish, and its second-
largest city, Summerside. Its only connection to the mainland is the Confederation Bridge, spanning the
Abegweit Passage of the Northumberland Strait. This island's capital and the suburbs of Cornwall and
Stratford form the polity's main urban area. Situated in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, it is located north of Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick. Name this island with capital at Charlottetown, the smallest province of
Canada.
ANSWER: Prince Edward Island [accept St. John's Island before it is mentioned]
Manosque, Rians and Greoux are located in this region, the Ouveze flows through it, and the Lake of Serre-
Poncon is one of the largest artificial lakes here. The Lac de Sainte-Croix is formed by the Verdon river,
which also forms the namesake Gorges; it joins the Durance near Vinon. The Luberon massif is located
here, and the Var and the Vaucluse are two of its departements. Les Beaux, Gordes and Grasse are among
the nicest places here, and the latter is often considered the center of the perfume industry. The Mont
Ventoux is considered the giant of this region that suffers from cold Mistral and warm Sirocco winds. Paul
Cezanne would paint his views of the Montagne Sainte-Victoire here, while wild horses reign in the
Camargue. FTP, Avignon and Arles are located in what south-eastern French region known for its lavender?
ANSWER: Provence
The last ruler of this region when it was an independent county was the exiled Rene of Naples. Since
the early 1970s, pink flamingos have lived on an island in its marshy river delta, the Camargue. People
living in this region attacked the national government for vergonha, the policy of replacing their native
Occitan language, which with the closely related Catalan was the language of many early troubadours.
Vincent van Gogh painted landscapes here including one of the River Rhone, which forms this region's
western border. Its southern border is formed by the Mediterranean and contains Marseille. For ten points,
name this region of southern France.
ANSWER: Provence
In addition to its main island, this region also consists of small cays as Vieques and Culebra. One
major feature of this island is the El Yunque Rainforest which is home to petroglyph sites from the
Taino people and the indigenous tree frogs called 'Coquis-. It is the third largest Caribbean island in
population but it is the smallest of the Greater Antilles in size after Cuba, Hispanola and Jamaica. With its
capital at San Juan, for 10 points, identify this Caribbean island, a semi-autonomous commonwealth of the
United States.
ANSWER: Puerto Rico
Every year, this island's capital celebrates a classical music festival in honor of Pablo Casals. Luis
Munoz Marin founded the Popular Democratic Party on this island, championing its subculture of
mountain-dwelling peasants called jibaros. (PON-say) Ponce, Bayamon, and Arecibo are among the cities
on this island, whose main mountain range is called the Cordillera Central. It is the ancestral home of Sonia
Sotomayor and the birthplace of Ricky Martin. For 10 points, name this Caribbean island, a
statehood-seeking territory of the United States.
ANSWER: Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
The U.S. Geological Survey defines this question of water's northern boundary by three lines, one of which
connects Fidalgo and McGlinn Islands, and another one of which follows Deception Pass. It borders the
Kitsap Peninsula and is considered part of the Salish Sea. Admiralty Inlet connects it to the Strait of Juan
de Fuca. Its namesake Naval Shipyard is in Bremerton, and the largest city on its shores is the seat of King
County. For 10 points, Tacoma and Seattle are the largest cities on what sound in Washington state?
ANSWER: Puget Sound [or Puget Sound after it is mentioned]
Lesser known cities in this state include Jalandhar, which is notable for producing surgical products. Its
largest city, Ludhiana, is notable for having many manufacturing plants, and is thus called "the Manchester"
of this state, while other cities in this state include Barnala and Patiala. An open hand serves as the official
logo of the capitol city of this state, and Le Corbusier served as the architect of that city, Chandigarh.
Bordering the states of Haryana and Rajasthan, much of this state gets water for agriculture from the "five
rivers", and its city of Amritsar contains the Golden Temple. For 10 points, identify this Indian state, the
birthplace of Sikhism.
ANSWER: Punjab
The ruler Menander I Soter established his capital at Taxila in this region, and it had earlier been the
site of the Battle of the Hydaspes in which its King Porus was defeated by Alexander the Great. A
state of this name shares with Haryana its capital, Chandigarh, which was planned by Le Corbusier,
and Ludhiana is the largest city of one state by this name. The Beas, Chenab, Jhelum, Ravi and
Sutlej are the five rivers which give this region its name, and it is home to Faisalabad, Rawalpindi and
Lahore, three of the four largest cities of one country which shares it. This region was the site of Operation
Blue Star in 1984, in which Indira Gandhi ordered a strike on the militants in the Golden Temple of its city
of Amritsar. For 10 points, name this region along the India-Pakistan border, the birthplace of Sikhism.
ANSWER: Punjab
During religious celebrations in this region, the traditional giddha dance is performed. In the 19th
century, the Sirhind Canal was built in this region. The "Moorish Mosque" can be found in its city of
Kapurthala, while it also contains the "City of Saints", Multan. This region is home to the capital of
Mahmud of Ghazni and its namesake language can be written using the (*) Gurmukhi alphabet. The
Beas and four other rivers make up the five rivers described in its Sanskrit name. The Adi Granth was
written in its namesake language, and the city of Lahore is located here. For 10 points, name this region
divided between India and Pakistan.
ANSWER: Punjab [or Panjab]
This city became prominent under Gojoseon rule and in 427 AD it became the capital
of the Goguryeo kingdom. Landmarks include the Arch of Triumph, the Mumsusan
Memorial Palace, Juche Tower, and the unfinished Ryugyong Hotel. Sunan International
Airport is located in this city, with regular flights from Moscow and Beijing. This city was
captured in 1950, making it the only Communist capital city ever to fall in battle.
Mangyongdae Hill and the Kim Il Sung Stadium can be found in, for ten points, what capital
city of North Korea?
ANSWER: Pyongyang
One structure in this city contains a plaque honoring Gabonese dictator Omar Bongo at its foot, along with
81 other "allies", while another monument in this city is at the foot of Moran Hill and contains four vaulted
gateways with azaleas carved into them. Besides that copy of the Arc de Triomphe, another arch in this city
is in the form of two women holding a depiction of the country in which it is located. This city contains the
Liberation monument, which is visited by newlyweds, and the newly constructed three-winged pyramidal
hotel known as the 105 Building. Another tower in this country is next to a statue of figures holding a
paintbrush, a hammer, and a sickle, and is named for the state ideology. For 10 points, name this city home
to the Juche Tower, Kim Il-Sung Stadium, and Kim Il-Sung square, the capital of North Korea.
ANSWER: Pyongyang
This mountain range is home to Sorteny National Park, found in the Ordino region. The Ordesa Valley
leads to one of its highest peaks, Mount Perdu, which is obscured to one side by the Cirque of Gavarnie. A
series of tall peaks runs from Carlit peak to Anie, though their highest point is found at Aneto in the
Maladeta massif. On their western end, they meet up with the Cantabrian mountains, and they are traversed
by the Roncevaux Pass and give rise to many tributaries of the Ebro River. For 10 points, name this chain
bordered by regions such as Aquitaine and Aragon, which contains Andorra and marks the boundary
between France and Spain.
ANSWER: Pyrenees Mountains [or Pirineos; or Pirineus]
Cap de Creus is on the eastern end of this mountain range, where bandits who kill St. Aubert in The
Mysteries of Udolpho live. A range on the Moon named for it separates Mare Nectaris and the Sea of
Tranquility, and The Stone Raft deals with events caused by a crack in it. The location of Cirque de
Gavarnie, a treaty named for this range was signed after the Battle of the Dunes and provided for the
marriage of Maria Theresa and Louis XI. Roncevaux Pass, where Roland dies, is in it. With highest point at
Aneto, for 10 points, name this mountain range that encompasses Andorra, and separates Spain and France.
ANSWER: the Pyrenees or los Pirineos or les Pyrenees or els Pirineus or los Pireneus or Perines or
Pirinioak
Up until the 18th century, it was incorrectly believed that the 9,134 foot Canigou Mountain was the
highest point in this range. Spa towns like Panticosa and Ax-les-thermes in this mountain range have
thrived due to the abundance of sulphurous hot springs here. The Gave de Pau forms the Gavarnie
waterfall in this mountain range, also home to ski resorts like Formigal and (*) Somport. The Maladeta
ridge contains this mountain range's highest point, Aneto, and this mountain range is home to the famous
Roncevaux Pass. The Catalonian nation of Andorra is almost completely encircled by this range. For ten
points, name this mountain range that separates Spain and France.
ANSWER: Pyrenees Mountains
In 1949, this region's town of Asbestos saw the asbestos miners of the Thetford mine go on strike.
Containing the autonomy-seeking region of Nunavik, it is home to the La Grande River, on whose
shores is a hydroelectric plant named for former premier Robert Bourassa. This region, containing
the Chic-Choc Mountains and Gaspe Peninsula, underwent a secularization called the (*) Quiet
Revolution. A failed accord named for its Meech Lake strengthened calls for its sovereignty in 1987. For
10 points, name this Canadian province that borders Maine and hosted the 1967 World's Fair, or Expo -67,
in Montreal.
ANSWER: Quebec
The Monteregian Hills are remnants of magma intrusions in this province, and the Ungava Bay lies to its
north. It contains the subdivisions Kutivik and Nunivik, with its highest point being Mount Caubvick in the
Torngat Mountains. Its largest city lies on the Hochelaga Archipelago. This region contains the Chic-Choc
("shik shock") Mountains in its Gaspe Peninsula, located north of Chaleur Bay. Its longest river drains into
the largest estuary in the world, that of the St. Lawrence River, and it is bordered by Newfoundland to the
east and Ontario to the west. For 10 points, identify this province of Canada containing cities such as
Montreal.
ANSWER: Quebec
In this province, the Rupert River flows from Lake Mistassini. This province's highest point of Mount
Caubvick rests in the Torngat Mountains, while the Nord and St. Maurice rivers rise in the Laurentian
Mountains in its south. A group of magma intrusions called the Monteregian Hills rest in this province,
as do its Chic-Choc Mountains on the Gaspe Peninsula, which is north of New Brunswick. The La
Grande and the Eastmain rivers are sites of this province's James Bay Hydroelectric Project, located
east of Ontario. Name this Canadian province whose official language is French, and which includes
the city of Montreal.
ANSWER: Quebec
In this province, the La Grande River, on which a hydroelection dam was built as part of the James
Bay Project, flows from the Nichicun Lake, which lies to the south of the Ungava Bay. The Canadian
Shield occupies most of this province in which the (*) Laurentian mountains and the Abitibi region can
be found. Cities in this province such as Laval and Sherbrooke lie on the St. Lawrence River. This province
lies to the east of Ontario and to the west of Newfoundland. For 10 points, identify this largest and oldest
Canadian province in which Montreal is located.
ANSWER: Quebec
This state's islands include the Wellesley Islands, Osprey Reef, and Fraser Island, the largest sand island in
the world. It shares the Barkly Tableland and the Simpson Desert with the territory to its west. The Gregory
and Grey ranges are sub-ranges of the mountains along its east coast, which extend north to the Cape York
Peninsula. Bordered to the west by the Gulf of Carpentaria, to the north by the Torres Strait, and to the east
by the Coral Sea and the Great Barrier Reef, its state capital is Brisbane. FTP, name this state in the
northeast of Australia.
ANSWER: Queensland
This region's highest mountain, Mount Bartle Frere, lies to the east of an area notable for its volcanic
features, the Atherton Tablelands. This state's Cape Tribulation is along the Daintree River, which is
infested with saltwater crocodiles. This state's northernmost point is Bramble Cay, one of the islands in the
Torres Strait, which separates Cape York Peninsula from New Guinea, and it also contains much of the
Great Dividing Range. Its eastern coast lies on the Gulf of Carpentaria, and runs parallel to the Great
Barrier Reef. For 10 points, name this second-largest Australian state, with capital at Brisbane, named in
honor of Victoria.
ANSWER: Queensland, Australia
This place's Mount Isa Mines produce large amounts of copper, lead, zinc and silver. Its Far North
portion, which occupies the majority of the Cape York Peninsula, recently considered secession. That
area borders the Torres Strait to the north, and contains Cooktown and Cairns. Its capital lies on
Moreton Bay and was originally called Edenglassie, after Edinburgh and Glasgow. Now that capital
is known as the River City, for its namesake river. This place's Sunshine Coast gives it its nickname,
the Sunshine State, and the city of Gold Coast is popular for surfing. The Gulf of (*) Carpenteria lies
to its northwest, and the Coral Sea is to the east. For 10 points, name this territory east of the Northern
Territory and to the north of New South Wales, with capital at Brisbane.
ANSWER: Queensland [prompt on Australia until "Far North" region]
Flooding in this region in late 2010 occurred along the Burnett and Fitzroy Rivers and destroyed
parts of its city of Toowoomba. The majority of the Great Artesian Basin is located in this region,
where the Glass House Mountains can be found in the urban area of the Sunshine Coast. This
region's capital, containing Story Bridge, lies to the west of Moreton Bay and to the east of the
Darling Downs. Off the coast of this region is an island once called the Great Sandy Island but now called
Fraser Island. The northernmost parts of this region are comprised of Cape York Peninsula, to the west of
which is the Gulf of Carpentaria, and the Great Barrier Reef is found off of its shores. Brisbane is the
capital of this region, which lies north of New South Wales and east of the Northern Territory. For 10
points, name this Australian state named in honor of the monarch Victoria.
ANSWER: Queensland
This state's capital is the site of the Ekka agricultural fair each August, and is the home of the Story
Bridge. "Banana bender" is a slang term for inhabitants of this state. Carnarvon Gorge is a national park in
this state, which is also home to a world heritage site named for its Wet Tropics. Cairns and Rockhampton
are cities in this state, though its second-largest city is Toowoomba. Cape York Peninsula extends north in
this state, and the Great Barrier Reef extends along its shoreline. For ten points, name this large state in
northeast Australia.
ANSWER: Queensland, Australia
Among the native American names for this mountain is Talol, and a name which can be translated as "larger
than Koma." That name lends its name to a city to the north of this mountain. A number of rivers form on
some of its glaciers which empty into the Puget Sound, and it is actually a relatively young stratovolcano,
though it hasn-t erupted in over a century. This is a good thing because Seattle lies a mere 54 miles north
of, FTP, what volcano in the Cascade Range?
ANSWER: Mt. Rainier
In 1996, this company purchased H.M. Gousha, a rival company begun by a former employee. This
company's headquarters, which was designed by Burnham and Root, was the world's first all-steel framed
skyscraper. Based in Skokie, Illinois, it was founded by a Chicago print shop owner and his partner, an
Irish immigrant. First publishing "Railroad Guides," this company's products were later adopted by Gulf
Oil to be sold at service stations, and one of its regional rivals was a company called King of the Road. For
10 points, name this American publisher of atlases, known for publishing road maps used by travelers.
ANSWER: Rand McNally
Bayan Obo is the largest source of these commodities, which are almost exclusively produced in the
town of Baotou. In the US, Molycorp has somewhat successfully increased production of them. In 2010,
production of these was restricted by 40%, causing their price to rise more than 500%. Production of thes
commodities creates sludgy radioactive tailings ponds. Inner Mongolia is a center of the production of
these goods, which are extracted with concentrated acid baths. China produces 97% of the world's supply
of them. For 10 points, name these goods, which include neodymium, europium, and fifteen other
uncommon elements found in the soil.
ANSWER: rare earth metals [prompt on partial answer; prompt on lanthanides]
An alternative name for the Sutlej River uses this adjective. The Otter Tail and Bois de Sioux rivers are
tributaries of one river of this name, and another river of this name empties into the Gulf of Tonkin after
originating in the province of Yunnan. The shortest branch of the Volta River uses this adjective. One river
of this name empties into Lake Winnipeg and is distinguished as the one "of the North", while the one "of
the South" forms the Oklahoma-Texas border. For ten points, give this adjective that also appears in the
name of a sea between Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
ANSWER: red (accept more specific answers like Red River of the North or Red River of the South)
One face of this building contains the inscription "If heaven can be on the face of earth, It is this, It is
this, It is this." Pavilions named Sawan and Bhadon, the two rainy months in monsoon season, surround the
"life-restoring garden" in this structure. This structure also contains the "hall of private audiences," or the
"diwan-i-khas," where men like Bahadur Shah II received guests. The Lahori Gate is the main entrance to
this structure, from whose ramparts the prime minister delivers a speech every Indian independence day.
For ten points, name this former residence of the Mughal emperors, a tourist attraction in Delhi named for
its colorful sandstone walls.
ANSWER: Red Fort
A 1931 conflict regarding this river dealt with the construction of a new toll bridge, which angered
Governor Ross Sterling. Forks in this river include Prairie Dog Town Fork. General Lucius D. Clay
managed the construction of the Denison Dam on this river. This river was once jammed by a collection of
fallen trees running over 150 miles until Captain Henry Miller Shreve cleared the "Great Raft" jamming
this river and its distributary, the Atchafalaya, in Louisiana. While also flowing through Arkansas, it once
separated U.S. and Spanish territory as declared in the Adams-Onis Treaty. For 10 points, name this
colorfully named river, a tributary of the Mississippi, which forms the boundary between Texas and
Oklahoma.
ANSWER: Red River
One river of this name rises from the confluence of the Bois de Sioux River and the Otter Tail Rivers in
North Dakota before emptying into Lake Winnipeg, while another river with this name rises in Southern
China before emptying into the Gulf of Tonkin. Prior to the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, another river of
this name served as the border between the US and Mexico, as stipulated by the Adams-Onis Treaty. For 10
points, identify this common name shared by a tributary of the Mississippi River that separates Texas and
Oklahoma.
ANSWER: Red River
One question of water of this name flows through Hanoi before flowing into the Gulf of Tonkin. Another question
of water with this name flows through Grand Forks and joins the Assiniboine River at a place called "The
Forks." That river eventually flows into Lake Winnepeg. Another question of water with this name had a
namesake "log jam" in the 1830s which was cleared by Henry Miller Shreve. Flowing through
Natchitoches, for 10 points, identify this question of water, which flows through Shreveport before flowing into
the Mississippi after forming much of the border between Texas and Oklahoma, named for a color.
ANSWER: Red River
This river led to a namesake bridge war when Governor "Alfalfa Bill" Murray ordered a new
free bridge to be opened. Cartographers debate whether its true stem is at the North Fork or at
Prairie Dog Town Fork. According to the Adams-Onis Treaty, this river's south bank, not that of
the Rio Grande, was set as the boundary between the United States and Spain. A collection of
fallen trees was this river's "Great Raft," which prevented navigation between Alexandria and
Shreveport. Its namesake "shootout" refers to an annual college football game between the
Longhorns and Sooners. For 10 points, name this colorfully named river that is basically the
border between Texas and Oklahoma.
ANSWER: Red River of the South [do not accept "Red River of the North"]
This question of water is home to the Farasan Islands and Dahlak Archipelago. International observers ensure
freedom of navigation through its Straits of Tiran. The Bridge of the Horns is a proposed construction
project that would cross the Bab-el-Mandeb, which is the southern entrance to this question of water, and it
connects to the Gulf of Aden. Its largest port is Jeddah; it contains the Gulf of Aqaba; and it is part of the
Great Rift Valley. For 10 points, identify this question of water, one end of the Suez Canal, which Moses
allegedly parted during his escape from Egypt.
ANSWER: Red Sea
The Farasan and Hanish Islands are archipelagos that lie in the southern part of this question of water.
During the Eocene epoch, this question of water began to form due to its namesake rift. In December
2011, volcanic activity created a new member of the Zubair Islands in this sea. Lying on its western
coast are the cities of (*) Massawa and Assab, and this question of water covers the entire Eritrean coastline.
The Bab el Mandeb strait connects this question of water with the Gulf of Aden to the south, while the Sinai
Peninsula and Gulf of Suez lie to its north. For 10 points, identify this narrow, colorfully-named sea that sits
between northeast Africa and the Arabian peninsula.
ANSWER: Red Sea
A 1975 decree established an "industrial city" on the shore of this question of water at Yanbu. This
question of water surrounds the Farasan Islands and the Dahlak Archipelago, and the proposed Bridge
of the Horns might soon span its outlet. This sea forms the eastern side of the disputed Hala'ib
Triangle. At its north, it is connected to gulfs by the Strait of Jubal and the internationally monitored
Strait of Tiran, which was briefly closed in (*) 1967. The Hejaz abuts this sea which the Bab el-Mandeb
links to the Gulf of Aden. The Gulf of Aqaba is an extension of this sea, and Jeddah and Port Sudan are
ports on its coast. Its Gulf of Suez separates the Sinai Peninsula from the rest of Egypt. For 10 points, name
this sea between the Arabian Peninsula and Africa.
ANSWER: Red Sea [or al-Bahr al-Ahmar; or al-Bahr al-Qalzam; or Qeyyih Bahri; or Yam Suph; or Ya Adom]
The Suakin and Dahlak Archipelagos are located within this question of water, which is found west of
the Asir Mountains and north of the Denakil Desert. Also the site of the Farasan Islands, which lie off
the coast of Jizan, this question of water is the site of Foul Bay, and its northeast extension is connected
by the Strait of Tiran before ending at the town of (*) Eilat. The city of Jiddah is found on one of its
shores opposite the Nubian Desert, while the Bab el Mandeb connects this sea to the Gulf of Aden near
Djibouti. The Gulf of Aqaba and Gulf of Suez are northern extensions of, for 10 points, what colorful sea
found between Africa and the Arabian Peninsula.
ANSWER: Red Sea
The Bab el Mandeb strait is at the south end of this question of water, which is southwest of the Hejaz
Mountains. Eritrea's Dahlak Archipelago is in this sea, which includes the Gulf of Tadjoura, and the
Straits of Tiran [tee-RAHN] link this sea to the Gulf of (*) Aqaba [ah-KAH-bah] east of the Sinai
Peninsula. Connected to the Mediterranean by the Suez Canal, for 10 points, name this sea between Egypt
and Saudi Arabia, allegedly parted by Moses.
ANSWER: Red Sea
This question of water contains the volcanic Jabal al-Tair Island as well as Kamaran Island, and it also
contains the Dahlak Archipelago near the city of Adulis. One coastline on this question of water contains
the Hejaz (*) and Asir Mountains in addition to the cities of Rabigh and Jiddah, and the northern part of
this question of water contains the Straits of Tiran and Gubol. The resort town Sharm-el-Sheik is in the city of
Eilat lies on its Gulf of Aqaba, and this question of water is bounded on the south by the Bab el-Mandeb.
Created by the intersection of the African and Arabian plates, for 10 points, identify this question of water
bordering Yemen, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia.
ANSWER: Red Sea
Cape Banas indents this question of water, which also includes the Farasan Islands, the Dahlak Archipelago,
and the Strait of Tiran. The Hejaz region lies east of this question of water, which contains the Gulf of Aqaba
(AH-kah-bah) and flows into the Gulf of Aden. This question of water separates Africa from the Arabian
Peninsula. For 10 points, name this question of water that contains the Gulf of Suez and is connected to the
Mediterranean Sea by the Suez Canal.
ANSWER: Red Sea
This question of water contains the Dahlak and Hanish Islands, and it has recently been the site of
volcanic activity on the Zubair Group. The Straits of Tiran separate this question of water from the Gulf
of Aqaba, on which lies the resort town of Eilat. The Hijaz Mountains separate one country's (*)
Nejd plateau from this sea, and that country contains this sea's largest port city, Jeddah. This question lies
within the Great Rift Valley, and the Bab-el-Mandeb connects it to the Gulf of Aden, which in turn links
this question to the Arabian Sea. For ten points, name this sea bordered by Egypt and Saudi Arabia that is
linked to the Mediterranean Sea by the Suez Canal.
ANSWER: Red Sea
A volcano located on the small island of Jabal al-Tair on this question of water erupted in 2007. The Hejaz
Mountains lie along the eastern shore of this question of water. The Great Rift Valley branches off in a
northwestern direction to form this question of water's namesake rift. Jeddah is the largest port on this question of
water. The Bab-el-Mandeb connects this question of water to the Gulf of Aden, and, to the north, the Strait of
Tiran connects it to Eilat and the Gulf of Aqaba. Sharm el-Sheikh lies on the northern part of this question of
water on the Sinai Peninsula. For 10 points, name this long, narrow sea bordered by Saudi Arabia and
Egypt.
ANSWER: Red Sea
One indentation on this question of water is the Gulf of Dunqunab, and az-Zuqar is one of the Hanish Islands
found here. Farasan Island is a tourist destination in this question of water, and Ghabbi-Hu and other islands
make up the Dahlak archipelago found here. In ancient times ports such as Adulis and Berenice were
important sites here, and the Hala'ib Triangle is one disputed region located along this question of water. Ras
Mohammed National Park is in the entrance to the Straits of Tiran, while Perim is located in the Bab elMandeb, which connects this question of water to the Indian Ocean. For 10 points, name this question of water
whose indentations include the Gulfs of Suez and Aqaba, which separates the Mediterranean from the
Indian Ocean.
**ANSWER: Red Sea [or Bahr el-Ahmar]
This national park has ocean views possible on its Enderts and Crescent Beaches. This national park also
covers state parks named for Jedediah Smith, Prairie Creek, and the Del Norte Coast. Hyperion, the world's
tallest living organism at 379 feet, is located inside of this national park. For 10 points, name this United
States national park located along the coast of northern California, which is named for the tallest trees that
live within it.
ANSWER: Redwood National and State Parks
This city's namesake cheerfully said "Yes, yes, I-m dead, goodbye!" after being killed by a sniper at the
Battle of South Mountain. It is home to the National Bowling Stadium, and it forms a metropolitan area
with Sparks known as the "Truckee Meadows." It contains an iconic arch at the intersection of Commercial
Row and Virginia Street. Once a popular destination for couples seeking a divorce, this city is also the
birthplace of the gaming corporation Harrah's. For 10 points, name this "Biggest Little City of the World,"
which is northeast of Lake Tahoe and is the largest city outside of Las Vegas in Nevada.
ANSWER: Reno
Six underground types of these sites were built in Minnesota between 1979 and 1990, including one in
Hayward that was built along with a 3.3 acre wetland. One of these sites in Iowa near Wilton offers
information about the codes used in quilts for the Underground Railroad. Vince Lombardi and Walt
Whitman are two namesakes of twelve named sites of this type in New Jersey. In 2002, one of these sites in
Maryland was where the Beltway snipers were captured. For ten points, name these sites that generally offer
bathrooms and vending machines along the sides of interstates.
ANSWER: interstate rest areas [or rest stops; or service areas]
This is the largest city along the Sudhurland highway. Since 1801, its population has grown from
307 total inhabitants to over sixty percent of its country's residents. A central heating system
completed in 1943 utilizes nearby hot springs. Its geographic center is (*) Laekjartorg Square, which is
near a statue commemorating its legendary first resident, Ingolfur Arnarson. This city is home to the
Althing, the world's oldest parliament. For 10 points, name this capital of Iceland.
ANSWER: Reykjavik
The "correction" of this river to make it straighter was achieved by an engineer named Tulla.
Efforts to clean this river began in earnest after a chemical spill in 1986 caused by the Sandoz fire.
The Stork Plan has focused on reforesting land around this river's main distributary, the Waal. The
most polluted tributary of this river, the "biologically dead" Emscher River, flows through
Dortmund. A 1976 convention to protect this river from pollution was signed in (*) Bonn, a city south
of its confluence with the Ruhr. This river, which marks the eastern border of Alsace, meets the Main
between Strasbourg and Cologne. For 10 points, name this river that rises in the Swiss Alps, flows through
western Germany, and empties into the North Sea in the Netherlands.
ANSWER: Rhine River [or Fluss Rhein; or Riviere le Rhin; or Fleuve Rhin; or Rivier Rijn ("RHAYN"); or Rivier de Rijn or Flum Rain]
The Plessur torrent feeds this river near the ancient town of Chur. The anterior source of this river
begins near Tomasee. This river splits into branches, forming the IJssel [EE-sul] and Waal Rivers. A
narrow section of this river is the site of a large rock that - according to legend - houses maidens,
the Lorelei. The old city of Lindau is located on Lake Constance, which this river flows through. At
its delta, this river combines with the Meuse ["muse"] and Scheldt rivers, flowing into the North Sea.
Name this river that forms parts of the borders of France, Switzerland, Austria, and the country that
contains most of it, Germany.
ANSWER: Rhine River
One branch of this river begins at Lake Toma, and the branches join together by the town of Tamins. It
helps form Lake Constance, and it is fed by the Neckar River near Mannheim. In the early 20th century,
canals were built to keep this river separate from the Meuse by their deltas, where they flow into the North
Sea. This river forms the western border of Liechtenstein, and it travels through Cologne and Rotterdam.
Name this river, the longest in Germany.
ANSWER: Rhine River
A secret Warsaw Pact war plan allocated seven days to reach this river. During the final months of
World War II, a bridge over this river was captured intact at Remagen. This river's northern portion and
Westphalia name a modern state with a capital at Dusseldorf. In 1936, a remilitarization of the land named
for this river violated the Treaty of Versailles. For ten points, name this river, the longest in Germany.
ANSWER: Rhine River [or Rhein]
This river's Central Commission was established at the Mainz Convention of 1831. One of the terms of the
1919 Treaty of Versailles [vehr-SIGH] allowed France use of water from this river to create hydroelectric
power. Julius Caesar made this river the eastern border of Roman Gaul. Lake Toma is a major tributary of
this river, whose Untersee [OON-ter-see] arm begins at Lake Constance. Major cities found on its banks
include Basel [BAHS-el], Bonn, and Cologne [kuh-LONE]. Name this major river that flows through
western Germany.
ANSWER: Rhine River
The anterior origin of this river is the Lai da Tuma (LYE dah TOO-mah), and a secondary source of this
river is the Paradies Glacier. The Teutoberg Forest massacre solidified it as the northern border of the
Roman Empire. The Moselle flows into this river near Koblenz, and the Main flows into it near Bingen.
Emptying into the North Sea at multiple points in the Netherlands, this river notably flows past the cities of
Bonn, Basel and Cologne. For 10 points, name this important river of western Germany, an area sometimes
called its "land."
ANSWER: Rhine River
This river rises at Lake Toma before flowing over Schaffhausen Falls. This river's distributaries
include the Waal and the IJssel ("eye-sell"), and the Aar flows into this river after passing by a
national capital. Bingen lies at the end of this river's namesake gorge, which contains a rock named
after the Lorelei. The Moselle joins this river at Koblenz, and it flows past the industrial (*) Ruhr
Valley. The western border of Liechtenstein is formed by this river, which receives the Neckar and the Main
after flowing past Lake Constance. Basel, Cologne, and Rotterdam lie on this river. For ten points, name
this river which flows through Germany before emptying into the North Sea.
ANSWER: the Rhine (or Rijn; or Rhin)
When painting Washington Crossing the Delaware, Emmanuel Leutze modeled the Delaware River after
this river, which was effectively made an international waterway by the 1831 Mannheim Convention. With
a length of about 800 miles, it passes through numerous countries, and one national capital. This river's
bridge at Arnhem was the site of the failed Operation Market Garden of World War II, which occurred
downstream of cities such as Basel, Worms, Speyer, and Rotterdam. For 10 points, name this major river of
Western Europe that starts in the Alps and ends in three distributaries in the Netherlands.
ANSWER: The Rhine
The town of St. Goar is one of five along this river that hosts a firework parade called "[this
river] in flames." Several boat accidents near a rock in this river have given rise to legends of a
Siren-like maiden who leads sailors to their death, known as the "Loreley." The tallest Catholic
cathedral in the world is located by this river in the city of (*) Cologne. The land surrounding both
banks of this river was demilitarized after World War I. For 10 points, name this European river that flows
from the Swiss Alps to the Netherlands through Germany.
ANSWER: Rhine [do not accept "Rhone"]
Barnaby Evans installed the sculpture WaterFire in this state, which is home to the Green Animals topiary
garden. Block Island is ten miles south of this state's coast, and Theodore F. Green is the namesake of one
of its airports. This state was the site of the burning of the HMS Gaspee [gass-PAY], and it was the location
of Samuel Slater's cotton mill. The old Touro Synagogue and a mansion known as The Breakers are located
on the island of Aquidneck [uh-KWID-nek] in Newport in this state. The island of Conanicut [kuh-NAN-ihkuht] is located in Narragansett Bay, which indents this state. For 10 points, name this smallest state whose
capital is Providence.
ANSWER: State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations
The majority of this state receives its water supply from Scituate Reservoir, and suburbs of its largest
city include Cranston and Woonsocket. A referendum to shorten the official name of this state was defeated
in the 2010 elections, in which its citizens also chose independent Lincoln Chaffee to be its next governor.
Its namesake landmass is home to the city of Newport, and is found in Narragansett Bay. For 10 points,
name this New England state whose capital and largest city is Providence, the smallest by area in the
United States.
ANSWER: Rhode Island and Providence Plantations
This island's region of Kallithea contains Faliraki Bay. This island is located off of the coast of Caria, and
the island of Karpathos is located to its west. The largest city in the southern part of this island is Lindos,
and this island's capital contains well-preserved city walls built by the Knights Hospitalliers. That group is
sometimes called the Order of St. John of this place. The largest of the Dodecanese Islands, for 10 points,
identify this island of the Southeastern Aegean sea, which was noted in ancient times for its harbor which
contained a statue of Helios, its so called "Colossus."
ANSWER: Rhodes
This river is joined by the Valserine at the town of Bellegarde, and it becomes fully navigable at Le
Parc. The Genissiat Dam lies on this river, and the Durance, Isere and Saone are its main tributaries.
With a delta beginning at Arles, this waterway flows through Avignon and Lyon, and it is the only major
river that flows directly into the Mediterranean Sea. For 10 points, name this Alpine River of France and
Switzerland that rises at its namesake glacier north of Geneva.
ANSWER: Rhone River
The source of this river is a glacier on the south flank of the nearly twelve thousand foot Dammastock peak.
From there it flows through the Gletsch Basin, Goms Valley, and Plain of the Valais into a major lake two
hundred twenty-four square miles in area. Major tributaries of this river include the Durance, Isere, and the
Saone. During the Tertiary Period, what is today the Rhine River flowed southward and was included in this
river's drainage basin, but tectonic movements reversed its course. In France, this river flows westward to
Lyon, before it turns southward through Avignon and Arles near its delta at the Gulf of Lyon. FTP, identify
this river that flows through southern Switzerland, into Lake Geneva, and through southeastern France into
the Mediterranean Sea.
ANSWER: Rhone River
The city of Kuttanadu is famous for producing this commodity. The mountains of Ifugao near Banaue
[BAN-OW-UH] include a natural wonder where this commodity is produced. The "Johnson spot" is
characteristic of Magnaporthe grisea, a namesake "blast" affecting this product. When this product is
grown in soil, it is called "upland." Along with indigo, this crop is produced by the Gullah in coastal South
Carolina. Bangladesh is the fourth-largest exporter of this crop in the world. It is often grown in terraced
underwater fields called paddies. For 10 points, name this most important staple grain in the world, mostly
grown in Asia.
ANSWER: rice [or white rice; or other types of rice]
This city is the site of a project undertaken by Dutch artists Haas & Hahn that has brightly colored
its square of Santa Marta through a series of contiguous house paintings; they plan on expanding
their project to its Favela slum district, which is known as "O Morro" or "The Hill" in its
predominant language. The finals of the 2014 World Cup will be played in this city, and it will host
the 2016 Summer Olympics. It existed as its own state for fifteen years after it ceased to be a national
capital in 1960. Located near (*) Sugarloaf Mountain on Guanabara Bay, it contains the Rodrigo de
Freitas Lagoon. The Tijuca Forest National Park is located in this city, and its Corcovado Mountain can be
found in that park. Atop Corcovado Mountain lies a statue of Christ the Redeemer. For 10 points, name this
second most populous Brazilian city known for its carnivals.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro
Neighborhoods in this city include Botafogo and Leblon, and this city contains Maracana Stadium
and the Sambadrome. Tijuca Forest can be found in this city, which is connected to Niteroi via a
bridge over Guanabara Bay. Cable cars allow tourists to visit Sugarloaf Mountain in this city, whose
residents are called cariocas. Copacabana and Ipanema Beaches are found in this city, and its slums
are called (*) favelas. This city's Corcovado Mountain holds one of the New Seven Wonders of the World,
a statue of Christ the Redeemer. For ten points, name this Brazilian city that will host the 2016 Olympics,
located northeast of Sao Paulo.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro (prompt on "Rio")
This city is located on the western shore of Guanabara Bay, and this city's Pedro Ernesto Palace now
houses its city council rather than a parliament. The majority of this city's slums, which are called
favelas, are located in the Tijuca zone. The mountain Corcovado near this city overlooks (*) Sugarloaf
Mountain and is home to this city's Christ the Redeemer statue. This city is home to the world's largest
soccer stadium, Maracana Stadium, the likely host of the 2014 FIFA World Cup final. For ten points name
this second largest city of Brazil, the host for the 2016 Olympic Games.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro
This city lies on Guanabara Bay, encloses the Lagoa Rodrigo de Freitas and contains the replanted Tijuca
Forest. This city contains Copacabana, Botafogo, and Ipanema beaches and Sugarloaf Mountain. This city
was the capital of its nation before the election of Juscelino Kubitschek, and from the top of Corcovado
Mountain, Christ the Redeemer looks over this city. For 10 points, name this second largest city of Brazil
after Sao Paulo, set to host the 2016 Summer Olympics.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro
A famous vantage point in this city can be scaled by cable car and is called Sugarloaf Mountain. This
was the capital of an empire proclaimed by Pedro I. This city's Corcovado is home to a famous statue of
Christ the Redeemer. It was replaced as capital by a city designed by Oscar Niemeyer. For ten points, name
this city that hosts the world's largest Carnival festival annually, the second-largest city in Brazil.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro
This city is home to the Maracana Stadium, and its Pedra da Gavea monolith and Corcovado mountain are
contained in the world's largest urban forest, the Tijuca. Babilonia, Complexo do Alemao ("com-PLE-shu
du a-le-MAN"), and Cidade de Deus are among this city's favelas. This city lies across from Niteroi and
Sao Goncalo ("san gon-SA-lu"), and its Guanabara Bay is dominated by Sugarloaf Mountain. This so-called
"Marvelous City" has some renowned beaches include Ipanema and Copacabana, and it is set to host the
2016 Summer Olympics. For 10 points, name this Brazilian city, whose bay is dominated by a statue of
Christ the Redeemer.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro
This city entirely contains Tijuca National Park, which boasts the largest urban forest in the world.
This city's edges are home to the infamous slums known as favellas, which are far from its major
attractions such as Maracana Stadium. Its other points of interest include (*) Sugar Loaf Mountain
and a giant statue atop Corcovado Mountain known as Christ the Redeemer. Also home to Copacabana
beach, for 10 points, identify this second-largest city of Brazil, misnamed because Portuguese explorers
mistook its harbor for an estuary.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro [prompt on Rio]
This city's Tiradentes Palace is home to a state legislature, and its Tijuca National Park is one of
the largest urban forests in the world. This city's Sambodrome is found on the Marques de Sapucai.
Located on Guanabara Bay, this city's landmarks include a statue on (*) Corcovado Peak. The
Avenida Atlantica is located near its Copacabana Beach, and Sugar Loaf Mountain is also found here. For
10 points name this Brazilian city which is overlooked by the Christ the Redeemer statue.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro
This city is surrounded by the Tijuca Forest. This city's neighborhood of Rocinha (ro-SEEN-yah)
is one of the largest favelas in its country. This city includes the islands of Nova and Tatu in Septiba
Bay to its west. Guanabara Bay lies to the east of this city, whose inhabitants are known as (*)
cariocas. This city is home to a giant statue on Corcovado Mountain known as Christ the Redeemer.
Sugarloaf Mountain is located in, for 10 points, what former capital of Brazil whose beaches include
Copacabana and Ipanema?
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro [prompt on Rio]
This city is located near Sugarloaf Mountain and its attractions include the Roman style aqueduct Arcos
da Lapa and the Tijuca rainforest. Residents of this city are often called Cariocas, and it houses the Estadio
do Maracana, the largest arena on its continent. Beaches near this city include Ipanema and Copaccabana.
The Christ the Redeemer statue can be found in this city, which was the capital of its country until the
creation of the planned city of Brasilia. For 10 points, name this tourist hotspot in Brazil.
ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro
The Samborombon bay is found at the mouth of this river, and the Matanza river empties into it. On
its northern bank lies the city of Colonia del Sacramento. Its navigable part is called the Canal Punto
Indio, and the Isla Martin Garcia is also located in this river. The province of Entre Rios is located at the
formation of this river near the confluence of the Uruguay and the Parana rivers. For 10 points, identify this
river, which forms a big estuary at its mouth in the Atlantic, and on whose banks lie Montevideo and
Buenos Aires.
ANSWER: Rio de la Plata
From 1810 to 1831, there existed a "united provinces" named for this geographical feature, off which the
Admiral Graf Spee was scuttled. It is depicted as cowering in a Bernini sculpture. The capital cities of
Montevideo and Buenos Aires sit at opposite ends of this geographical feature, named for the presence of
silver, which is formed by the confluence of the Uruguay and Parana Rivers. For ten points, name this question
of water on the southeast coastline of South America.
ANSWER: Rio de la Plata [or River Plate; or La Plata River; or River of Silver before mention]
This question of water contains the Samborombon Bay, and the North Point of the San Antonio Cape juts into
it. It is both the habitat for and the namesake of a type of saltwater river dolphin. Punta Brava and Punta del
Este are two points on its north shore, and Flores Island lies near one of two national capitals on it. Formed
by the confluence of the Parana and Uruguay rivers, Montevideo and Buenos Aires lie on it. FTP, name this
South American estuary whose English name is an archaic word for silver.
ANSWER: Rio de la Plata or River Plate or Plate River [or Silver River before mention]
Isla Martin Garcia lies near the coast in this question of water, and cities on its shore include Colonia del
Sacramento and Juan L. Lacaze. One bay in this question's western bank receives a namesake river, as well as
the Salado River. That bay, which stretches from Point Piedras to the north point of Cape San Antonio, is
Samborombon Bay. The Paraguay River drains into a larger one near this question of water, while another river
that leads to this question rises in Santa Catarina state in Brazil, and is the namesake of one of the countries that
borders this question. Montevideo and Buenos Aires are on the shores of, for 10 points, what estuary where the
Parana and Uruguay Rivers meet the Atlantic Ocean named for silver?
ANSWER: Rio de la Plata [or River Plate]
Its tributaries include the Salado, Conchos, and Puerco, and its basins include Lake Toronto and the Falcon
Reservoir. Its sources lie in the San Juan Mountains, and its early course flows into the San Luis Valley.
Before it flows into the Gulf Coastal Plain, this river flows into the Big Bend, and it is the fifth longest river
in North America. For 10 points, name this river on which lie Ciudad Juarez and El Paso, the border
between Mexico and the United States.
ANSWER: Rio Grande
This river begins to the east of the fourteen thousand-foot peak Mount Wilson. After flowing eastward past
the San Juan and Sangre de Cristo Mountains, this river turns southward through such features as the White
Rock Canyon. Much farther south, this river is joined by its largest tributary, the Conchos River. On another
side, the most notable tributary is the Pecos River, which joins near the Amistad National Recreation Area;
however, a much more famous area is the scenic Big Bend National Park. Near this river's mouth, the most
populous cities include Reynosa in Mexico and Brownsville in Texas. FTP, identify this major river of
Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas that forms a major part of the U.S. border with Mexico.
ANSWER: Rio Grande (also accept Rio Bravo del Norte)
A province of this name is home to the town of San Antonio Oeste on the Gulf of San Matias, and has
its capital at Viedma. One river of this name flows past Mercedes and is the source of the Gabriel
Terra Reservoir, while Another river of this name is formed by the Neuquen and the Limay. A city
that sits at the end of the longest (*) river by this name is divided by the "canoe paths." That river
receives the Vaupes, Guainia, and Brazo Casiquiare before picking up its major tributary, the Branco. At
Manaus, this river meets the Solimoes, marking the start of the Amazon. For 10 points, give the common
name of these Argentinian, Uruguayan, and Brazilian rivers, all known as such because their silt load affects
their color.
ANSWER: Rio Negro
A peak in this mountain range is Going-to-the-Sun Mountain. Despite its name, the amusingly
named "Mount Massive" is only the second highest peak in this range. Katharine Lee Bates wrote the
poem "America the Beautiful" after ascending a peak in this range. Its highest peak is Mount (*)
Elbert, and it contains such national parks as Banff and Grand Teton. For 10 points, name this mountain
range which includes Pike's Peak and other Colorado mountains.
ANSWER: Rocky Mountains [or the Rockies; or Lewis Range until it is read]
This mountain range runs through the middle of the Flathead River valley and the Uinta Mountains are one
of its subranges. Nature preserves in this mountain range include the Kootenay National Park and the
Sawtooth National Recreation Area. The highest peak in this mountain range is Mt. Elbert, and the northern
terminus of this range is the Liard River in Canada. The Owen-Spalding route is used to summit one
mountain in this range; that mountain in this range is the namesake of the Grand Teton National Park. For
10 points, name this mountain range which contains landmarks such as Pike's Peak, the longest in North
America.
ANSWER: Rocky Mountains
One subrange of this mountain range contains Mount Roosevelt, Mount Churchill, and Dieppe Mountain,
and another subrange contains the Liard River and Muncho Lake. This mountain range contains the Battle
of Britain Range and the Terminal Range as well as the sources of the Athabasca and Kicking Horse Rivers
in Jasper and Yoho National Parks. In this range, the Royal Gorge cuts through Fremont Peak, and the
Jackson and Blackfoot Glaciers are in this mountain range's Glacier National Park. The Teton range of this
mountain range lies north of the state which contains this range's Mt. Elbert and Pike's Peak. For 10 points,
name this largest mountain range in Western North America.
ANSWER: Rocky Mountains [or Rockies; accept Canadian Rockies before "Fremont Peak"; accept Muskwa Ranges before "Athabasca"; accept Battle of Britain Range before "Liard River"]
This mountain range includes Mummy Range, which runs from the Chapin Pass to Signal Mountain.
One of this range's highest peaks in its Rainbow Range is Mount Robson, which is west of the town
of Jasper and northwest of Banff. Its southern end is just north of the Sandia-Manzano Mountains,
and there is disagreement as to whether its northern end includes the Brooks Range. Some of the
most visited peaks in this range include Mount Owen, Longs Peak, Grand Teton, and Pikes Peak.
Name this mountain range that stretches from Canada down to New Mexico, the largest range in the
United States.
ANSWER: Rocky Mountains [or Rockies; accept answers that additionally mention "Canada"]
The Front Range and Clark Range are branches of this larger mountain range. Yoho National Park and
Jasper National Park lie within this range, which also contains the sources of the Peace and Fraser rivers.
At its southern terminus, the Sierra Madre range begins. The highest peak in this range is Mt. Elbert, which
lies in the same state as a more notable mountain in this range, Pikes Peak. Containing a namesake national
park in Colorado, this is, for 10 points, which largest mountain range in the western United States?
ANSWER: Rocky Mountains or the Rockies
The Climax mine in this mountain range was once the world's largest producer of molybdenum.
The northern border of this mountain range is marked by the Liard river. The highest peak in this
mountain range is Mount (*) Elbert. This range is part of the delineator known as the Continental Divide,
which separates watersheds that drain into the Pacific and those that drain into the Atlantic. For 10 points,
identify this mountain range in western North America that stretches from Canada to New Mexico.
ANSWER: Rocky Mountains [or the Rockies]
This nation's westernmost reaches constitute the historical region of Banat, whose primary city is
Timisoara. Its western border is also home to the large river gorge known as the Iron Gate. This
nation was the site of the Nazi internment camp known as Targu Jiu, which is now a major tourist
attraction thanks to its sculptures by (*) Constantin Brancusi. That city lies at the base of the Carpathian
Mountains, which divide this nation's regions of Moldavia and Wallachia from Transylvania. For 10
points, name this Eastern European country with capital at Bucharest.
ANSWER: Romania
This nation's westernmost reaches constitute the historical region of Banat, whose primary city is
Timisoara. Its western border is also home to the large river gorge known as the Iron Gate. This
nation was the site of the Nazi internment camp known as Targu Jiu, which is now a major tourist
attraction thanks to its sculptures by (*) Constantin Brancusi. That city lies at the base of the Carpathian
Mountains, which divide this nation's regions of Moldavia and Wallachia from Transylvania. For 10
points, name this Eastern European country with capital at Bucharest.
ANSWER: Romania
This country was where the "man with the hammer," a serial killer named Romulus Veres, operated,
and it was the site of two suicides of academics after the forced merger of the Babes (BAH-besh) and
Bolyai Universities. A region here has a historic seal of Michael the Brave. A cultural center in this country
is Timisoara, the site of mass protests before a 1989 revolution. This country contains Bran Castle, which is
commonly referred to as "Dracula's Castle." For ten points, name this modern day Eastern European country
with such regions as Wallachia and Transylvania.
ANSWER: Romania
A rock formation known as this nation's 'Sphinx' as well as a pair of massive mushroom-shaped
rocks known as "Babele" are located in this nation's Bucegi Mountains. This country's Iron Gates
National Park is near the largest European hydroelectric dam outside of Russia and those gorges are
shared with Serbia. The Roman province of (*) Dacia was found in southern region of this nation which
is now often referred to as Wallachia and the Carpathian Mountains run throguh this country's Western
portion, Transylvania. Bordered by Bulgaria to the south and the Black Sea on the East, FTP, identify this
European nation with its capital at Bucharest.
ANSWER: Romania
Max Weber wrote a book about the agrarian history of this city, which was protected by the Servian
Wall. Its religious landmarks include the Church of the Gesu, the model for many churches worldwide.
Monte Mario is the highest point of this city, which is located in the Lazio province on the Tiber River. It
rests on seven hills, such as the Capitoline and Palatine. For ten points, name this Italian city legendarily
founded by Remus and Romulus.
ANSWER: Rome [or Roma]
This city contains the tomb of Munoz de Zamora in its Saint Sabina Basilica. This city is divided into
regions such as Campitelli, where Carlo Rainaldi's Church of Saint Mary is located. The first wall to
surround this city was called the Servian Wall, which was later replaced by the more expansive Aurelian
Walls. One region of this city was once known as the English Ghetto; it contains a French church called
Trinita dei Monti which is connected to the Piazza di Spagna by the Spanish Steps. This city also contains
Nicola Salvi's Trevi Fountain as well as the Pantheon and its ancient Colosseum. Name this city that
contains Vatican City, the capital of Italy.
ANSWER: Rome [or Roma]
A landmark in this city had a series of tunnels where animals and slaves were kept. This city, the center
of the Lazio region, once had a nearby port that is now the suburb of Ostia. The Alban Hills lie south of this
city, that is surrounded by the "campagna." This city, built on seven hills, lies on the Tiber River. For the
point, the Pantheon and the Colosseum are located in what center of a classical empire?
ANSWER: Rome [or Roma]
A northern county of Scotland known as Wester [this name] is home to the sandstone mountain,
Slioch which is just south of the Fisherfield forest. The Gould Coast forms the southernmost portion
of the Sea of this name which is home a namesake island that contains the volcanic Mount (*) Bird,
Abbot Peak and the scientifc facilities at McMurdo Sound. New Zealand claims the Antartic dependancy
with this name which is dominated by a massive ice shelf also bearing this name. FTP, identify this common
geographical name; many of which are named after the Scottish Antarctic explorer who commanded the
ships Terror and Erebus.
ANSWER: Ross
An indentation into this question was known as the Bay of Whales, and that bay was eliminated by a 1987
event. The base for Operation High Jump was located on this question and was known as Little America IV. Its
namesake first spotted it in 1841, and its anchor points include a similarly-named island and the Edward
VIII Peninsula. The McMurdo Sound region is on the western edge of this question, which was the
headquarters for Robert Falcon Scott's 1911-1912 sledding expedition, and its eastern barrier was the
starting point of Roald Amundsen's 1911 visit to the South Pole. For ten points, name this indentation into
Antarctica that is the world's largest question of floating ice.
ANSWER: Ross Ice Shelf [prompt on "Antarctica"]
In this modern-day country, a stone cross was erected on a bank of Sterzh Lake in 1133. This
modern-day country is home to the Nivkh people, an indigenous people of the (+) Amur river, which
empties into the Strait of Tartary. Medieval principalities in what is now this country included
Pskov, Tver, and (*) Novgorod. Its Chukchi peninsula contains the easternmost point of Asia, thus
forming the western terminus of the Bering Strait. It is also home to Siberia. For 10 points, identify this
largest country by area in the world.
ANSWER: Russia
The eastern part of a lake that lies in this country was the site of a battle lost by the Teutonic Knights
when it was frozen; that lake is Peipus. The deepest freshwater lake in the world lies in this country. The
mountain range that divides Europe and Asia, the Urals, lies mostly in this country. Its most important river
is the Volga. For 10 points, name this country with capital at Moscow.
ANSWER: Russia
This country's southeastern corner contains an autonomous Jewish district, less than two percent of
whose residents are Jewish. Its easternmost point is located on the uninhabited Big Diomede Island. Its
highest point, located in the Caucasus Mountains, is Mount Elbrus. This country contains an archipelago to
the west of the Kara Sea known as Novaya Zemlya, as well as most of the length of the Ural Mountains.
For 10 points, name this largest country in the world by area, which has its capital at Moscow.
ANSWER: Russia
Dumplings called pelmeni originated from this country. Ukha is a fish soup, and shchi is a cabbage
soup, from this country. Hot water urns used to pour tea in this nation are called samovars. Rye bread is
made into a weakly alcoholic beverage common in this country, kvass. Blini made of buckwheat are
common in this country's cuisine, and beef sauteed in a mushroom sauce with sour cream is named for the
Stroganoff family from this country. For ten points, name this country where Smirnoff, a producer of vodka,
originated.
ANSWER: Russian Federation [or Rossiyskaya Federatsiya; or Rossiya]
A series of early color photographs taken of this country's rural areas in 1909 depicts people such as the
Khan of Khiva and a woman from Dagestan (DAH-guh-stahn). One federal subject of this country is the
Krasnodar Krai, which is divided by the Kuban River. Other rivers that flow through this country include
the Amur (AA-murr), the Yenisei (YEN-iss-ey), and the Lena. Countries bordered by this nation include
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Norway, and North Korea. For 10 points, name this country, the physically largest in
the world.
ANSWER: Russian Federation
Possessions of this nation include Franz Joseph Land and the disputed Kuril Islands, and this country's
major cities include Kazan, Yekaterinburg, and Nizhny Novgorod. This country contains the tallest
mountain in Europe, Mount Elbrus, and the deepest lake in the world, Baikal. The Ural Mountains divide
Asia and Europe in this country. For 10 points, name this country with capital at Moscow that is, by area,
the largest in the world.
ANSWER: Russian Federation or Rossiyskaya Federatsiya
This country's oldest holiday occurs the week before Lent, features week-long consumption of pancakes
representing the sun, and is named after the word for "butter." People in this non-Finnish country can slap
their bodies over with bundles of twigs before entering a type of sauna called a banya. The balalaika is an
instrument native to this country, which contains Saint Basil's Cathedral. For 10 points, name this country
whose national drink is vodka.
ANSWER: Russia [or Rossiya]
The population of Nkombo Island, near this country's western border, speaks the hybrid Amashi dialect.
It is home to the active volcano Mount Bisoke and the dormant Mount Karisimbi, both of which are part of
the eastern Virunga Mountains. The southwest border of this nation is marked by the Ruzizi River, which is
part of the Albertine Rift. This country contains the eastern half of Lake Kivu, while the Democratic
Republic of Congo controls the western portion. For ten points, identify this African country north of
Burundi which saw a 1990 civil war between the Hutus and Tutsis.
ANSWER: Republic of Rwanda
This country is the home of the Impala Orchestra. Lakes Muhazi and Ihema are located in the east of
this country, whose cities include Gitarama and Butare. Karisimbi is the highest peak of its
northwestern (*) Virunga Mountains, and it shares Lake Kivu with its western neighbor. It is located to the
north of a country that shared in its mid-90s ethnic strife, Burundi. For 10 points, name this country that
also borders Zaire, Uganda, and Tanzania, the site of a genocidal civil war between Tutsis and Hutus.
ANSWER: Rwanda
This city's Crocker Art Museum is the oldest American art museum west of the Mississippi. Its Latino
culture is celebrated each Memorial Day weekend during the Festival de la Familia. In the nineteenth
century, this city was called Yee Fow, which is Chinese for "second city." This city was the western
terminus of the Central Pacific railroad. In the mid-2000s, a "cigar tent" was set up outside a mansion in
this city. The American River joins with this city's namesake river and was dammed to make Folsom Lake,
which lies northeast of this city. Sutter's Fort is in this present-day city. For ten points, name this city where
governor Jerry Brown currently resides.
ANSWER: Sacramento, California
The Tanezrouft region lies in this location, which also contains the Tassili n'Ajjer. The lowest point in this
region is the Qattara Depression, and it also contains the Tibesti and Ahaggar mountain ranges. This region
contains an extinct volcano known as Mount Koussi, and the sirocco winds originate in this location. The
French tested their first nuclear bomb in the Grand Erg of this region, which is bordered by the Sahel to the
south. For 10 points, name this largest North African desert, which contains the Nile River.
ANSWER: Sahara Desert
This multinational region is home to the Cataglyphis ant, which can zoom in a straight line back to its
nest by sensing the sun's angle. Opposite sides of this region are home to the Grand Ergs and the
sinkhole-like Qattara depression.The nomadic Tuaregs trade across this region, whose western part is
bounded by the Atlas mountains to the north and the grasslands of the Sahel to its south. For 10 points,
name this North African desert, the world's largest.
ANSWER: Sahara Desert
This physical feature includes the Tassili n-Ajjer (tah-SIL-ee NAW-jur), Ahaggar (ah-HAH-gur),
and Tibesti (tih-BES-tee) mountain ranges, noted for cave art dating back to 4000 BCE. It contains
the Qattara (KAHT-tar-rah) Depression, an important habitat for gazelle and cheetahs, and it is
home to the (*) Tuareg (TWAH-reg) people, who are descended from the Berbers. Also home to the Grand
Erg Oriental, a sea of sand in Algeria, it is bounded by the Sahel grasslands to the south and the Atlas
Mountains to the north. For 10 points, name the world's largest hot desert.
ANSWER: Sahara Desert
The highest point in this area is the volcano Emi Koussi in the Tibesti Range. Other important mountain
ranges in it include the Air and Ahaggar mountains. The Great Eastern Erg is a sandy region in the north of
it. Notable ethnic groups that live in this area include the Tuaregs and the Berbers, and its major cities
include Nouakchott, the capital of Mauritania, and Timbuktu. The southern border of this area is a semi-arid
savanna, the Sahel. FTP, name this North African desert, the world's largest.
ANSWER: Sahara Desert
This region shares its name with the zone between the Gulf of Hammamet and the Gulf of Gabes;
both are named from the Arabic word for "coast." In the past several decades, this region has been
stripped of its thorny scrub. Defined by the intermittent presence of (*) acacia trees, a collaborative
project exists to build the Dakar-Ndjamena Highway across this region. For 10 points, name this region
extending from Sudan to Senegal, the transition zone between the savannah and the Sahara Desert.
ANSWER: the Sahel
In 1995, this land mass was struck by an earthquake that destroyed the town of Neftegorsk. Its
highest point is Mount Lopatin, and it is separated from the mainland by the Tatar Strait. In 1875
the country that controls it today traded it for a nearby archipelago and ran a penal colony on it
before losing its southern half thirty years later. During that time, the island was known as Karafuto,
and was handed over according to the Treaty of (*) Portsmouth. Cities on it include Alexandrovsk and
Yuzhno, which is the capital of the province formed by this namesake island and the nearby archipelago,
part of which is still claimed by Japan, the Kuril Islands. The Sea of Okhotsk lies east of, FTP, what island,
the largest in Russia?
ANSWER: Ostrov Sakhalin (accept Karafuto before mentioned)
To the south of this island lies the u-shaped Aniva Bay, and it is home to the Oroks. Korsakov and Kholmsk
are major ports of this island, whose city of Yuzhno is by far its largest. Two parties agreed to share this
island in the Treaty of Shimoda, but one country was later ceded its southern half through the Treaty of
Portsmouth. This island is separated from the mainland by the Strait of Tartary, and the La Perouse Strait
separates it from Hokkaido. This island borders the Sea of Okhotsk, and its namesake oblast includes the
Kuril Islands. For 10 points, name this Pacific island home to the Ainu which is now part of Russia.
ANSWER: Sakhalin [or Karafuto; or Saharin; or Kuye; or Saghalien]
Approximately four hundred people speak the Nivkh language in this locale, which is not related to any
other language. The highest point on this landmass is Mt. Lopatin. Approximately two thousand people
died in a 1995 earthquake here that destroyed the town of Nefegorsk. Anton Chekhov wrote about an 1890
journey to this place's penal colony, and La Perouse Strait separates this landmass from Hokkaido. This
location changed hands in the 1905 Treaty of Portsmouth and was renamed Karafuto. For ten points, name
this island that is separated from the Asian mainland by the Tatar Strait and was taken by Russia from
Japan at the end of World War II.
ANSWER: Sakhalin Island [or Kafafuto before mentioned]
This city is home to a symphony orchestra that plays at the stageless Abravanel Hall. This city is the
origination point for the world's longest-running radio program, Music and the Spoken Word, which has
aired weekly since 1929. The Seagull Monument is found in its Temple Square, which is also home to the
Tabernacle building. This city on the Jordan River is at the feet of the Wasatch Range and was laid out by
Brigham Young. For 10 points, name this city which overlooks a namesake question of water in Utah.
ANSWER: Salt Lake City
This city houses the Days of -47 parade, and this city's Chinatown was wholesale demolished in 1952,
causing a mass Chinese-American exodus from this city. That area was called Plum Alley, and small
shops characterize the Sugar House neighborhood, which was established shortly after this city. The
(*) Wasatch Range foothills house some of the residential buildings in this city. This city, currently run by
Ralph Becker, contains a large building that is a successor to two previous versions constructed at Kitland
and Nauvoo. The first Transcontinental Railroad was completed outside this city. For ten points, identify
this city, which is the site of Brigham Young University and the capital of Utah.
ANSWER: Salt Lake City, Utah
Adolf Hitler used to vacation 30km south of this city at the Berghof, but modern visitors here are best
entertained by its Mirabell Palace, which boasts trick fountains that squirt tourists. This city is also home to
the rococo Leopoldskron Palace near the Untersberg. It was ceded to Bavaria along with the Tyrol by the
Treaty of Schonbrunn, while the Anschluss forced the Von Trapp family to flee this city named for its
reserves of salt. Best known as the birthplace of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, this is, FTP, what second most
populous city in Austria?
ANSWER: Salzburg
This people's flag includes a half-blue, half-red circle representing the sun and moon, whose diameter
sits along green and yellow stripes. In the 70s, these people protested a proposed dam on the Alta river.
They're not the Ainu, but they may have used huge, symbol-inscribed drums in a bear hunt ritual. Their
storehouses are often raised feet off the ground on wooden legs. During the Cold War, many of these
people were removed from the coasts of the Kola peninsula to its interior near Lovozero. Their traditional
lifestyle involved nomadic reindeer herding. For ten points, name this ethnicity of far-northern Russia,
Sweden, and Finland.
ANSWER: Sami [or Lapps; or Laplanders]
This country's garbage-eating avaava fish is compared to a person in one of its common insults; such
an insult was used in 2009 on its Prime Minister, who had its roads change from right-side to left-side
driving. Tourists to this independent country can watch its native "fire knife" dancers or walk the Saleaula
lava fields. This country's tallest peak, Mount Silisili, is found north of the Apolima Strait, which divides
this country's two landmasses of Savai-i and Upolu. For 10 points, name this island nation with capital at
Apia, located northwest of an American territory in the same Polynesian archipelago.
ANSWER: Independent State of Samoa [or Malo Sa'oloto Tuto'atasi o Samoa; or Independent Samoa; do not accept "American Samoa"; do not accept "Western Samoa"]
The Rough Riders commonly gathered at the Menger Hotel in this city. The 250th anniversary of this
city coincided with its hosting of the 1968 World's Fair, or Hemisfair, for which this city's Tower of the
Americas was constructed. Marriage Island is located in this city's namesake river. The Long Barracks and
the chapel are the most popular locations at a landmark in this city, which is connected to other attractions
by a thoroughfare called the River Walk. The seat of Bexar County, this city is home to a mission named
for nearby poplar trees. For 10 points, name this seventh-largest city in the US, the second-most populous
in Texas, and the home of the Alamo.
ANSWER: San Antonio
Mountain bikers frequent the Black Mountain Open Space Park in this city, found near its
Rancho Penasquitos neighborhood. In 2006, the federal government used eminent domain to seize a
part of this city in an attempt to resolve Steve Trunk and Philip Paulson's longstanding
Establishment Clause lawsuit over the Mount Soledad cross. This city hosted the Panama-(*)
California Exposition in 1915, celebrating the economic boom that canal traffic brought to its harbor, which
is between the Silver Strand and Point Loma. South of this city is the world's busiest land border crossing at
San Ysidro; this city's center is only twenty-five miles from that of Tijuana, Mexico. For 10 points, name
this California city, home to a large, koala-breeding zoo.
ANSWER: San Diego
The Blue Angels perform annually at the MCAS Miramar air show in this city. Other attractions include its
Wild Animal Park as well as the Birch aquarium. A one billion dollar expansion of Lindbergh Field is
underway in this city, and an annual Giant Used Car Tent Sale is located at Qualcomm Stadium. Santa Ana
winds caused major fires here in 2003 and 2007. This major city recently suffered a blackout when an APS
worker in Arizona performed maintenance work. Located across the Mexican border from Tijuana is, for 10
points, what second largest city in California that is home to the Padres and the Chargers?
ANSWER: San Diego
In 1915, this city hired "rainmaker" Charles Hatfield to produce enough rain to fill a reservoir. A
museum here contains the bronze cannon "El Jupiter" that was once used to defend it. George Marston
funded the Junipero Serra Museum in this city. Numerous military bases are located in this American city,
including the largest naval fleet in the world. It is home to Naval Base Point Loma and a historic fort
founded in 1769 called the Presidio. This city is home to the suburb of Rancho Bernardo. For ten points,
name this second largest city in California, which forms a metropolitan center with Tijuana, Mexico.
ANSWER: San Diego
It's not New York, but Treasure Island is an artificial island built for this city's 1939 World's
Fair. The Clay-Montgomery building in this city is the old headquarters of Bank of Italy, which
became Bank of America. This city's first (*) earthquake-resistant building, Montgomery Block, was
eventually replaced by what is now its tallest, the Transamerica Pyramid. Joseph Strauss oversaw
construction of a bridge that connects this city with Marin County across its namesake bay. For 10 points,
name this Californian city connected to the Golden Gate Bridge.
ANSWER: San Francisco, California
The original settlement that became this city doubled in population upon the 1846 arrival of 240 Mormon
settlers by ship from the East Coast. Built on the settlement of Yerba Buena, one of this city's most
exclusive neighborhoods was formed by homes built by the "Big Four," who financed the Central Pacific
Railroad, including Leland Stanford. Nob Hill in this city abuts its Tenderloin District, while another
neighborhood is the Castro, with a sizable gay population, and from which Harvey Milk launched his
political career. FTP, name this West Coast city, much of which was destroyed by a fire following a 1906
earthquake.
ANSWER: San Francisco
In the 19th century, this city created a Committee of Vigilance to control crime, much of which was blamed
on a group of immigrants known as the Sydney Ducks in an area known as Barbary Coast.
One of its tourist areas is named after former Mayor Adolph Sutro, while another contains Baker Beach.
This city contains the Fillmore Auditorium and Fillmore West, located near Haight-Ashbury, and its largest
building is the Transamerica Pyramid. This city also contains Nob Hill and is near the Island of Alcatraz.
Name this California city near Oakland at one end of the Golden Gate Bridge.
ANSWER: San Francisco
This city contains hills such as Pacific Heights and Russian Hill, and its "Painted Ladies" are located
near Alamo Square. Coit Tower stands atop Telegraph Hill in this city's Pioneer Park, and
neighborhoods in this city include the Castro, the Richmond, and the Sunset. Ghirardelli Square and
Pier 39 are found at (*) Fisherman's Wharf in this city, and famous landmarks within it include the
Transamerica Pyramid and Candlestick Park. Its Lombard Street contains hairpin turns, and one can ascend
Nob Hill using this city's iconic cable car system. Its namesake bay contains Angel and Alcatraz Islands,
and it shares a metropolitan area with Oakland and San Jose. For ten points, name this city in California that
is the site of the Golden Gate Bridge.
ANSWER: San Francisco
Mission Dolores and the Palace of Fine Arts are landmarks of this city, where the popular "mission
burrito" was invented. This city, where the UN charter was signed, is connected by bridge to Oakland. For
10 points, name this foggy city whose namesake bay in Northern California is crossed by the Golden Gate
Bridge.
ANSWER: San Francisco
One national park near this city contains the oldest Japanese tea garden in the U.S. A stretch of
this city's Russian Hill contains Lombard Street. This city also includes Nob and Telegraph Hills.
This city, whose neighborhoods include (*) Haight-Ashbury and Castro, contains one end of the Bay
Bridge, which links it to Oakland. Off the coast of this city is a prison known as "The Rock." For 10 points,
name this city in California, home to Alcatraz and the Golden Gate.
ANSWER: San Francisco
Butch Kardum started the colorist movement in this city, which led to the fame of its set of Victorian
Houses, the Painted Ladies. This city includes Mount Davidson and the Twin Peaks. A question of
water that shares its name with this city is crossed by the Richmond-San Rafael [ruh-FEL] Bridge
and contains the Marin [muh-RIN] Islands. This city's "Little Saigon" is located in its Tenderloin
district. Its neighborhoods include Nob Hill, which includes Fisherman's Wharf, and the center of
the hippie movement, Haight-Ashbury. One of its islands, nicknamed The Rock and former home of
a major prison, is Alcatraz. Name this California city that experienced a 1906 earthquake and is at
the south end of The Golden Gate Bridge.
ANSWER: San Francisco, California
Landmarks in this city include the De Young museum, the Palace of the Legion of Honor, and the
Embarcadero. Cars in this city can make eight turns down one steep block along Lombard Street. The
connection between this city and Marin County is continuously repainted all year long, and this home of
Fisherman's Wharf and the gay-friendly Castro district also contains the tall Transamerica pyramid, which
was built to resist earthquakes. For 10 points, name this foggy West Coast city next to a namesake Bay
spanned by the Golden Gate Bridge.
ANSWER: San Francisco, California
In 1835, the Englishman William Richardson started the first homestead in this city and laid out streets
when it was called Yerba Buena. William Pereira designed a tall building in this city that formerly was the
headquarters of a major life insurance holding company, the Transamerica Pyramid. The Embarcadero is a
major road in the north of this city, which ends at Ghirardelli Square after passing the Ferry Building and
Fisherman's Wharf. For 10 points, the Palace of Fine Arts, the Presidio, and AT&T Park are all located in
what city of Northern California?
ANSWER: San Francisco [or Yerba Buena before it is read]
The Twin Peaks and Sunset Tunnels are two major transit arteries in this city, and the Civil War-era Fort
Point lies in the north of this city. The Hunter's Point Naval Shipyard is located in the southeast of this city.
The Farallon Islands, though lying thirty miles to the west of this city, are still officially part of it. Coit
Tower is located on Telegraph Hill in this city, and Portsmouth Square is at the center of this city's
Chinatown. Ghirardelli Square and Pier 39 are located on this city's Fisherman's Wharf. The only mobile
National Historic Landmark in the United States is this city's cable car system. For 10 points, name this
California city that is the location of the Golden Gate Bridge.
ANSWER: City and County of San Francisco
This question of water is bounded to the northwest by Marin County. The Dumbarton Bridge spans this
question of water which contains Yerba Buena Island and the artificial Treasure Island. The Cosco
Busan collided with one of the more famous bridges spanning this question of water in 2007, causing a
small oil spill. That bridge's eastern span partially collapsed in the (*) Loma Prieta Earthquake. The O.
Co Coliseum lies on its shore near Alameda Island, a large island in the eastern portion of this bay, while
Alcatraz and Angel Islands lie in the western portion. For 10 points, name this northern California bay
spanned by the Golden Gate Bridge.
ANSWER: San Francisco Bay ("Bay" not needed after it's read)
As of October 2010, a bridge across this question of water is being retrofitted to include a novel
self-anchored suspension span. The deepest part of this question of water is Raccoon Strait, and San Pablo Bay
is a northern extension of it. Angel Island, in this question of water, was the Pacific counterpart to Ellis Island,
and another island in this bay was home to a notorious prison. On its east end lie the cities of Berkeley and
Oakland, which are part of a namesake "Area" whose southern part includes Silicon Valley. For 10 points,
name this bay in Northern California.
ANSWER: San Francisco Bay
Humphrey the Whale was twice stuck on the shores of this question of water, necessitating removal by
engineers. This question of water is fed by the Carquinez Strait, which is in turn connected to by the Suisun
Bay, although these bodies, along with the San Pablo Bay, are often treated as part of this bay. This question
surrounds Angel Island and its southern extent is spanned by the San Mateo bridge. This bay is fed by the
San Joaquin and Sacramento Rivers and is home to Pier 33, from which one can visit Alcatraz Island. FTP,
name this bay surrounded by Berkeley, Oakland, and its namesake city in Northern California, which outlets
to the Pacific under the Golden Gate Bridge.
ANSWER: San Francisco Bay
This city is the location of the rock cut tomb replica in its Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum. This city has
taken steps to reduce light pollution due to the proximity of the Lick Observatory at nearby Mount
Hamilton. This city's oldest building is the Peralta Adobe, and this city was the original capital of its state.
This city is located in Santa Clara Valley along the Guadaloupe River and Coyote Creek. For 10 points,
name this city that is the third largest city in California and is the hub of Silicon Valley.
ANSWER: San Jose
In 1825, one city of this name served as the provisional capital of Uruguay during its uprising against
Brazil. The city of this name on Luzon lies near the source of the Chico River, while another city of this
name is the home of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. The Peralta Adobe is the oldest building in
the U.S. city of this name, which is also home to a mansion with a bunch of dead-end doors, the Winchester
Mystery House. That city is located along Coyote Creek and the Guadalupe River in Santa Clara County,
and is California's third-largest. For 10 points, name this name shared by a Silicon Valley mecca and the
capital of Costa Rica.
ANSWER: San Jose
The Square of the See lies at the center of this city, in which the Immigrant's Hostel is located.
Guarulhos and Osasco are within this city's namesake state. Located on the banks of the Tiete River, it
contains the largest population of Japanese people in one city outside of Japan. The Monument to Ipiringa
in this city celebrates its country's independence. This city is on the Serro do Mar, and its port of Santos is
the busiest in Latin America. It has more people than any other city in the Southern Hemisphere. For 10
points, name this most populous city in Brazil, named after a saint from Tarsus.
ANSWER: Sao Paulo
This city is the home of Oscar Niemeyer's Copan Building, and the 9 de Julho Palace is also located here.
The massive Morumbi and Pacaembu football stadiums are located here. This city's Mirante do Vale is the
tallest building in this city's country. Guaruja is a beach resort for this city. The Parque do Ibirapuera is the
home of this city's Art Biennial. This city is located on the Tiete (Tyuh-Tey), and Pinheiros, rivers. This
city's Atlantic port is Santos. For 10 points, name this largest city in Brazil.
ANSWER: Sao Paulo
Franz Heep designed this city's Italia Buidling during its time under mayor Francisco Prestes Maia. The
Copan Building in this non-capital city was designed by Oscar Niemeyer. The Cry of Ipiranga occurred on
a river near this city, when Pedro I declared his country's independence. For 10 points, name this city
whose more than ten million inhabitants make it the largest city in Brazil.
ANSWER: Sao Paulo
This place's landscape is dotted by cylindrical Bronze Age towers called nuraghi. Its namesake language
has a southern Campidanese dialect and a northern Logudorese dialect. This island's highest peak, Punta la
Marmora, is in its Gennargentu range, and the Tirso river runs through its center. Its town of Iglesias grew
over a silver mining industry spurred on by the same Ugolino commemorated in Dante's Divine Comedy.
The San Teodoro resort is on this island's beachy Emerald Coast. This island's city of Sassari is south of
the Strait of Bonifacio, and its capital is Cagliari. For 10 points, name this Italian-controlled island south of
Corsica.
ANSWER: Sardinia [or Sardegna]
The natives of this locale enjoy casu marzu, a cheese riddled with live maggots, as a delicacy, even though
consumption of it is banned by EU legislation. Mistrals blowing south from France sweep over this island
every winter and spring. Occupied by the Byzantines after the fall of Rome, it became independent for a
short time at the end of the sixth century, but was later occupied by the Aragonese in the fifteenth century. It
has since become part of Italy, and is now one of Italy's five autonomous regions. Name this island south of
Corsica with its capital at Cagliari.
ANSWER: Sardinia
A theory about this question of water's name states that Portuguese sailors coined it in reference to a small
species of tropical grape. It names a series of William Hope Hodgson stories that include "From the
Tideless Sea." This sea is the traditional spawning migration center of both the European and American
eel. The name of this sea comes from a specific genus of broth macroalgae, which has a reputation for
ensnaring ships, although ships trapped here are mostly affected by the horse latitudes. For ten points, name
this sea in the North Atlantic noted for the massive amounts of seaweed found there.
ANSWER: Sargasso Sea [prompt on the Atlantic Ocean]
A notable 2008 world record ballooning attempt occurred here near the town of North Battleford. Currently
lead by center-right premier Brad Wall, a major issue here is the privatization of crown corporations. Its
cities are a bastion for the New Democratic Party that was founded by a noted former socialist premier,
Tommy Douglas, who began his nation's Medicare system here. A major source for uranium and potash,
one can see Prince Albert National Park and the CFL's Roughriders here. For 10 points, name this
rectangular-shaped prairie province in Canada whose most populous city is Saskatoon.
ANSWER: Saskatchewan
This polity's largest naturally occuring lake that is contained entirely within it is Long Lake, although the
construction of the Qu-Apelle River Dam and Gardiner Dam created its largest man-made reservoir, Lake
Diefenbaker. The capital of this province is situated nearby Wascana Creek. Smaller lakes within this
geographical unit include Cree Lake and Reindeer Lake. Cities within this polity include Yorkton, Swift
Current and Moose Jaw. The Mosaic Stadium within Taylor Field can be found at this province's second
largest city. The namesake of this province is a river that eventually dumps into Manitoba's Lake Winnipeg.
For 10 points, name this middle of the Prairie Provinces whose largest city is Saskatoon.
ANSWER: Saskatchewan
The first European exploration of this province is traditionally credited to Henry Kelsey, a fur trader
who hoped to increase trade with native peoples there. The capital of this province was originally a
mining tent village called Pile o' Bones. The Carrot River is found in the North of this province,
which has cities named Estevan and Moosejaw. This Prairie Province shares Lake Athabasca with its
neighbor Alberta. For 10 points, name this Canadian prairie province bordered by Alberta, Manitoba and
the Northwest Territories with capital at Regina.
ANSWER: Saskatchewan
This province's capital was the site of a 1912 "cyclone," the deadliest tornado in Canadian history.
The western red lily adorns the flag of this province, whose city of Preeceville is near the source of a
river that flows east to another province's capital. This province, the source of the Assiniboine River,
contains the eastern portion and majority of Lake (*) Athabasca. Sitting Bull settled his people in this
province's Wood Mountain area following the Battle of Little Bighorn. This province, which is a
quadrilateral, contains the cities of Prince Albert and Moose Jaw. For 10 points, name this Canadian prairie
province whose capital is Regina and whose largest city is Saskatoon.
ANSWER: Saskatchewan
The Carrot, Beaver and Qu-Apelle rivers flow through this province, which has its highest point somewhere
in the Cypress Hills. The Fond du Lac River begins in its Wollaston Lake, while its southern border is the
site of Grasslands National Park. Reindeer Lake forms part of its eastern border, while Lake Athabasca is
shared with its western neighbor. The Churchill River, which flows into Hudson Bay, begins in this
province, while Edmonton and Calgary lie on tributaries of its namesake river. With its largest cities
including Swift Current, Prince Albert and Moose Jaw, for 10 points, identify this prairie province between
Alberta and Manitoba whose capital is Regina.
ANSWER: Saskatchewan
Reindeer Lake lies on the eastern border of this province and Lake Athabasca on the western border. Swift
Current and Moose Jaw are to the south, and the Assiniboine River flows through the capital of this
province. Bordered by the Northwest Territories to the north, Manitoba to the east, and Alberta to the west,
this is, for ten points, what Canadian province whose cities include its provinicial capital, Regina, and
Saskatoon?
ANSWER: Saskatchewan
The Farasan Islands, belonging to this country, lie offshore from the city of Jizan in this country. The
Hejaz and Asir mountains are located in the western part of this country. The Nejd, in this country,
in which the cities of Anaiza and Baraydah lie, is bordered to the south by its overwhelming share of
the (*) Rub 'al Khali, also known as the Empty Quarter. The King Fahd causeway connects this country to
Bahrain. The Zamzam Well is located in this country, which has coastline on both the Red Sea and the
Persian Gulf, along which its main oil producing region lies. For 10 points, identify this Islamic kingdom
with its capital at Riyadh, which dominates the Arabian Penninsula.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
This country began the Khurais Megaproject in 2006. Motiva Enterprises is a collaboration between an
American company and a firm headquartered in this country. Dammam is located in this country's Eastern
Province, while Shaybah is located in its extreme southeast. This country bought out ARAMCO in 1980.
Ghawar Field is located in this country. Abdullah Tariki, who hailed from this nation, joined with
Venezuelan Juan Pablo Perez Alfonso to found OPEC. For ten points, name this largest oil producer in the
Middle East.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia [or Al Mamlakah al Arabiyah as Saudiyah]
This nation's capital contains the Olaya District, and is found on the central Nejd plateau. This country
is home to Ghawar, the world's largest conventional oil field, and Aramco is its national oil company. It
borders both the Red Sea and Persian Gulf, and a city in this country is home to the Ka-aba. It's
southernmost portion is the massive sand desert Rub 'al Khali, or the "Empty Quarter". For 10 points,
Mecca and Medina are found in this Islamic monarchy with capital at Riyadh, which occupies most of the
Arabian Peninsula.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
This state is the location of the Nikolaikirche (nee-kol-EYE-keer-keh), which was the location of
Christian Fuhrer's Monday demonstrations against Communist restrictions. The Pillitz Palace is located in
this state, whose Zwinger Palace contains the Old Masters Picture Gallery. The construction of the Little
Castle in the Woods Bridge across the Elbe River in the capital of this state prompted the revocation of the
surrounding area's status as a UNESCO World Heritage site. That capital of this state lost approximately
100,000 residents during a World War II firebombing. For ten points, name this state in eastern Germany in
which Leipzig is located and whose capital is Dresden.
ANSWER: Saxony [or Sachsen]
This region includes an archipelago to the west which is separated from the mainland by the North Minch,
along with an island with volcanic plugs such as the Old Man of Storr, as well as Dunvegan Castle. On its
southern border are the Cheviot Hills, while its highest peak lies in the Grampians. That peak is Ben Nevis.
Waterways in this region include the Solway and Moray Firths, as well as the River Clyde, which runs past
Glasgow. Its Caledonian Canal links several of its lakes, including Loch Ness. Its capital is Edinburgh. For
10 points, name this region north of England which is part of the United Kingdom.
ANSWER: Scotland [prompt on United Kingdom, Great Britain, or Hebrides before "Cheviot," accep Alba]
Arram forms one end of a boundary fault dividing this region, and off its shore lies the isle of Skye. It
partially contains the Cheviot Hills and some of its tallest mountains are in the Cairngorms. Its Grampian
Mountains include the tallest peak in this region, Ben Nevis. Its largest subdivision is divided by a fault
extending from Fort William to Inverness, the Great Glen. This region's largest island is Lewis and Harris,
located in the Outer Hebrides. Partially divided into the Southern Uplands, Central Lowlands, and the
Highlands, for 10 points, name this country of the United Kingdom, home to cities such as Glasgow and
Edinburgh.
ANSWER: Scotland or Alba [prompt on Scottish Highlands until it is mentioned]
One island off the coast of this political unit contains an abbey founded by Saint Columba. Forced
evacuations of this country occurred during one of its region's namesake "clearances." The Jacobite
rebellion originated in this place, home to many warring clans. Skye is the largest island in the (*)
Hebrides (HEBB-rid-eez), off the coast of this place. It contains Ben Nevis, and a lake supposedly home to
a sea monster. For 10 points, the Highlands and Loch Ness are found in what component of the United
Kingdom?
ANSWER: Scotland
The population of this political unit was forcibly urbanized in the Highland Clearances. Two of the
world's longest cantilever bridges and suspension bridges cross this political unit's Firth of Forth. This
place's highest point is Ben Nevis. The Orkney and Shetland Islands are to its north, and this region's
largest city is Glasgow. For 10 points, name this constituent part of the United Kingdom, with capital at
Edinburgh (ED-in-burr-uh), which lies to the north of England.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Scotland
A sporting event that originated in this country consisted of throwing a ninety-pound, seventeen-foot
log into the air so that it lands oriented in the opposite direction; that sport is called "tossing the caber." In
this country's distinctive law system, based both on Roman law and common law, the supreme court is the
Court of Sessions. This birthplace of Presbyterianism has its religious life governed by the Kirk. This
country's people call its estuaries "firths" and its coastal indentations "lochs." For ten points, name this
northernmost country in the United Kingdom known for its highlands and kilts.
ANSWER: Scotland [prompt on the United Kingdom]
The Duke of Sutherland forced many people out of this region. The Grampian Mountains form the
southeast part of this region. Fort Williams is one endpoint of the Caledonian Canal, which lies in the
fault region that bisects this region, the Great (+) Glen. The Orkneys are generally considered part of
this region. Urquhart Castle overlooks one lake in this region, Loch (*) Ness. One of the last battles on
British soil took place in this region at Culloden Moor, near Inverness, which is regarded as the capital of
this region. For 10 points, identify this area of Scotland contrasted with the Lowlands.
ANSWER: the Scottish Highlands [prompt on Scotland]
An amusement park named Playland once existed in this city's Bitter Lake neighborhood, and part of state
route 99 through this city is known as the Alaskan Way Viaduct. A former utilities plant gives its name to
this city's Gas Works Park, and neighborhoods in this city include Green Lake and Rainier Beach. This
city's namesake "Center" includes the Experience Music Project and a tower built for the 1962 World's
Fair. Located on Puget Sound, for 10 points, name this large Washington city which includes the Space
Needle.
ANSWER: Seattle
This American city contains Queen Anne Hill and holds a yearly festival known as "The Bite."
The artificial Harbor Island is within this city's Duwamish Waterway. The freshwater Lake Union is
completely surrounded by this city, the home of the (*) Pike Place Market. Its primary harbor, Elliott
Bay, is an inlet of Puget Sound, and a landmark here is left over from the 1962 "Century 21 Exposition"
World's Fair. For 10 points, name this home of the Space Needle and most populous city in the state of
Washington.
ANSWER: Seattle, Washington
This city is named for a Duwamish chieftain who apocryphally gave a speech asking "how can you buy
or sell the sky?" Militant anti-globalization protesters forced the World Trade Organization to end its 1999
conference in this city early. Boeing was founded in this city, which is the headquarters for Nordstrom,
Amazon, and Starbucks. For 10 points, name this center of the grunge music scene in the 1990s whose
Century 21 Expo featured the Space Needle.
ANSWER: Seattle
This city's Scandinavian immigrants live near canal locks in the Ballard neighborhood. This city is
connected to Bremerton and Bainbridge Island by ferry, and its Industrial districts lie along the Duwamish
river. Drivers in this city can cross east on the Evergreen Point Floating Bridge to its suburb of Bellevue.
This home of the Pike Place market and Pioneer Square is the seat of King County, and visitors can ascend
a structure, built for the 1962 World's Fair, whose circular observation deck offers views of Puget Sound.
For 10 points, name this home of the Space Needle, the largest city in Washington State.
ANSWER: Seattle, Washington
It's not Rome, but Mount Baker neighborhood lies on one of the "seven hills" that this city was built
on. The suburb of Issaquah is on Lake Sammamish near it. The Duwamish River flows into Elliott
Bay near this city, and the Kitsap Peninsula lies to the west of this city. Bellevue is one of its eastern
suburbs, and it is located near the Olympic Mountains. Known as the (*) "Emerald City", this seat of
King County contains Pike Place Market. One of its landmarks was built for the 1962 World's Fair and has
a "hovering disk" at its top. This city on Puget Sound features the Space Needle. For 10 points, name this
most populous city in the state of Washington.
ANSWER: Seattle, Washington
This city lies northeast of Vashon Island and southeast of Admiralty Inlet, and its Pioneer Square is
home to the Smith Tower. It contains Pike Market Place as well as a Central Library designed by
Rem Koolhaas. Lake Washington borders this city to the east, and the Duwamish River flows
through this city before emptying into Elliot Bay. (*) Bellevue and Redmond are a part of the
metropolitan area of this city, which is home to a building designed by Frank Gehry, the Experience Music
Project. This city lying on Puget Sound is home to the Space Needle. For ten points, name this most
populous city in Washington.
ANSWER: Seattle
Music events in this city include the Earshot Jazz Festival and Bumbershoot. This city's native son
Joshua Ramus joined Rem Koolhas to design its public library. The namesake of this city ceded the land for
it in the Treaty of Port Elliott. Suburbs including Everett, Bellevue, and Redmond surround this city. A
major landmark here was built for the 1962 World's Fair and provides a view of Mount Rainier from its
top. For 10 points, name this city on Puget Sound, the home of the Space Needle in Washington.
ANSWER: Seattle
Beneath this city's Aurora Bridge is a giant sculpture of a creature called the Fremont Troll. Its
founding, on Alki Point, is usually attributed to the Denny Party. Among its skyscrapers are the Smith
Tower and the Columbia Center, and its suburbs include Magnolia and Wallingford. The most notable
landmark in this city was built for the 1962 World's Fair and provides views of such sites as Elliott Bay and
Mount Rainier. For 10 points, name this city, home to the Space Needle, found in the U.S. state of
Washington.
ANSWER: Seattle
This city is located near Lake Washington, whose namesake ship canal is an important waterway
for its commercial activities; another important channel is the Duwamish Waterway, which leads
directly to its artificially created Harbor Island. Found east of the Kitsap Peninsula, it was the site of
the 1983 Wah Mee Massacre in its Chinatown district. It hosted the 1962 World's Fair, which led to
the construction of its most notable building. The Frank Gehry designed (*) Experience Music Project
can also be found here. For 10 points, name this city near Mount Rainier home to the Space Needle.
ANSWER: Seattle
One river of this name is found in Ontario and is the namesake of a series of Precambrian rocks that are
similar to the Knife Lake Series and adjacent to the Keewatin Series. Tributaries of another river of this
name form in the Morvan highlands, an extension of Massif Central. The "mascaret" is the phenomenon of
tidal bore between the mouth of this river and the English Channel. Cities that lie on this river include
Rouen and Troyes. It has two natural islands, Ile Saint-Louis and Ile de la Cite, both located where it passes
through the largest city on its banks. For 10 points, identify this river which cuts through Paris.
ANSWER: Seine River
This river's namesake tidal bore, also called le mascaret, was eliminated by the early 70s due to
dredging. Rising on the Langres plateau, and repeatedly used by Viking conquerors, this river's
many [*] bridges include the cable-stayed Pont de Normandie and the Pont Neuf. An intellectual hotbed
along this river, which empties at Le Havre in the north, was the Left Bank, and it originates in the
Burgundy Alps. For 10 points, name this second-longest river in France, which flows through Paris.
ANSWER: Seine River
A left-bank tributary of this river is unique in that it rises in impermeable crystalline highlands, a
northward extension of the Massif Central known as Morvan, and is the Yonne. The most dangerous
winter flood of this river occurred in 1910. The tidal bore in this river, known as (+) mascaret, has
been virtually eliminated through dredging. The Vikings used this river in their 885 to 886 siege of
the most notable city this river flows through. This river empties into the English Channel at (*) Le
Havre. After the Loire, it is the longest river in France. For 10 points, identify this river that flows through
Paris.
ANSWER: Seine River
In the 1960s, attempts were made to control the tidal bores on this river, known as "le mascaret."
This river rises in the Langres plateau, near Dijon, and its tributaries include the (+) Oise and Marne
Rivers. The Pont Neuf was constructed over this river. After flowing past Rouen, this river flows into
the English Channel near the port city of (*) Le Havre. Landmarks located near this river's course
include the Cathedral of Notre-Dame and the La Sainte-Chapelle, constructed by Louis IX. For 10 points,
name this river that flows past the Ile de la Cite in Paris.
ANSWER: Seine River
The Diola people in the southern Casamance region have long waged a separatist conflict in this nation.
The city of Kaolack lies along Saloum River, a major waterway along which mangrove forests have been
dying out. The Wolof, Pular and Serer peoples together make up a large majority of the population, which
is almost entirely Muslim. This former French colony surrounds Gambia and was once part of the
Federation of Mali. For 10 points, name this country formerly ruled by Leopold Senghor, the westernmost
continental nation of Africa, whose capital is Dakar.
ANSWER: Senegal
The second largest city in this country, Touba, is the holy city for the Mouride Brotherhood. In a 2012
presidential election in this nation, Macky Sall defeated the incumbent, Abdoulaye Wade. Saint (LOO-ee)
Louis lies on the mouth of the river named for this nation. That river also forms the entire border between
this nation and its northern neighbor, Mauretania. The capital of this nation lies on the Cap-Vert, the
westernmost point of mainland Africa. For 10 points, the infamous House of Slaves lies in Dakar, the
capital of which West African nation?
ANSWER: Republic of Senegal
In 2008, this nation's westernmost region, Kedougou, separated from Tambacounda, which contains this
nation's highest point near Nepen Diakha. Its city of Kaolack lies on the Saloum River. The MDFC has
been a terrorist group active in Ziguinchor, a main city of its Casamance Region. It contains Goree Island,
the location of The House of the Slaves. This country's capital lies on the Cape Verde Peninsula near the
westernmost point of continental Africa and is home to Leopold Sedar Senghor Airport. This country is the
only neighbor of another comprising the shores of a namesake river, at the mouth of which lies Banjul. It is
separated from its northern neighbor, Mauritania, by a river sharing its name. For 10 points, name this
nation which completely surrounds the Gambia and has capital at Dakar.
ANSWER: Republic of Senegal [or Republique du Senegal]
In 2010, this country opened the Monument of African Renaissance, which was built by North Korean
laborers and which this country's president claimed a thirty-five percent commission on because it was his
idea. With its smaller neighbor, this country is the site of over 1,000 stone circles used to mark burial
mounds. Locations in this country that played an important role in the slave trade include Saint-Louis and
the site of the Maison des Esclaves, the island of Goree. The Gambia is almost entirely surrounded by this
country. For 10 points, name this country, home to the westernmost point in Africa and the city of Dakar.
ANSWER: Senegal
A sculpture of a woman named "Yaye Boye" sits blowing a horn in this country's monument, the Door
of the Millenium. The Sufi order Mouride is based in its city of Touba. It is north of Guinea-Bissau. This
country is the westernmost part of mainland Africa and completely surrounds the Gambia. For 10 points,
name this African country with capital at Dakar.
ANSWER: Senegal
One island in this nation was home to the mixed-race "signares" (sig-NAR-eez). That island, Goree
(GOR-ay) Island, was once the largest slave trading center in Africa. Though this country's official
language is French, many inhabitants also speak Wolof. This nation is north of (*) Guinea-Bissau, and
its eastern border is split between Mali and Mauritania. This country's Cap Vert [CAP VARE] peninsula
contains the westernmost point in Continental Africa. For 10 points, name this country that has capital at
Dakar and completely surrounds the Gambia.
ANSWER: Republic of Senegal [or Republique du Senegal]
A mole inhabiting this archipelago has been rendered nearly extinct due to the proliferation of goats on
these islands. This archipelago, which is sometimes called the "Pinnacle Islands", was annexed on January
14, 1895, by a country which now celebrates that date as "Pioneering Day." Near these islands, a fishing
trawler collided with patrol boats in 2010. This archipelago was purchased from a private owner in 2012.
Consisting of three rocks and five uninhabited islands, it is bounded by the Okinawa Trough to the south.
For 10 points, name these islands in the East China Sea angrily contested by Japan and China.
ANSWER: Senkaku Islands [or Diaoyu Islands; or Tiaoyutai Islands; or Pinnacle Islands before mention]
This city contains a building with green curves on its exterior, the Hana Bank Building. The tallest
skyscrapers in this city are the 63 Building, Tower Palace Three, and Hyperion Tower. Most of this city is
between Bukhan and Namsan Mountains, the latter of which has a large tower on it. This city also has the
Banpo Bridge, which contains the Moonlight Rainbow Fountain and crosses over the Han River. It is
located near Inchon and the Yellow Sea. Name this city whose metropolitan area is the second-largest in the
world, the capital of South Korea.
ANSWER: Seoul
In the northern part of this city is the Bongeunsa Buddhist temple, and its Topgol Park is the site of the
beginning of its nation's March 1st Movement. The Jongno, a major east-west road in this city, ends at the
Great East Gate, the Dongdaemun. The Namhangang runs west through this city, the central district of
which is the Jung-Gu, where the Palace of Serene Harmony was built by the Joseon Dynasty. Also home to
the Olympic Stadium built for hosting the 1988 summer games, FTP what is this capital of South Korea?
ANSWER: Seoul
This city's neighborhood of Insa gained popularity with international tourists during the 1988 Summer
Olympics. The Moonlight Rainbow Fountain can be found along this city's Banpo Bridge, which runs over
the Han River. It has been home to several incarnations of the "Blue House" executive residence. This city
is connected to the amphibious landing site of Incheon by an extensive subway system, and it contains
districts such as Gangnam. For ten points, name this capital city of South Korea.
ANSWER: Seoul Special City
This city's highest point is a tower with a notable teddy bear museum on Namsan, while in the north,
Bukhansan is this city's tallest mountain. Attractions in this city include Yeoui Island as well as the world's
largest indoor theme park, Lotte World, and the 14th century dynastic halls, the "Five Grand Palaces". The
Han River runs through this city, and it shares an administrative region with Gyeonggi Province and
Incheon. This city, which resides in the second largest metropolitan area in Asia, contains districts like
Gangseo and Gangnam. For 10 points, name this capital of South Korea.
ANSWER: Seoul Special City
One tradition from this country is the "three-finger salute," an extension of the thumb, index, and middle
fingers that is meant to represent patriotism. Villages in this nation hold a tree called the zapis holy, while
families in this country celebrate their patron saint on Slava. Its third-largest city is served by Constantine
the Great Airport, and its namesake language was reformed by Vuk Karadzic. The Morava is a tributary of
the Danube in this nation, whose other rivers include the Tisa and Sava. Cities in this nation include Nis
and Novi Sad. For 10 points, name this Balkan country from which Kosovo has declared independence.
ANSWER: Republic of Serbia
This region contains the Ngorongoro Highlands, which were once part of its namesake national park. The
natrocarbonatite lava that erupts from this region's volcano, Oldoinyo Lengai, northwest of the city of
Arusha, is responsible for its lack of trees. The Grimeti River runs through this region's center, while on its
northern edge, the Mara River feeds the Maasai Mara Reservoir. These locations, as well as the Olduvai
Gorge, are visited twice a year by two million wildebeests and zebras as a part of a long circular route.
Lying beside the Great Rift Valley, for 10 points, name this plain of Tanzania and Kenya, home to a hugeass migration.
ANSWER: the Serengeti Plain [generously prompt on Tanzania before it is read]
A yearly event in this region typically congregates around the confluence of the Mara and Grumeti
Rivers. This region's lone volcano, Ol Doinyo Lengai, is the only one in the world that erupts
natrocarbonatite lava. The south of this region contains the large, seasonal Lake Eyasi. Jakaya Kikwete has
supported a controversial proposed road through this region. The national park named for this region
borders a conservation area named for Ngorongoro crater that contains Olduvai Gorge. The
northernmost part of this region is the Maasai Mara in Kenya. For 10 points, name this region of Tanzania
that is home to a massive wildebeest migration.
ANSWER: the Serengeti [accept Serengeti National Park]
Two varieties of a prominent species in this region are named for Thomson and Grant. A proposed highway
that would cut through this region known as "The Road" has been met with staunch opposition by
conservation groups. This area is also home to a number of discoveries of early hominid remains, including
the site of much of Mary and Louis Leaky's investigations, Olduvai Gorge. Each June sees the beginning of
a massive northward and westward migration across this region toward Lake Victoria. For 10 points, name
this region of Kenya and Tanzania known for its rich diversity of animal species, including wildebeests,
buffalo, and zebras.
ANSWER: the Serengeti Plain
This city hosts the amusement park "Hell's Street" and is decorated with exclusive pavilions called
casetas during its "April Fair." A few miles outside of this city, tourists can visit the Roman ruins at Italica.
A dodecagonal watch tower called the "Torre del Oro" overlooks this city. This city's cathedral houses the
Tomb of Christopher Columbus and is the largest Gothic cathedral in Europe. This city is home to a
minaret converted into a belltower now called "La Giralda," as well as the Alcazar Palace of Pedro the
Cruel. It is located along the Guadalquivir River. For 10 points, name this capital of Spain's Andalusia
region.
ANSWER: Seville, Spain [or Sevilla]
This city's Xintiandi shopping area is made up of traditional stone houses known as shikumen. The Lupu
Bridge, the world's longest arched bridge, crosses the Huangpu River, which divides this city into its old
and new sections. The Pudong New District contains this city's international airport, which is served by the
world's first commercial maglev train. During the late 19th century, parts of the Puxi section of this city
were divided into International and French concessions, which remain as distinct neighborhoods today. For
10 points, name this city, the largest in mainland China.
ANSWER: Shanghai
This Asian city contains a stadium called the Mercedes-Benz Arena. The City God Temple and the
She Shan Basilica can be found in this city, which also contains Yuyuan Garden and a namesake
World Financial Center skyscraper that has a trapezoidal aperture at its peak. Lujiazui lies within
this city's (*) Pudong district, which is home to the Oriental Pearl Tower and Jinmao Tower, across the
Huangpu River from which lies the Bund. This city lies north of Hangzhou Bay and downstream from
Nanjing on the Yangtze River. For ten points, name this most populous Chinese city.
ANSWER: Shanghai
Parks in this city include one called Riverside Promenade which offers a view of a section of the city called
the Bund that contains numerous buildings built by the British and French. This city's Century Park is its
largest, located in Pudong, and other attractions include the Jade Buddha Temple which contains the Hall of
the Kings of Heaven. A tea house is located in the center of a lake in this city located near the Yu Garden.
This city is located just south of Hengsha Island and east of Lake Tai, the source of the Huangpu River
which bisects this city, but more notable is this city's location on the delta of the Yangtze. For 10 points,
name this Chinese port city located east of Nanjing on the East China Sea.
ANSWER: Shanghai
This city's Dashijie, or Great World, is its leading theater, and the Bund is its waterfront thoroughfare.
Pudong was once this city's largest slum, and Suzhou Creek runs through its center. Its Yangjingbang Canal
once separated this city's French and British concessions, and it is located at the confluence of the Huangpu
and Yangtze rivers. For 10 points name this Chinese port city, the home of the Oriental Pearl Tower.
ANSWER: Shanghai
From this city's Riverside Promenade Avenue, one can see the British and French buildings found along its
Bund. Yuyuan Garden lies within its City God Temple, or Cheng Huang Miao. The site of the world's
longest arch bridge, this city's main shopping center is Nanjing Road. Its "New" district contains Century
Park and an iconic TV tower, as well as the Maglev train line serving its its Pudong International Airport.
Slated to host the World Expo 2010, it is bisected by the Huangpu River, a tributary of the Yangtze. For 10
points, name this largest city in China.
ANSWER: Shanghai
This city contains the 88-story Jin Mao Tower, the Yuyuan Garden, and the City God Temple. This city's
hosting of the 2010 World Expo led to the reopening of its waterfront, the Bund. Its Pudong district is a
Special Economic Zone. The Huangpu (WONG-poo) River flows through this city, which is a
province-level municipality bounded by Zhejiang (JEH-jang) Province, Jiangsu (JANG-soo) Province, and
the East China Sea. For 10 points, name this city whose population of 23,000,000 makes it the largest in
China.
ANSWER: Shanghai, China
It's not Palm Beach or Kirkcudbright, but the St. Ignatius Cathedral in this city was designed by
William Doyle. The art deco Sassoon house in this city is now the Peace Hotel. Other notable
buildings, such as the Development Tower and the Oriental Pearl Tower, lie on the western bank of
the [*] Huangpu River. This city's main airport, served by the world's first commercial Maglev train
system, is called Pudong International Airport. Including neighborhoods like the Bund, for 10 points, name
this city that lies between Hangzhou Bay and the Yangtze River Delta, China's most populous urban area.
ANSWER: Shanghai
This city is home to Longhua Park and the People's Park, and this city's surrounding islands include
Hengsha and Chongming. This city's Yuyuan Garden is located near the city of Suzhou, and religious
sites in this city include the Hall of the Great Hero and the Jade Buddha Temple. This city contains a
Europeanized section called the Bund, and the World Financial Center, Pearl Twoer, and Jin Mao Building
are located in its Pudong area. Located in Jiangsu Province on the Huangpo River near the mouth of the
Yangtze River, for 10 points, name this site of the 2010 World Expo and largest city in China.
ANSWER: Shanghai
Newer sections of this city are built up south of Yanan Road and along the Suzhou River, in the
Bund area that was built around its International Settlement. This home of the Oriental Pearl Tower
was where the (+) Gang of Four's power base lay. The twenty-three million people within the urban
limits of this city make it the (*) largest city proper, though not largest metro area, on Earth. For 10
points, name this city at the delta of the Yangtze, on China's Pacific coast.
ANSWER: Shanghai [or Hu; or Shen]
Beginning at al-Qurnah, the area surrounding this river once had the largest date palm forest in the world.
The lower course of thisriver is bordered by Abadan island on its north and the al-Faw peninsula on the
south. Its third largest tributary, the Karun River, joins its downstream of Basra. This river was the site of
intense conflict between the two countries that share most of it, and it is also known as the Arvand Rud. For
10 points, name this river that receives the waters of the Tigris and Euphrates, and whose name literally
means "River of the Arabs".
ANSWER: Shatt al-Arab [accept Arvand Rud before mentioned]
One polity in this region was led from a fortress at Qashliq by rivals of the Shibanid Mongols, and was
defeated by a man hired by Semyon Stroganov who drowned while trying to swim the Wagay river. That
man was Yermak. One region in this polity was designated as a resettlement zone for Jews to counter the
arguments of Zionists like Ber Borochov. This region's settlements include Mangazeya and Tobolsk. A
major extinction event was caused when this region's Traps erupted 250 million years ago. Major rivers in
this region include the Lena, Yenisey, Ob, and the Angara, which drains Lake Baikal. For 10 points,
identify this portion of Russia east of the Urals, where one might have been exiled under the czar or sent to
a gulag under the Soviet Union.
ANSWER: Siberia
This region contains the largest nickel-copper-palladium deposits in the world. An example of
Denisova hominins called "Woman X" was found in a cave in this region, which has namesake "traps"
responsible for the "Great Dying" extinction event. Those punished under the katorga system were sent
here. This region was the site of the 1908 Tunguska Event and was home to numerous labor camps called
gulags. For ten points, name this large geographical region extending eastward from the Urals in North Asia,
which takes up three-quarters of Russia.
ANSWER: Siberia [prompt on Russia, etc. until "namesake" is read]
Taiwan claims Tuva and other lands located in the southern portion of this region, while this region's
deepest lake is divided into three basins by underwater ridges. The Lena River in this region
eventually flows into the Laptev Sea. The Sea of Okhotsk is surrounded by this region's (*)
Kamchatka Peninsula. The longest railway in this region ends in Vladivostok, and Lake Baikal is located
here. Forest and tundra cover this region usually defined as being east of the Ural Mountains. For ten points,
name this cold eastern region of Russia.
ANSWER: Siberia (accept Russia before region is said; prompt on "Russia" after that)
This province introduced the policy that linked farmers- income to actual output, and it is the location
of the ancient Dujiangyan irrigation system. This province contains three autonomous prefectures,
including the Aba Tibetan, and it is the location of the cottage of the poet Du Fu. Prior to the separation of
Chongqing from it in 1997, it was the most populous province in China. It was also the site of a 2008
earthquake that killed thousands. This province is the location of the Wolong Nature Reserve, a sanctuary
for an animal principally found in this province, the giant panda. For 10 points, name this second largest
Chinese province with capital at Chengdu.
ANSWER: Sichuan [or Ssu-ch-uan; or Szechwan]
Neijiang is the center of this province's sugar industry, and its second-most populous city is Mianyang, a
major electronics hub. This province's city of Leshan, located at the confluence of the Dadu and Min
Rivers, boasts the world's largest carved stone Buddha. Its Wenchuan County, which contains the Wolong
Nature Preserve, made news in May 2008. This province is located south of Gansu, north of Yunnan, and
east of Tibet. Before Chongqing became an independent municipality in 1997, it was China's most
populous province. Chengdu is the capital of, for 10 points, which panda-infested province that was
devastated by a 2008 earthquake?
ANSWER: Sichuan
Its province of Trapani includes the Egadi Islands, as well as Pantelleria Island. Rivers here include several
named for Acis, whose killer lived by its active volcano, as well as the Salso and Simeto. Its nine provinces
also include Ragusa, Enna, and Agrigento, and it was known as Trinacria to the Romans on account of its
shape. One province on this island contains the Aeolian Islands, and is separated from Reggio by the Strait
of Messina. FTP, name this island, home to Palermo and Syracuse, as well as Mount Etna, and the largest in
the Mediterranean.
ANSWER: Sicily accept Sicilia
This island is home to the Temple E. A triskelion with Medusa's head and three legs appears on this
island's flag and may symbolize this island's triangular shape. The coppola is a traditional cap of this
island south of the (*) Tyrrhenian Sea that was once colonized as part of Magna Graecia. Scylla and
Charybdis were said to occupy the strait between this island and mainland Europe. This island contains the
largest active Volcano in Europe. That strait is Messina and that volcano is Mt. Etna. For 10 points, there
was a Kingdom of Two of what island that lies just off the tip of the boot of Italy.
ANSWER: Sicily
The world's oldest known chestnut tree grows in this island's town of Naro. The Hyblaean Mountains are in
this island's south, and the Madonie Mountains are in its north. On this island, the Salso River flows
through the province of Enna. Catania is on its coast, as is Marsala, while the Aeolian Islands in the
Tyrrhenian Sea lie just off of this island. A proposal to connect this island to the mainland of the country it
belongs to would bridge the Strait of Messina. Syracuse and the volcano Mount Etna lie on this island,
whose capital is Palermo. For 10 points, name this largest island in the Mediterranean, located off the toe of
Italy.
ANSWER: Sicily [or Sicilia]
A low, formerly submarine volcanic chain that includes Mount Raci on this island is known as the Hyblaean
Mountains. To this island's north lie a series of islands known for pumice and sulfur mining, including
Lipari. The Simeto River on this island rises in the Nebrodi Mountains. This island's southeast features
thousands of square-cut rock tombs known collectively as the Necropolis of Pantalica. This island contains
the remains of the Greek colony of Selinunte as well as a number of Doric-style temples at Agrigento.
Separated from mainland by the strait of Messina and located south of the Tyrrhenian Sea, for 10 points,
identify this island that contains Mount Etna, located next to the boot of Italy.
ANSWER: Sicily
Early inhabitants of this island included the Elymi. This island is home to an archaeological site
called the Valley of the Temples. According to legend, the philosopher Empedocles jumped into a
volcano on this island. It was the birthplace of criminal groups called the (*) Mafia. This island lies
west of the Strait of Messina and north of the Malta Channel. For 10 points, name this large Mediterranean
island that is home to Mount Etna and the city of Palermo.
ANSWER: Sicily
This region wholly contains the Simeto River. The namesake of this region's most expansive plain is
the city of Catania, which is the tenth largest city in its nation, just behind Bari. Off the northern
coast of this island lies Lipari, which is part of the archipelago of the Aeolian Islands, which also
includes Vulcano and (*) Stromboli. This large island is broken up into nine provinces including Ragusa.
A proposed suspension bridge would link this massive island to Calabria across the Strait of Messina.
Syracuse is located in, for 10 points, what largest island in the Mediterranean, located just southwest of
Italy's boot?
ANSWER: Sicily
The largest city on this island is enclosed by its namesake bay and the Golden Shell. This island contains
the capes of Lilibeo, Passero, and Peloro. The Battle of the Crimissus was fought here. Ancient cities on
this island included Selinus. The Aegadian Islands lie just to the west of this one, and a namesake strait to
its south contains the Pelagie Islands, which include Linosa and Lampedusa. The ancient home of Segesta,
this island saw a huge eruption in 1669 that created Monti Rossi. Like the Isle of Man, this island's flag
contains a triskelion. The Simeto River passes near its plain of Catania. It is separated from the mainland by
the Strait of Messina, and the Tyrrhenian Sea lies to its north. For 10 points, name this large Italian island
home to Mt. Etna and Palermo.
ANSWER: Sicily [or Sicilia]
The Peace of Caltabellotta recognized Frederick III as ruler of this polity, which is home to such
waterways as the Simeto and Salso Rivers. Inhabited in its earliest days by the Sicani people, this
polity found south of the Aeolian Islands was the site of a 1282 rebellion that took its name from a
Catholic prayer known as the (*) Vespers. Found on the western side of the Strait of Messina, this island
south of the Tyrrhenian Sea contains the cities of Marsala, Catania, Syracuse, and Palermo. For 10 points,
identify this largest Mediterranean island found off the southwestern edge of Italy.
ANSWER: Sicily
After a naval reaction to a revolution in 1848 on this island, King Ferdinand II earned the nickname King
Bomba. Cape Punta [POON-tah] del Faro is found off the coast of this island. The Simeto [see-MAY-toe]
River flows through this island's province of Catania [kah-TAHN-yah]. The ancient Akagras Agrigentum
[ah-KAH-grahs ah-gree-GENT-oom] was built on this island. Its gorges include the Valley of the Oxen and
the Alcantara [ahl-kahn-TAHR-ah] River Park. Its major cities include Messina, Palermo, and Syracuse.
Name this island off the southern tip of Italy.
ANSWER: Sicily
The Mende and the Temne are the largest ethnic groups in this nation, and much of its commerce goes
through the Queen Elizabeth II Quay in its capital city. The capital of this country has a small population of
people calling themselves Creoles, and they are disproportionately represented in this country's Parliament,
which is located on Tower Hill. This country recently saw the election of Ernest Koroma as President,
which followed the conclusion of this country's massive civil war in 2002. Like Angola, other problems
faced by this country include a massive blood diamond industry. Bordered by Guinea and Liberia, this is,
for 10 points, which country of Western Africa with capital at Freetown?
ANSWER: Republic of Sierra Leone
A people from this mountain range worship the sun god Tao Jreeku. The San Martin de Bolanos mining
community is located in this range. The Tepehuan Revolt occurred in this mountain range. Indigenous
people of this range include the Huichol and the Raramuri, who are known for their long-distance running.
The town of El Salto is south of one location in this range. Basaseachic Falls and Copper Canyon are
located in this mountain range. This mountain range runs from the Arizona-Sonoran Desert border to its
"del Sur" subrange. For ten points, name this mountain range of western Mexico.
ANSWER: Sierra Madre Occidental
This mountain range is bounded by Fredonyer Pass to the north and Tehachapi Pass to the south.
The American and Tuolumne Rivers rise in this mountain range, which contains Mono Lake and
Devil's Postpile. Mariposa Grove and Hetch Hetchy Valley can be found in one national park located
in this range, while King's Canyon names another. The General Sherman Tree is located in this
range, through which the (*) John Muir Trail runs. El Capitan and Half Dome are landmarks in this range,
which lies east of the San Joaquin Valley. This range is home to Sequoia and Yosemite National Parks, as
well as Mt. Whitney. For ten points, name this mountain range found primarily in eastern California.
ANSWER: Sierra Nevada
The Venezuelan national park by this name is found in the Cordillera de Merida and contains Mirror Peak.
The one in Europe's highest point is at Mulhacen, and has Europe's southernmost ski resort. The one in
South America is the world's highest coastal range, and includes Pico Cristobal Colon and Pico Simon
Bolivar. The North American range casts a rain shadow on Death Valley, and its high point is Mount
Whitney. For 10 points, what name do these mountain ranges share, meaning "snowy mountains" in
Spanish?
ANSWER: Sierra Nevada
Due to being caught in this mountain range in the winter, members of the Donner Party resorted to
cannibalism to survive. The Giant Sequoia, the largest tree in the world, only exists naturally on the
western slopes of this mountain range. This mountain range contains the largest alpine lake in North
America and Yosemite's Half Dome. For 10 points, name this mountain range which contains Lake Tahoe
and the highest point in the contiguous United States, Mount Whitney.
ANSWER: Sierra Nevadas
The northern extent of this range is demarcated by the Susan River and Fredonyer Pass. A lake in this
mountain range near Lone Pine was the subject of "water wars" that led it to be drained at the urging of
William Mulholland. A formation of columnar basalt, Devil's Postpile, is located on the western slope of
this mountain range, which also contains Acrodectes Peak in Kings Canyon National Park. The giant
sequoia is endemic to this mountain range, which contains the highest point in the contiguous US, Mount
Whitney. For 10 points, name this American mountain range that contains Lake Tahoe and Yosemite Valley
and straddles the California-Nevada border.
ANSWER: Sierra Nevada range
The lesser known mountain range of this name includes the largest mountain in continental Spain,
Mulhacen, and some of the southernmost ski-resorts in Europe. The better known range by this name is the
source for the Truckee River, which flows from this range's most famous lake into Pyramid Lake. This
range is the source of water for the San Joaquin River Delta to its west, though its rain shadow contributes
to making the Western Great Basin one of the driest regions in the United States. In the 1840s, the pioneers
of the Donner Party resorted to cannibalism here to survive a harsh winter. Containing such locations as
Yosemite Valley and Mount Whitney, FTP, name this American mountain range which contains Lake
Tahoe, only a small part of which is in its namesake state.
ANSWER: Sierra Nevada
A reserve on Mount Williamson in this mountain range protects its endangered Bighorn Sheep.
Canyons on the west of this mountain range include Kern Canyon, Kings Canyon, and the Hetch Hetchy
Valley. The Merced River flows from this mountain range into the Central Valley. This mountain range
extends from the Mojave Desert to the Cascades. Giant sequoia trees only grow on the western slopes of
this mountain range, which contains the highest peak in the continental US, Mount Whitney. For ten points,
name this mountain range that runs through California and Nevada.
ANSWER: Sierra Nevada
The Great and Small Bitter Lakes lie to the west of this region, and Lake Bardawil lies on its northern coast.
The ancient city of Pelusium is located in this region, which contains Mount Catherine. The Negev Desert
lies to the east of this region, and it separates the Gulf of Aqaba from the Gulf of Suez. Saudi Arabia claims
Sanafir and another island separated from this region by the Straits of Tiran. For 10 points, name this
peninsula owned by Egypt, which shares its name with a biblical mountain.
ANSWER: Sinai Peninsula
This region's north contains Lake Bardawil, which Herodotus wrote of as the army-swallowing Serbonian
Bog, and which is considered one of the Bitter Lakes on this region's western border. The Philadelphi
Corridor connects this region with a strip of land to the east. The oldest monastery in the world is located at
Mt. Catherine in this region, which also contains the Mitla Pass. The resort town of Sharm El-Sheik is in
this region's southern tip. The Gulf of Aqaba separates this region from the Arabian Peninsula, which is
separated from the mainland by the Gulf of Suez and a canal zone. For 10 points, name this Egyptian
peninsula that juts into the Red Sea.
ANSWER: Sinai Peninsula [accept Sinai Desert; prompt on Egypt]
This location was purchased from Hussein Shah on behalf of the British East India Company by Sir
Stamford Raffles. This location's urban district of Kallang would be the location of its proposed Sports
Hub. This location lies north of the Kepulauan Raiu and south of the city of Johor Bahru. Its economic
progress is due in part to a state-led industrialization program directed by Dutch economist Albert
Winsemius. Along with South Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, it is considered one of the four "Asian
Tigers". For 10 points, name this island nation, ruled for 31 years by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew,
located in Southeast Asia at the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula.
ANSWER: Singapore
This country was founded after an Anglo-Dutch Treaty in 1824 by Stamford Raffles. Pranks targeting
its Mass Rapid Transit subway doors led to its standing ban on chewing gum. The People's Action Party
has restricted speech in this country since the administration of Lee Kuan Yeuw, who allowed duty-free
trade in its ports. For ten points, name this small, economically prosperous city-state on an island which split
off from Malaysia.
ANSWER: Republic of Singapore [or Republic Singapura]
The Fountain of Wealth is located in this city's Suntec City mall, and the Marina Bay Sands resort in this
city is the most expensive building in the world. This city is home to the first nocturnal zoo, the Night
Safari. Many of this city's petrochemical companies are based on its artificial island of Jurong. The Kallang
River flows through this city's biodiverse Bishan Park. Stamford Raffles founded this city, which is
separated from Malaysia by the Straits of Johor. For 10 points, name this small city-state in Southeast Asia.
ANSWER: Republic of Singapore [or Xinjiapo Gongheguo; or Republik Singapura; or Cingkappu Kudiyarasu]
The Syonan Jinja is a Shinto shrine located on Bukit Timah in this country. Sentosa Island is a popular
tourist destination in this country, which is symbolized by a mythical creature designed by Alec
Fraser-Brunner, the Merlion. Its Jurong Island is home to many petrochemical industries, and it is
connected to its northern neighbor by Tuas Second Link. Lee Kuan Yew is the "father" of this country,
whose main island is sometimes called Pulau Ujong. Stamford Raffles turned this country's main city into
an economic hub of Asia. For 10 points, name this small island country on the tip of the Malay Peninsula.
ANSWER: Republic of Singapore
This city grew out of a settlement on Keppel Harbor. This city is connected via two causeways to the
nearby city of Johor. The Sook Ching massacre was carried out here after it was surrendered to the
Japanese. Lee Kuan Yew was the first autonomous leader of this city, which was founded by Sir Stamford
Raffles. This southernmost of the Four Asian Tigers is built on 63 islands. This city's chewing gum ban is
an example of its notoriously strict standards of cleanliness. For 10 points, name this city-state on the
southern tip of the Malay Peninsula.
ANSWER: Republic of Singapore [or Republik Singapura]
The eastern part of this country contains the Domasa Dam on the Ondava River, and its northern part
contains Gerlach Peak, the highest of the Tatra Mountains. The site of the Siege of Pressburg, this country
also is the location of the Orava, Spis, and Bojnice Castles. Its first female Prime Minister, Iveta Radicova,
took office this year. Its second largest city, located near Hungary on the Hornad River, is Kosice, while its
largest city and capital borders both Hungary and Austria. This nation became independent in 1993 when it
separated from the Czech Republic. Name this nation whose capital is Bratislava.
ANSWER: Slovakia
In this modern-day country's north, the Tatra Mountains include its highest point, Gerlachovsky Stit, and
include numerous hiking and skiing attractions. The Vah river originates in its Tatras Mountains, and flows
West and then South past cities such as Trencin and Zilina. The Spis castle is located in the Kosice region,
while Presov is the third largest city in this country, and is home to a salt mine. This country's western
border is formed by the Morava River, which also forms part of its southwestern border with Austria. For
10 points, name this country also bordered by Hungary, Ukraine, and Poland with its capital at Bratislava,
and was once paired with the Czech Republic.
ANSWER: Slovakia [or Slovak Republic; or Slovenska Republica; do not accept "Czechoslovakia"]
The Holmec Incident, in which JNA troops were supposedly killed while attempting to surrender, occurred
during this country's war of independence of a namesake length. At the end of the Ten-Day War, this
country signed the Brioni Agreement. The Julian Alps, Kamnik-Savinja Alps, and the Karavanke chain can
be found in this country, which also has a region that gives its name to a type of topography, the Kras
Plateau. This country contains part of the Drava River, a tributary of the Danube, on which the largest city
in the country's region of Lower Styria lies. That city is also home to this country's second largest airport,
Maribor Airport. It recently joined the European Union, becoming, in 2008, the first ex-Communist country
to hold the Presidency of the Council of that question. This is, for 10 points, what Slavic nation that was
formerly a part of Yugoslavia, and whose capital is at Ljubljana?
ANSWER: Republic of Slovenia
Fort Hall Indian Reservation, Massacre Rocks State Park, and Swan Falls Dam can all
be found on its banks. It rises in Two Oceans Plateau and flows 1,040 miles westward to Pasco,
Washington, where it flows into another river. American Falls, CJ Strike, Browlee, and Hells
Caynon are some of the dams on this river, which forms most of the Oregon-Idaho border. This
is for ten points what tributary of the Colombia river?
ANSWER: Snake River
Lakes lying along this river include Milner Lake and Lake Walcott near Burley and the Sawtooth
National Forrest. The travel of trappers along this river was limited by the lava banks in the area
surrounding the tributary of Henry's Fork, as well as fear after a massacre near Pierre's Hole.
Contemporary uses of this river include irrigation in the fertile Palouse Hills region and large hydroelectric
projects like the Ice Harbor Dam located near Pasco where this river ends. This river's largest tributary is
the Salmon River, which it meets just after flowing through Hells Canyon. For 10 points, identify this river
that flows through Wyoming, Idaho and Oregon before becoming the largest tributary to the Columbia
River.
ANSWER: Snake River
This question of water traditionally marks the southern boundary of the Palouse region, and the end of this
river's course includes Lake Wallula, created by the McNary Dam in Umatilla County. After flowing
southwest of Rexburgh, this river is fed by the Henrys Fork River, and eventually runs through the ski town
of Jackson Hole. This river receives the Salmon River and flows over both Shoshone Falls and Twin Falls.
This river creates the deep gorge called Hell's Canyon and forms part of the Idaho-Oregon border. For 10
points, name this river of the Northwestern United States with a serpentine name.
ANSWER: Snake River
This river's first hydroelectric dam was built at Swan Falls in 1900 to provide power to a mine in Silver
City. One large waterfall on this river is named for the Shoshone people who lived on its banks prior to
white encroachment. Due to extensive damming, its salmon run ends at Hells Canyon Dam. Rising in
western Wyoming, it passes the city of Twin Falls before joining the Columbia. FTP what is this river
perhaps named by a mistaken understanding of an undulating motion of the hands by Shoshone people, who
meant to represent fertile fishing, not a serpent.
ANSWER: Snake River
One of these buildings has "Acik" sections at its ends in addition to the opposing "Maraton" and
"Fenerium" tribunes. Plans for a new structure of this type in Education City claim its shape will be that of
a "jagged diamond." Another planned building of this type had its design inspired by the sail of a dhow and
will be called Lusail Iconic. Both of those new structures of this type will be climate controlled given
concerns about summer weather during an international event in 2022. For 10 points, name these venues
that will be built in Qatar in preparation for the FIFA World Cup.
ANSWER: soccer stadiums [or football stadiums; or stadia]
Mount Akhun overlooks this city. Yevgeny Kafelnikov was born in this city, where Maria Sharapova
first trained in her youth. A road between this city and Krasnaya Polyana has cost 200 million dollars per
kilometer. This city is located in the Krasnodar Krai, where terrible flooding occurred in 2012 and March
2013. Stalin's summer dacha was located here. This city with a humid subtropical climate is the target of
eleven billion dollars of infrastructure to connect it to the nearby Caucasus. For 10 points, name this Black
Sea resort in extreme southwest Russia that will host the 2014 Winter Olympics.
ANSWER: Sochi, Russia
Alvaro de Mendana gave this archipelago its name after discovering gold in the Mataniko River, surmising
that it once supplied gold to the Levant. It includes the islands of Santa Isabel and Choiseul and lies north of
Vanuatu and south of Nauru, the island on which John F. Kennedy found refuge when commanding PT-109
in this archipelago. Geographically, this island group also contains Bougainville, which is part of Papua
New Guinea. Most famous as the site of the World War II battle for Guadalcanal, these are, FTP, what
Melanesian islands with capital at Honiara?
ANSWER: Solomon Islands
Rob Roy Island lies to the south of Choiseul in this island chain, and a question of water named for the
preponderance of ships sunk within it, Ironbottom Sound, is located south of Savo Island in this chain. The
Santa Cruz Islands are located to the east of these islands, and New Georgia Island is located southeast of
this island chain's largest island, which is controlled by Papua New Guinea, Bougainville. The capital of its
namesake country is Honiara, which lies on this chain's second largest island, notable as the site of a 1942
turning point in World War II. For 10 points, name this Pacific Island chain located northeast of Australia
and which contains Guadalcanal.
ANSWER: Solomon Islands
Some islands in this country feature the fa abua system, in which valuables are given as compensation
for the violation of unwritten rules. This country's largest province is Malaita, which is centered at Auki.
Ironbottom Sound is south of Florida Island and Savo Island in this country, which contains a question of
water that was called "the Slot" by soldiers in World War II. East of Papua New Guinea, it encompasses the
New Georgia Sound, which runs through its middle between Bougainville and Guadalcanal. For 10 points,
name this country in Oceania formed out of almost one thousand islands and whose capital is Honiara.
ANSWER: Solomon Islands [or Solomons]
Divided into eighteen regions called gobollada, it is home to a semi-desert plain known as the Guban. The
Guban runs parallel to the Karkaar Range in this country's north. Home to only two permanent rivers, the
Jubba and the Shabele, this nation is bordered by Djibouti in the northeast, Kenya in the southwest, and
Ethiopia is to the west. Often known as the Horn of Africa and home to longest coastline on its continent,
FTP, name this country with capital at Mogadishu, famous for contemporary piracy.
ANSWER: Somalia (Also: Somali Republic)
Baidoa has been proposed as a temporary capital of this country, whose current capital is home to the Fakr
ad-Din Mosque. Its port city of Kismayo is located in a region named for the Jubba River. The northeast
section of this country, Puntland, has declared independence. Another port city in this country, Berbera, is
located along the Gulf of Aden. A battle that failed to capture Mohammed Farah Aidid, and saw the
downing of two Black Hawk helicopters occurred in its capital, Mogadishu. For 10 points, name this
country whose coast is home to many pirates.
ANSWER: Somalia [or Somali Democratic Republic]
The museum named after this natural feature is currently offering workships on aridity to its
teachers. This desert is home to the wait-a-minute tree, whose scientific name honors Josiah Gregg,
who has written about this desert. The desert bighorn sheep can be found in and around this region,
which is why the Cabeza Prieta Wildlife Refuge was established here. Mount Kofa and Mount Catalina
are two mountains in this desert, which is also home to some parts of the Gila and Colorado River. Also
home to Saguaro National Park, it is named for a Mexican State. For 10 points, identify this desert that
sprawls across Baja California, California and Arizona, a large North American desert.
ANSWER: Sonoran Desert
This desert contains a number of archaeological sites created by the Huhukam Culture. Puerto Penasco,
or "Rocky Point," is a beach resort located within this desert. A section of this desert made fertile by
irrigation is the Coachella Valley. The Colorado and Altar Deserts are part of this larger desert. This desert
contains Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, and it is the only natural home of the Saguaro cactus. For
10 points, name this North American desert which is the namesake of a Mexican state and extends into
southern Arizona.
ANSWER: Sonoran Desert [prompt on Colorado or Altar desert before they are read]
This nation was unable to spur private construction of power plants, causing the state-owned power
supplier Eskom to experience deficiencies and rolling blackouts across the region in 2007. The fossil
remains at Sterkfontein, Kromdraai and Makapansgat caves suggest australopithecus were present
in this nation 3 million years ago. It contains a vast, flat, and sparsely populated scrub-land to the
northwestern regions called the Karoo, and completely [*] surrounds the nation of Lesotho. Sporting a
large diamond mining economy, for 10 points, name this African country with three capitals at Pretoria,
Bloemfontein, and Cape Town.
ANSWER: South Africa
In 1995, this country's Ellis Park hosted the Rugby World Cup, where the All-Blacks were defeated by
this country's Springboks. This country's Witwatersrand (vit-VOT-erz-rond) is the source of the Limpopo
River. This country's False Bay is so named because many sailors confused it for Table Bay. Bantu
languages spoken in this country include Xhosa (ZOH-suh) and Zulu. For 10 points, name this country
where Cape Town and Johannesburg are.
ANSWER: South Africa
It is not Canada, but a boom in the cat population once plagued this country's Prince Edward Islands.
One sporting center in this country is found on Algoa Bay and called Port Elizabeth. A march to Orlando
Stadium was the cause of civil unrest in 1976 in Soweto, a slum district of another city here. The Cape
Mountains and the Drakensberg Mountains are both found in the country, which contains the southern
reaches of the Kalahari Desert and completely surrounds Lesotho. For 10 points, name this African nation,
home to the cities of Pretoria and Johannesburg.
ANSWER: South Africa
This country's largest city contains a skyscraper made to look like a diamond at 11 Diagonal Street and is
home to soccer teams like Kaizer Chiefs. Another of its cities lies near False Bay, so named because people
confused it with Table Bay, and once saw a forced clearing of its District Six. A narrow coastal region in
this nation is separated from the interior by the Great Escarpment. A loose analogue of white trash in this
country is called zef. Cities in its south include Stellenbosch and Port Elizabeth. This country's
Witwatersrand is the source of the Limpopo River. Durban is the largest city in its province of Kwa-Zulu-Natal, 
and its Gauteng province includes one of its three capitals, Pretoria. For 10 points, name this country
where Afrikaans is spoken in cities like Johannesburg and Cape Town.
ANSWER: Republic of South Africa [accept RSA or Republike van Suid-Afrika; if someone gives an answer in what sounds like a Bantu language, glare at them and look it up on Wikipedia, which lists the name of the country in all eleven official languages at the top of the sidebar]
A long scenic stretch along this country's southern coast is known as the "Garden Route" and
includes the Cango Caves. A large desert region in this country is known as the "Karoo," and its
highest mountain range is the Drakensberg. One city in this country has the Victoria and Alfred
Waterfront, is overlooked by Table Mountain, and is accessible by boat from Robben Island. Its
provinces include Gauteng and Limpopo and its judicial capital is at Bloemfontein. For 10 points, name this
African country with other capitals at Pretoria and Capetown.
ANSWER: Republic of South Africa
Off of this country's coast lie the Marion islands. The northeastern part of this
country contains the Highveld region, which is bordered by the Greater and Lesser
Karoo regions. This country contains the cities of Richards Bay and East London.
Its largest river includes tributaries such as the Vaal, which join near the city of
Kimberley. That larger river, the (*) Orange, arises from this country's Drakensberg
mountains. For ten points, name this country bordered by Lesotho and Namibia and whose
cities include Cape Town and Johannesburg.
ANSWER: Republic of South Africa
A type of vegetation called fynbos is found in this country, which is also home to the Karoo [kuh-ROO], a
semi-arid plateau. This country extracts natural gas offshore of Mossel Bay, and its city of Germiston is a
railroad hub. North West is one of this country's nine provinces, and Venda is one of its eleven official
languages. A political prison was once located on Robben Island seven miles offshore of this country.
Swaziland is mostly surrounded by this country, and Lesotho is completely surrounded by it. For 10 points,
name this country whose cities include Pretoria, Cape Town, and Johannesburg.
ANSWER: South Africa [or Suid-Afrika]
This country was the subject of a 2008 BBC documentary about the "law and disorder" in its capital. It
has the largest private security industry in the world and has the highest reported incident of rape in the
world. In this country, a rape trial featured a man admitting he took a shower to reduce the risk of
contracting HIV. That man on trial for rape was this country's president, the head of the African National
Congress. For ten points, name this country which maintained a prison at Robben Island where Nelson
Mandela was imprisoned during the apartheid era.
ANSWER: Republic of South Africa
Large companies based in this country include Standard Bank and the Sasol energy firm. This
country's Constitutional Court sits in a city that is served by O.R. Tambo International Airport. The
provinces of Gauteng and (*) Limpopo are found in this country, which shares its longest border with
Botswana and its shortest with Swaziland. For 10 points, name the nation where one can find the Cape of
Good Hope, Pretoria, Bloemfontein, Johannesburg and Cape Town.
ANSWER: South Africa
Addo Elephant National Park is located near one city in this nation, and another city includes the tourist
district known as the Golden Mile. Those cities in this nation are Port Elizabeth and Durban. This nation is
home to the Drakensberg Mountains and the Great Escarpment, and this nation completely surrounds the
Kingdom of Lesotho. For 10 points, name this nation whose judicial capital is in Bloemfontein and whose
legislative capital is in Cape Town.
ANSWER: Republic of South Africa
In this country, Durban and Pietermaritzburg (PEE-ter-MARE-its-burg) are in the same territory as the
city Ladysmith. The Molopo, Limpopo, and Orange rivers run on the northern border of this country. This
country's territories include Kwazulu, or Natal, and the Traansvaal and Cape territories. This country's three
capitals are Bloemfoentein (BLOOM-fawn-tain), Pretoria, and Cape Town, the last of which is on the Cape
of Good Hope. This country completely surrounds Lesotho, and once governed its northern neighbor,
Namibia. For 10 points, name this country whose largest city is Johannesburg, and which is the
southernmost country in Africa.
ANSWER: Republic of South Africa
Hector Pieterson was one of the first people killed in a student uprising in this country known as "June
16." The Drakensburg Mountains run through this country and two countries that have long borders with it,
Lesotho and Swaziland. The Soweto Uprising occurred in this country's largest city, Johannesburg. For 10
points, name this country where apartheid was practiced.
ANSWER: Republic of South Africa
Among the territorial possessions of this nation is a sub-Antarctic archipelago including Marion Island and
Prince Edward Island. The Karoo is a large desert region in this country, whose harbors include Saldanha
Bay and Richards Bay, home to the world's largest coal export center. The Drakensbergs are its highest
mountains, while the Limpopo runs between Zimbabwe and this nation, which completely surrounds
Lesotho. Recently, Kgalema Motlanthe became president of this nation, whose previous leaders include
Thabo Mbeki, and Frederik de Klerk. The Cape of Good Hope lies at the tip of, FTP, which African nation
whose capitals include Bloemfontein, Pretoria, and Cape Town?
ANSWER: South Africa
This state's wine producing Barossa Valley was first known as New Silesia because of the large
number of German immigrants who settled there. The British performed nuclear tests in the 1950s at
Maralinga in the Woomera Prohibited Region of this state, and Edward Gibbon Wakefield
advocated colonizing this region as a safety valve to combat the overpopulation of Great Britain. This
state's Yorke Peninsula separates its Gulf St. Vincent from its Spencer Gulf, and the first site of
colonization in this region was its Kangaroo Island. This state contains the eastern half of a treeless
region known as the Nullarbor Plain, as well as its country's largest question of water, Lake Eyre. The site of
the mouth of the Murray-Darling River, for 10 points, name this Australian state with capital at Adelaide.
ANSWER: South Australia
The Musgrave Ranges in the northwest part of this polity contain its highest point, Mount
Woodroffe, and in its southeast one will find the Gawler and Flinders Ranges, the latter of which is
found between Lakes Frome and Torrens. Site of Goyder's Line and the (*) Woomera Prohibited Area,
this state surrounds Spencer and St. Vincent's Gulfs, both of which lie north of Kangaroo Island. The mouth
of the Murray River, the eastern parts of the Great Victoria Desert, and Lake Eyre (AIR) all reside in, for 10
points, what Australian state whose capital is Adelaide.
ANSWER: South Australia
A standoff over the Scarborough Shoal in this question of water has been ongoing since 2012. The
Macclesfield Bank is administered under the Sansha prefecture in this question of water, which bounds the
island of Palawan along with the Sulu Sea. Brunei and Malaysia both have territorial claims in the Spratly
Islands in this sea. For 10 points, name this marginal sea of the Pacific Ocean that is bounded by Vietnam to
the west, the Philippines to the east, Indonesia to the south, and a namesake People's Republic to the north.
ANSWER: South China Sea
Some of the small pieces of land in this question of water are the Scarborough Shoal and Macclesfield
Bank. Separated by the Palawan islands from the Sulu Sea, this question of water also includes the
Spratly, Paracel, and Pratas Islands. This is northeast of the Strait of Malacca, and this question of
water is at the northern end of the Karimata Strait, which links it to the Java Sea. Its western arms
include the Gulf of Thailand and Gulf of Tonkin. Name this part of the Pacific Ocean that borders
Borneo, Vietnam, the Philippines, and the country it takes part of its name from.
ANSWER: South China Sea [prompt on China Sea or Pacific Ocean]
Clay County in this state is home to the city of Vermillion and this state's flagship university. One
geologic attraction here is the Thunder Butte, which can be seen in all directions of it for miles. Lake
Oahe and Lake Sharpe were both created from damming the Missouri River in this state. It is home
to a three-dimensional maze cave, and the densest cave system in the world is found in this state's (*)
Wind Cave National Park. This state's city of Mitchell is home to the Corn Palace, and its city of Aberdeen
was first inhabited by Sioux Indians. This state's most notable landmark is found near the city of Keystone,
was sculpted by Gutzon Borglum, and is found in the Black Hills region. For 10 points, name this U.S.
state, home to Mt. Rushmore.
ANSWER: South Dakota
The grave of Dr. Valentine McGillycuddy is located atop this state's highest point. This state is
home to two major cave systems, Jewel Cave and Wind Cave, as well as a work of art started by
Korczak Zio?kowski and the Homestake Mine. Lakes Oahe, Sharpe, and Francis Case are located on
the Missouri River in this state, which is the home of the (*) Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. Rapid City
is the fastest-growing city, though Sioux Falls is its largest city. For 10 points, what is this state that
contains the Badlands and Mount Rushmore?
ANSWER: South Dakota
Both the menacing Doubtful Sound and Browne Falls can be found on this island's region of
Fiordland. The Foveaux Strait separates this island from Stewart Island. Both the Heathcote and
Avon River flow through this island's largest city, which sits near the Banks Peninsula. In 2011, this
island's province of Canterbury was struck by a massive earthquake. This island, which is separated
from its (*) northern counterpart by the Cook Strait, is known as the "canoe of Maui" in the Maori
Language. The Southern Alps runs through portions of this island, and it is home to its country's second
largest city, Christchurch. For 10 points, name this larger of New Zealand's two main islands.
ANSWER: South Island
The industrial center of this country contains the world's largest shipyard and is called Ulsan
(OOL-sahn). The highest point here, Halla-san (HAN-la-sahn), is located on Jeju-do (JEH-joo-doh) island.
The longest river in this country, the Nakdong (NAHK-dohng), passes through Daegu (DEH-goo) and
Pusan (BOO-sahn). This country lies across the East Sea from Japan. For 10 points, name this Asian
country found below the 38th parallel, across from a Communist dictatorship to its north.
ANSWER: South Korea [or Republic of Korea; or Dae Han Min Guk; do not accept "Democrati People's Republic of Korea"]
In 1234, a man from what would become this nation is purported to have invented metal movable
type. This nation's current English name comes from its name in the 10th century, and it has also
been lobbying the International Hydrological Organization to change the name of the sea on its
eastern coast. In 2011, it was selected as a host nation for the Olympics, which will mark the first tice
the Winter Olympics will be held outside of (*) Japan in Asia. The largest corporations from this nation
are known as chaebol and include Samsung and Hyundai. For 10 points, name this country below the 38th
parallel, the site of a 1950's war with its northern neighbor.
ANSWER: South Korea or the Republic of Korea [accept Tae-han-min-guk or similar answers; prompt on "Korea" or "ROK"; do not accept "Democratic People's Republic of Korea" or "North Korea"]
Halla-san is a volcano in this nation's southernmost province, the island of Jeju. This country plans
to move government facilities to a new "special autonomous city," Sejong. This country's largest
port, north of Tsushima Island, is the southern city of (*) Busan, while the northern city of Incheon is
near a de-militarized zone crossing the 38th Parallel. For 10 points, name this peninsular Asian nation with
capital Seoul.
ANSWER: South Korea (accept Republic of Korea; accept Han'guk or Taehan-min'guk; prompt on Korea before "nation;" do not accept Democratic People's Republic of Korea)
Archaeological evidence suggests that this country was inhabited as early as the Lower Paleolithic. There
are about 3000 islands on its western and southern coast with the most notable being the Liancourt Rocks
and Socotra Rock, although most are small and uninhabited. The Nakdong River is the longest in this
country, and the Han River flows through its capital. Its highest point is Hallasan, an extinct volcano located
on Jeju Island. The Yellow Sea is located to this country's west, and the Sea of Japan is located to the east.
FTP, name this country that occupies the southern part of a namesake peninsula.
ANSWER: South Korea (also accept Republic of Korea, prompt on Korea)
Though it's not South Africa, one proposed name for this locale was Azania, and it contains the
Sudd, one of the largest swamps in the world. This region was almost named Juwama, which is a
combination of the names of the three cities Wau, Malakal, and its capital Juba, and its (*)
independence was partially brought about by the genocidal actions of the janjaweed. The Darfur region is
contained in, for ten points, what soon-to-be African country that, on July 1st, 2011, will become
independent from its northern neighbor, which has capital at Khartoum?
ANSWER: South Sudan (prompt on Sudan, do not accept North Sudan, prompt on Juwama before mentioned)
This country's east is home to Boma National Park, just east of which is another country's
Gambela National Park. The swampy Sudd is formed where the Sobat river meets the White Nile in
this country's north. John Garang proposed building a new capital here at Ramciel, a plan supported
by this country's current president, (*) Salva Kiir. For 10 points, identify this African country with its
capital at Juba, which in 2011 split from another country that is home to Khartoum.
ANSWER: Republic of South Sudan [do not accept or prompt on "Sudan"]
This region of the world is generally characterized by hot and humid weather, with monsoons in June and
December bringing heavy seasonal rainfall. The association containing this region's countries currently has
ten members, though East Timor will be a logical future member. Home to the world's largest Muslim
nation, where President Barack Obama spent part of his childhood, it is the most ecologically diverse place
on Earth. Located between China and Australia, FTP, name this region in Asia, containing countries such as
Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines and Indonesia.
ANSWER: Southeast Asia
This structure was created as a compromise between the designs of John Graham and Edward Carlson,
who proposed a giant balloon. It was financed by a group called the Pentagram Corporation. Stephen
Cosgrove proposed this building was the home of a furry creature called the Wheedle, and it also contains a
revolving restaurant called SkyCity. When constructed for the 1962 World's Fair, it was the tallest
structure west of the Mississippi River, and it was painted colors like Orbital Olive. For 10 points, name
this 605 foot tower from which people can observe the Olympic Mountains, a tower located in Seattle.
ANSWER: the Space Needle
This building's Legacy Light was unveiled on New Years' Eve 1999. A children's book by Stephen
Cosgrove posits that a furry creature called the "Wheedle" lives atop this building. John Graham was the
architect of this building constructed for the 1962 World's Fair. From its top, one can see Mount Rainier
and the Cascade Mountains. What is this tallest building in Seattle?
ANSWER: Space Needle [or the Needle]
In a children's book, Stephen Cosgrove theorized that a creature called the "Wheedle" lived on this
structure. This structure took the title of the tallest building in the West from the neighboring Smith Tower.
One of the financiers of this building had been inspired by his visit to Germany's Stuttgart Tower to suggest
its design. Victor Steinbrueck introduced the hourglass profile of this building's tower, and this building
was made by combining the designs of John Graham, Jr. and Edward Carlson. This building was built for
the 1962 World's Fair and includes the SkyCity rotating restaurant. For ten points, name this observation
tower in Seattle.
ANSWER: the Space Needle
This country controls the exclave of Llivia, and the highest point on the mainland of this country is
Mulhacen, part of the Cordillera Penibetica. This country controls Formentera, Ibiza, Menorca, and
Mallorca, which make up the (*) Balearic Islands, and this country proposed a connection to Morocco via
an underwater tunnel below the Strait of Gibraltar. Bordered on the northeast by Andorra and France, and
on the west by Portugal, for ten points, what is this country on the Iberian Peninsula with capital at Madrid?
ANSWER: Kingdom of Spain
On June 23 in this country, adults light bonfires and children jump over smaller fires in a festival called
"Hogueras". After one tradition in this country, the ear of a certain animal is given to participants. This
country's namesake omelette is made with potatoes. The pre-Christmas festival of Posadas originated in this
country. Every year, citizens of this nation gather to throw tomatoes at each other in Bunol, and a cold
tomato soup originating from this country is called gazpacho. Tapas are traditional appetizers in this
country, which is famous for its paella. For 10 points, name this country where people run away from bulls
in Pamplona and speak Catalan in Barcelona.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Spain [or Espana]
The sea resort of Blanes is known as the "Gateway" to a rugged coastline region in this country.
With
its northern neighbor, this nation jointly manages the historical conference center of Pheasant Island
in the Bidasoa river. An "extremely hard" region in this country is known for producing ham from
black pigs, whose introduction here is credited to Phoenicians who built the settlement of (*) New
Carthage. The Costa Brava region in this country was home to the rabbi Nahmanides, who lived in the city
of
Girona. Rioja wine originates in this setting of Un chien andalou, whose 1978 constitution created its
autonomous communities of Extremadura and Asturias. For 10 points, name this original home of the "man
of La Mancha" from Castille.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Spain [or Reino de Espana]
An official language in one region of this country is Aranese. The south of this country speaks a
dialogue with "seseo," a merging of the "th" and "s" sounds. A group which speaks a language isolate in
this country is represented by the militant "Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (yoo-SKAH-dee tah
ah-ska-tah-SOO-nuh)." The only non-Romance language spoken in this country is common in Biscay and
Bilbao. For 10 points, name this country which has such official languages as Basque and Catalan, which is
spoken in Barcelona.
ANSWER: Spain [or Espana]
According to Pliny the Elder's Natural History, this monument was the burial place of King Harmais.
The first modern excavation of this monument was conducted by Giovani Caviglia. A popular tale about
this sculpture is that its nose was supposedly blown off by Napoleon's troops. It is thought that this
monument was built by Pharaoh Khafra during the Old Kingdom, thus making it the oldest known
monumental sculpture in the world. For 10 points, name this large limestone monument of a lion's question
and a human head that is located near a similarly named "Great Pyramid" in Egypt.
ANSWER: Great Sphinx of Giza
On its northern coast is Point Pedro, and its rivers include the Yan Oya and Aruvi Aru. Off its coast
is Delft island, and the Victoria Falls Reservoir is in its center. Its largest mountain is Pidurutalagala,
and the North Eastern province's capital is Trincomalee. The peninsula on its northern tip connected
by Elephant Pass and is named after the city Jaffna, which has been a rebel base. It got one of its
former names from the city Kandy. The (*) Adam's bridge connects it to the mainland, and spans the
Palk Straight. Buddhism was brought here by Ashoka's son Mahinda. FTP name this island nation which
has had an ongoing civil war between the southern Sinhalese and the northern Tamils, who practice
Hinduism, with a de facto capital at Colombo and which is near India.
ANSWER: Sri Lanka
In this nation, the Sacred Footprint appears at the base of Adam's Peak. It also includes the
southeastern Uva basin, and the coastal town of Mullaitivu, where Prabhakaran was recently killed,
and its longest river is the Mahaweli. Separated from the [*] mainland by Palk Strait next to its Jaffna
peninsula, and formerly known as Serendib, this island saw the 2009 end of a long civil war fought by the
extremist Tamil Tigers. For 10 points, name this island just off the coast of India with capital at Colombo,
formerly known as Ceylon.
ANSWER: Sri Lanka [prompt on "Ceylon" before read"]
In August 2010, the Saudi employers of a maid from this country pounded 24 nails and needles into her
question. The port city of Galle in the southwest of this country was destroyed in 2004, although the economy
in northern cities such as Trincomalee has been improving recently because of political reconciliation.
Much of this country's tourist industry centers on Kandy, a city that houses one of the Buddha's teeth, and
one of this country's major industries is growing tea. This country's northern city of Jaffna, located near the
Palk Strait, has been safer since the 2009 defeat of the Tamil Tigers. For 10 points, name this country once
known as Ceylon whose capital city is Colombo.
ANSWER: Sri Lanka
The southern part of this country is home to Ruhunu National Park, and Wilpattu National Park is in its
northeast. This country's four major rivers all begin at the same mountain, Adam's Peak. The Jaffna
peninsula is in the north of this island. A chain of islands known as Adam's Bridge separates the Gulf of
Mannar and the Palk Strait, which both separate this island nation from a larger landmass. FTP, name this
island nation with capital Colombo, which was once known as Ceylon.
ANSWER: The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (prompt on "Ceylon" before mentioned)
The ancient city of Sigiriya lies in this island's center, and Adam's Bridge connects it to the
mainland. Its Horton's Plains National Park includes Adam's Peak, and its southern city of Galle was
devastated in the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. Sinhalese Buddhists are the majority here, and (*)
Tamil separatists recently laid down arms here. Formerly known as Ceylon and with capital at Colombo, for
10 points, name this island nation southeast of India.
ANSWER: Sri Lanka
Agriculture in this nation is distinguished between wet farming in and around cities such as Kandy in its
central portion and dry farming in regions such as its Northern Jaffna Peninsula. The Central Highlands of
this nation contain its highest point of Pidurutalagala. The mouth of the Kelani river in the west is the site of
this nation's largest city of Colombo and its nearby capital, and this country was once connected by Adam's
Bridge to the region of Tamil Nadu. For 10 points, name this island nation located southwest of the Bay of
Bengal and southeast of the Indian Subcontinent.
ANSWER: Sri Lanka
This nation's northern end is Jaffna Peninsula. This nation is nearly connected to its northwestern neighbor
by a chain of limestone shoals called Adam's Bridge, but is in fact separated by the Palk Strait and the Gulf
of Mannar. Although the Sinhalese people are the majority in this country, a minority ethnic group sponsors
the militant Tamil Tigers. For 10 points, name this island nation that was once called Ceylon and is located
to the southeast of India.
ANSWER: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Two of this island's national parks, Yala and Wittapu, contain some of the highest concentrations of
leopards in the world. This island's longest river receives the Kotmale Oya, and empties into the sea
at the harbor of Trincomalee, the Mahaweli. A chain of limestone shoals links this island with the
mainland and is known as (*) "Adam's Bridge," and it is bound on the west by the Gulf of Mannar. This
island was the location of the kingdom of Kandy, and the Palk Strait separates its Jaffna peninsula from the
mainland. Formerly known as both Serendib and Ceylon, for 10 points, name this tear-drop shaped island
nation known for its production of tea, located in the Bay of Bengal, and with capital at Colombo.
ANSWER: Sri Lanka
This island's longest river, the Mahaweli, empties into the sea near the city of Trincomalee, and a series of
shoals connecting this island to the mainland is called Adam's Bridge.This country's north contains the
Jaffna Peninsula and bodies of water surrounding this island include the Gulf of Mannar and the Palk
Straight. Known in previous times as Serendib and Ceylon, for 10 points, identify this tea-producing island
nation located in the Bay of Bengal, which is home to the Tamil Tigers guerrilla group and has its capital at
Colombo.
ANSWER: Sri Lanka
Explorer James Tennant theorized that this nation's town of Galle was the site of Tarshish, a port
where King Solomon once docked. In the north of this nation is the Jaffna Peninsula and a formation
of shoals called Adam's Bridge, which the Palk Strait and the Gulf of Mannar separate from the
mainland. This island's longest river, the Mahaweli, eventually flows into the Bay of Bengal. The
majority ethnic group in this nation is the Sinhalese, but its Northern Province has a Tamil majority.
Its Kandy District produces a lot of tea. Name this nation with the cities Kotte and Colombo that
is southeast of India and was called Ceylon by the British.
ANSWER: Sri Lanka [prompt on Ceylon]
One World Heritage Site in this country is the Sigiriya fortress, which has been inhabited by monks since
the fifth century. Satellite images have found a land bridge submerged underwater connecting this nation to
the mainland, which is named Adam's Bridge. Its highest point is Pidurutalagala, which serves as a military
base, and the longest river in this country is the Mahaweli. It is separated from the mainland by the Palk
Strait, which is close to the Jaffna Peninsula, and this country saw the defeat of the extremist Tamil Tigers
in 2009. Formerly known as Ceylon, For 10 points, name this island nation south of India with capital at
Colombo.
ANSWER: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka [accept Shri Lamka or Ilankai; prompt o Ceylon]
Ivan Michurin's restoration of this building after a 1737 fire removed a history of this place that had
been added in a small inscription in 1683. Redevelopment done on this building by Joseph Bove created its
namesake square. This church was headed by Ioann Vostorgov during World War I. According to tradition,
this church was built by Postnik Yakovlev. The tsar who ordered the construction of this church was so
impressed with it that he blinded the architect who designed it. This church is often mistaken for the
Kremlin and was built to honor Ivan the Terrible's conquest of Kazan. For ten points, name this eight-domed
church in Moscow.
ANSWER: St. Basil's Cathedral [or the Cathedral of the Protection of Most Holy Theotokos on the Moat; or Pokrovsky Cathedral; or Cathedral of Vasily the Blessed; prompt on Trinity Cathedral; prompt on Trinity Church]
This island has the highest proportion of inhabitants of any territory who identify as Jehovah's
Witnesses, at around three percent. This island's only airport, on Prosperous Bay, is expected to be finally
operational in 2016. Though it is part of a British overseas territory also including Tristan da Cunha and
Ascension, Longwood House on this island is maintained by the French government due to its most famous
resident. For 10 points, name this island in the South Atlantic that served as the final place of exile of
Napoleon and whose inhabitants are known locally as "Saints."
ANSWER: St. Helena
A physician at this location was Dr. Barry O'Meara, who wrote a book charging its administrator
Hudson Lowe with mistreating and possibly murdering another resident. This island was where Dinuzulu
kaCethswayo, the last officially recognized Zulu king, was exiled to in 1890. The most famous resident
here lived in Longwood House. Part of a British Overseas Territory with Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
(COON-yuh), this place was where the loser of the Battle of Waterloo ended up. For ten points, name this
island off West Africa, the place of Napoleon's final exile.
ANSWER: St. Helena
This river flows past the only walled city in the Americas north of Mexico. Another city on this river is
home to a "Biodome" with replicas of four ecosystems, as well as an Olympic stadium nicknamed the "Big
O." This river empties into a massive estuary that contains the Magdalen Islands and Anticosti Island after
flowing past to the Gaspe Peninsula. This river flows through the Thousand Islands. The Ottawa River
drains into this river. The opening of this river's eponymous Seaway made the Erie Canal completely
obsolete. For 10 points, name this river that flows northeast from Lake Ontario through Montreal and
Quebec City before emptying into its namesake Gulf.
ANSWER: St. Lawrence River
This city was formerly home to the Pruitt-Igoe housing projects that were torn down in the 1970s. Towns in
a neighboring state that are across a river from this city include Venice and Brooklyn, while smaller rivers
in and near this metropolis include Meremac and Des Peres. A suburb of this city contains a popular
entertainment area known as the Delmar Loop. Forest Park sits in the west of this city, whose suburbs
include Clayton, Florissant, and Ladue. For 10 points, name this Midwestern city that is home to
Washington University and the Gateway Arch.
ANSWER: St. Louis, Missouri
An equestrian statue of this city's namesake sits in front of its Art Museum. This city's Soulard
neighborhood hosts what is usually the second-largest Mardi Gras parade in the U.S. This city's Ballpark
Village is being built next to its baseball stadium, one of whose predecessors was called Sportsman's Park.
It's not New York, but Joseph Pulitzer founded its Post-Dispatch newspaper. Dankmar Adler and Louis
Sullivan built this city's ten-story redbrick Wainwright Building. Its most famous monument is part of the
Jefferson National Expansion Memorial, and was designed by Eero Saarinen. For ten points, identify this
Midwestern city, home to the Gateway Arch.
ANSWER: St. Louis
The world's largest mosaics are in this city's Cathedral Basilica. Its zoo and World's Fair
Pavilion are in its Forest Park. Its Italian population used to be concentrated in the Hill
neighborhood. This city's eastern neighbor, which shares its name with this city, is home to the (*)
Gateway Geyser. This city is the home of the Jefferson National Expansion Monument. For 10 points,
name this largest city in Missouri, home of the Gateway Arch.
ANSWER: St. Louis
This city, founded by Pierre Laclede, has a Walk of Fame in the nearby Delmar Loop. The original
Dred Scott trials were held in this city's Old Courthouse; that Courthouse is now part of the Jefferson
National Expansion Memorial, as is this city's tallest building, an (*) Eero Saarinen-designed
monument in the shape of an inverted catenary on the Mississippi River. For 10 points, name this large city
on the Mississippi River, the home of Missouri's Gateway Arch.
ANSWER: St. Louis, Missouri
A transformed church in this city was where the first public demonstration of a Foucault pendulum took
place. Anatoly Sobchak was the first directly-elected mayor of this city. The assassination of a politician in
this city led to the Great Purge. Saint Isaac's Cathedral is in this city, where Stalin arranged for the death of
Sergei Kirov. Auguste de Montferrand designed this city's Alexander Column, and its Senate Square was
where the Decembrist Uprising occurred. This city's Winter Palace was stormed at the beginning of the
October Revolution. For ten points, name this Russian city once known as Leningrad.
ANSWER: St. Petersburg [prompt on Petrograd; prompt on Leningrad until it is read]
This city is home to St. Isaac's Cathedral, and the "White Nights" occur here. A fortress in this city has the
same names as two men assassinated here, one of whom was supposedly murdered by the lover of Count
Orlov. This city, home to the Peter and Paul Fortress, was built on land conquered from Sweden. Granite
embankments surround the river Neva in this city, which is known for causing disastrous floods. Home to
the Smolny Institute and the Winter Palace, For 10 points, name this former capital of the Russian Empire
founded by Peter the Great.
ANSWER: Saint Petersburg [accept Sankt-Peterburg]
This city's shopping district is located south of Folkungagatan and is cleverly called "SoFo," and its
Normmalm district houses its Royal Opera House. An obelisk designed by Jan Louis Desprez is found on
Slottsbacken street, which also houses the Royal Palace designed by Tessin. Home to the Moderna Museet,
it is the namesake of a large archipelago containing Beckholmen and Vaxholm. The Riddarfjarden bay juts
into this largest city located near Lake Malaren, which also overlooks the Baltic Sea. Often called "Venice
of the North," for 10 points, identify this city home to the annual Nobel Prize banquet and capital of
Sweden.
ANSWER: Stockholm
Visitors to this city can stay in a Boeing 747-turned-inn called the Jumbo Hostel. This city's
Rosenbad building hosts the nation's government. Its old town, known as (+) Gamla Stan, is attached
to the Stallbron and contains the Storkyrkan church, where monarchs have been crowned. South of
Uppland, this city is spread out on fourteen islands, including Sodermalm. This city is home to a
museum containing a ship called (*) Vasa, which sank in this city's harbor during the reign of Gustavus
Adolphus. For 10 points, name this capital of Sweden.
ANSWER: Stockholm
The Larkhill airfield sheds are found near this monument that was excavated by Hawley. This monument
is surrounded by cremation sites near the Aubrey Holes. This monument's builders lived at Durrington
Walls and were likely the Beaker People. Sarsen stones from Marlborough Downs were used to build this
site that includes the Heel Stone. For 10 points, name this stone circle in England that celebrated the
solstice.
ANSWER: Stonehenge
One legend says a wizard took part of Mount Killaraus and moved it here. The circular bank and
ditch about 110 meters in diameter were the first parts to be created, along with the 56 Aubrey holes.
The Q and R Holes in the middle were dug about 500 years later, and contained materials that were
originally thought to have been transported from (*) Wales but are now theorized to have been
deposited near the site by the Irish Sea Glacier. The sun rises directly behind the Heel Stone on the summer
solstice, when Druidic ceremonies are held. FTP, name this prehistoric monument located north of
Salisbury that is mainly known for its large circles of stones.
ANSWER: Stonehenge
This place contains five indentations known as Aubrey holes. Gerald Hawkins proposed that this place
served as an astronomical calendar, while William Stukeley popularized the idea that it was a center of
Druidic worship. The Preseli Hills in Wales are the source of some of the stones in, for 10 points, what
prehistoric monument on England's Salisbury Plain?
ANSWER: Stonehenge
Its city of Wadi Halfa is an important shipping center, and one of this country's major disputed regions is
the Ilemi Triangle in its southeast. Achieving independence under the rule of Ismail Al-Azhari, its borders
contain what was once the Mahdist State, which was defeated by Lord Kitchener at its largest city,
Omdurman. Containing the confluence of the Blue and White Nile, its border with Chad has led to a refugee
crisis in that nation, since that border is dominated by the war-torn region of Darfur. For 10 points, identify
this African nation with capital at Khartoum.
ANSWER: Republic of Sudan
This word denotes a region, named after an Arabic phrase meaning "land of the black peoples," that
includes the Sahel and comprises the belt of savanna plains south of the Sahara Desert and north of the
central African rainforests. This word also refers to a country within that region, which is home to the
cattle-dependent Nuer (NEW-err) people. Conflict between the Arab and black population, as well as
between Muslims and Christians, has led to the rise of the Janjaweed (JOHN-juh-weed) militias in, for 10
points, what country, thus causing a refugee crisis in its Darfur region?
ANSWER: the Sudan
The discovery of oil in the region around Juba in this nation problematized this nation's unresolved border
with its southeastern neighbor, Kenya. Its Eastern Front region also has an undemarcated border with
Eritrea, a nation which helped broker peace between this nation's Christian militias in the South with its
Muslim government in the north. Its large Western section has seen widespread ethnic cleansing led by the
Janjaweed, pushing refugees west into Chad. Site of the persecution of the people of Darfur, FTP what is
this nation with capital at Khartoum?
ANSWER: Sudan
This country's southern city of Waw is located on the Jur River; that city is part of its separatist region
in with capital at Juba. In the late 1800's a man known as the Mahdi led an uprising in this country
culminating at the Battle of Omdurman while in 1898 British and French clashed in this country at
Fashoda. The Nile splits into the White and Blue branches in this country, which contains a region plagued
by gunmen known as the janjaweed. For 10 points, name this North African nation with capital at
Khartoum whose western portion is known as Darfur.
ANSWER: Republic of Sudan
In this present-day country, the Funj people formed the Sennar Sultanate, and this nation is associated with
legendary headless creatures known as Blemmyes. The ancient cities of Meroe and Napata lie in this
present-day country and both served as capitals of the Kingdom of Kush, when this region was known as
Nubia. Along this country's northern border the construction of the Aswan High Dam resulted in the
creation of Lake Nasser, and its capital is located at the confluence of the Blue and White branches of the
Nile. For 10 points, name this African country south of Egypt which contains Darfur, and has its capital at
Khartoum.
ANSWER: Republic of the Sudan
Dust storms named haboob were observed and named in this country. The Kashm Al-Qirbah Dam is
located on this country's Atbara River: the last tributary to flow into this country's most important
river, which is itself dammed by the Al-Rusayis Dam. The Gezira scheme in this country was
originally used to irrigate lands to grow cotton. The Nuba Mountains rise in this country's oil-producing
South Kordofan province. The Fur people live in one area of this country dominated by the volcanic Marrah
Mountains: Darfur. One of the sister towns of this country's capital is Omdurman. For ten points, the White
and Blue Niles merge at Khartoum in what country?
ANSWER: Republic of Sudan [or Jumhuriyat as-Sudan]
This country's Atbarah River meets a larger river near the ancient city of Meroe. This country's
largest oil reserves are found in the Muglad Basin. To the northwest, the Nuba Mountains lie in the
province of South Kordofan. This country disputes the Hala-ib triangle with its northern neighbor.
It (*) ceased to be the largest country in Africa after a January 2011 referendum resulted in the
independence of its southern portion. For 10 points, name this country that contains Darfur.
ANSWER: Republic of Sudan
The region of this name was the home to the ancient kingdoms of Sennar and Dongola and is named for
an Arabic term for "land of the black peoples." That region extends west to east across Africa between the
Sahara Desert and the equatorial rain forest. The southern part of a country by this name will become
independent in July. For 10 points, name this large country south of Egypt, which is also the location of
Darfur.
ANSWER: the Sudan
The Banggai Archipelago lies off this island's east coast, which is indented by the Gulf of Tolo. Two other
large gulfs nearly bisect this island, the gulfs of Bone and Tomini. The Banda and Molucca seas lie to its
east, while a namesake sea separates it from Mindanao to the north. The Makassar Strait separates it from
Borneo. Manado is located on one of this island's four serpentine peninsulas, and the Flores Sea lies to its
south. FTP, name this Indonesian island.
ANSWER: Sulawesi accept Celebes
This island was known in Sanskrit as Swarnadwipa and Swanabhumi, or "land of gold," in ancient times.
Jambi and Pekanbu are cities on this island, where the Batak people live on Lake Toba, its largest lake. The
Barisan Mountains span the entire west coast of this island, whose tallest mountain is Mount Kerinci and
whose largest city is Medan. This island is separated from the Malay Peninsula to the north by the Strait of
Malacca, and from Java to the south by the Sunda Strait. For 10 points, name this largest island completely
owned by Indonesia.
ANSWER: Sumatra [or Sumatera]
The Barisan Mountains run through the north central part of this island and also contain Lake Toba. The
heavily Islamic northernmost region of this island was targeted in Operation Red Net after declaring
independence under Hasan di Tiro and the GAM. The city of Palembang was the capital of the greatest
kingdom based on this island, Srivijaya. It is separated from the mainland by the strait critical to the spice
trade between Europe and South Asia, the Strait of Malacca. This island contains the Aceh region, where
the Suharto regime fought an insurgency. This island is the second largest of the Greater Sunda Islands
after Borneo. For ten points, name this large island of Indonesia.
ANSWER: Sumatra
The Barisan Mountains run along the Western portion of this island, whose largest city is Medan.
One region on this island is noted for its GAM separatist movement which was formed after the
intervention of foreign oil companies. At this island's southern lies the Sunda Strait and on this island
one can find a rare endangered breed of tigers. At the northern tip of this island lies the region of
Aceh and to its northeast lies the Malay Peninsula, which is separated from this island via the Strait of
Malacca. For 10 points, name this large island of Indonesia that lies north of Java.
ANSWER: Sumatra
The Riau Archipelago is located to the northeast of this island, and this island is separated from its
eastern neighbor by the Karimata Strait. This island's highest point is at Mount Kerinci and part of
its Barisan Mountains, and the northern portion of this island contains the volcanic Lake Toba. Its
cities include Medan and Padang, and the northern part of this island is near the Nicobar Islands and
includes the territory of Aceh. Located to the west of the Sunda Strait and containing the city of Palembang,
for 10 points, name this island south of the Strait of Malacca which, behind New Guinea and Borneo, is the
third largest island of Indonesia.
ANSWER: Sumatra
Wildlife native to this island include its namesake striped rabbit, and other unique species can be
found on the Mentawai islands to its west. In 2001, military units hired as security for ExxonMobil
workers on this island's gas fields were accused of human rights abuses. A province on this island
was granted control of the Leuser Ecosystem thanks to an agreement with a separatist movement
called GAM. This is the smaller of the two islands to which the largest (*) flower on earth, Rafflesia
arnoldii, is endemic. This island's Barisan Mountains include the supervolcano Toba. This island contains
the province of Aceh ("ah-chay"), which was hit hard by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. It is separated
from the Malay Peninsula by the Strait of Malacca, and is the sixth largest island in the world. For 10
points, name this Indonesian island.
ANSWER: Sumatra (or Sumatera)
This lake is linked to another lake to its south by the Soo Locks. Twenty-two islands in this lake form
the Apostle Islands. This lake is also the location of a national park on Isle Royale. Ports on this lake
include Thunder Bay in Ontario and Marquette in Michigan. Based on surface area, this lake is the largest
freshwater lake in the world. For 10 points, name this lake that borders a namesake town in Wisconsin and
Duluth, Minnesota, and is the largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
The U.S. took control of this lake's shoreline from the Ojibwe in the Treaty of La Pointe. The
Keeweenaw Peninsula juts into this lake, that contains Chequamegon Bay and the Apostle Islands. The
Edmund Fitzgerald sank in this lake that contains Isle Royale. For 10 points, name this largest of the Great
Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior [or Gitchi Gummi or Gitche Gumme]
The Written Rocks or Petits Escrits are on the north shore of this question of water, while the Maple Islands
and Batchawana Bay are on its eastern shore. This lake empties into the North Channel via the St. Marys
River and the Soo Locks. Other islands in this lake include Pie Island and Michipicoten Island. The
Keweenaw Peninsula extends into this lake, whose largest island is Isle Royale. At the western end of this
lake is the largest inland port in the world, Duluth. Another port on this lake is Thunder Bay. For 10 points,
name this largest freshwater lake in the world, bordered by Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan, and Ontario,
one of the five Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
Christine Stark wrote an expose about sex trafficking on this question of water, in which Native women
were forced to live on commercial boats. A mythological being called the Great Lynx was said to live
on one island in it. The Apostle Islands are found in this question of water. The Greenstone Ridge Trail
is found on one island in this question of water that was the site of a study of predator-prey dynamics
between its populations of moose and wolves. This home of Isle Royale is drained by the St. Marys River,
and the Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve was established to preserve the numerous shipwrecks it
contains, including that of the Edmund Fitzgerald. The cities of Thunder Bay, Marquette, and Duluth are
located on its shores. For 10 points, name this largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
Parks on the shores of this question of water include Pukaskwa, Pictured Rocks, and Sleeping Giant. It is
drained by the St. Marys River, which is regulated by the Sault Locks. The Keweenaw Peninsula juts into it,
and the Nipigon River flows into this question of water northeast of Thunder Bay. One of its islands was
colonized by wolves which crossed this lake on winter ice and remained on the island to feed on moose. Its
islands include the Apostle Islands and Isle Royale, and one of its ports is Duluth. Lying south of Ontario
and north of the Upper Peninsula, for 10 points, name this largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
This lake is home to the United States- first National Lakeshore. Islands in this lake include
Madeline Island, the largest of the Apostle Islands, but the largest island in this lake is a national
park named (*) Isle Royale. This lake is noted for its shipwrecks around Whitefish Point, including the
1975 Edmund Fitzgerald sinking. The Ojibwe called this lake "big water," and it is the largest freshwater
lake in the world by surface area. For 10 points, name this lake with ports of Duluth and Marquette, the
largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
This question of of water is bordered by an eroded sandstone cliff known as Miner's Castle and it is fed
by Bridalveil Falls; both of which are part of this question's Pictured Rocks Lakeshore. The Porcupine
Mountains are found just off this lake's southern shore and this lake contains the heavily Finnpopulated Copper Island. In 1975, it was the site of the wreck of the (*) Edmund Fitzgerald. The
Canadian city of Thunder Bay lies on its north shore, while almost the whole of Michigan's Upper Peninsula
abuts its south. Referred to as 'Gitcheegumee' by Longfellow, FTP, identify this largest freshwater lake by
area; the largest of the American Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
The Keweenaw Peninsula juts into this question of water, on whose shores one can find the Pictured
Rocks National Lakeshore and Pukaskwa National Park. Its western portion borders the Misquah
Hills as well as the Apostle Islands, and it is fed by the Nipogon and Pigeon Rivers, the latter of which
flows into this question of water south of (*) Thunder Bay. Its easternmost section, Whitefish Bay, is drained
by St. Marys River, which flows past Sault (SOO) Sainte Marie. The site of Isle Royale National Park, this
lake borders the city of Duluth as well as the northern part of the Upper Peninsula. For 10 points, identify
this northernmost and largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
Ports on this question include Wawa, Aura and Illgen City, while on its shore lies the Sleeping Giant
formation, Pukaskwa National Park, and Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore. Fed by the Brule,
Kaministiquia and Nipigon Rivers, this question has portions named Agawa and Whitefish Bays while the
Keeweenaw Peninsula juts into it. Called Gichigami or "big water" by the Ojibwe, this lake contains the
Apostle Islands, including Madeleine Island, and Isle Royale, while the St Marys River connects it to Lake
Huron. For 10 points, name this largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
Eruption of lava in this lake formed the Michipicoten and St. Ignace islands. Places along the shore of this
lake include Pukaskwa National Park, the Sleeping Giant formation, and Pictured Rocks National
Lakeshore, the first National Lakeshore in the United States. Rivers that feed into this lake include the
Kaministiquia, the Brule, and the Nipigon. The St. Mary's river drains this lake and connects it to Lake
Huron, while other landmarks in this lake include Whitefish Bay, the Apostle Islands, and Isle Royale. For
10 points, name this largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
This lake is completely surrounded by a scenic highway system called its namesake "Circle Tour." The
Split Rock Lighthouse is located on this lake's shore. It lends its name to a reddish precipitate quartz, its
namesake agate. The U.S.'s largest freshwater port by tonnage is on the "North Shore" of this lake, which
also is home to Thunder Bay. This is the world's largest freshwater lake by surface area. For 10 points,
name this largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
A landform called the Sleeping Giant lies off the coast of this question of water, and the Apostle Islands
are located here near the Bayfield Peninsula. Two of the longest inflows of this question of water are the
Pic and Saint Louis Rivers. The largest island in this question of water is the Isle (*) Royal, and its many
shipwrecks include that of the Edmund Fitzgerald. Through the St. Mary's River, this lake flows into Lake
Huron, and cities on its coast include Sault St. Marie, Thunder Bay, and Duluth. For 10 points, name this
question of water, the largest of the Great Lakes.
ANSWER: Lake Superior
On its southern border lie the Tumuc-Humac Mountains as well as the Sipaliwini River, but this country
has disputed ownership of land southwest of Kayser Mountains and the Courantyne River, which also
forms its western border. In the northeast, bauxite mines populated the city of Moengo, near Albina; those
cities, with Benzdorp, lie within the Marowijne district with the Maroni river to its east, while other large
districts include Saramacca and Brokopondo, which contains Lake W.J. Blommenstein and the country's
namesake river, as well as part of the Wilhelmina Range, home to the highest peak, Juliana Top. For 10
points, name this South American country with capital at Paramaribo on the Caribbean coast, formerly
known as Dutch Guiana.
ANSWER: Republiek Suriname or Republic of Suriname
This country's capital saw an event known as the December Murders at a military installation that
was once Fort Willoughby, and it can be reached from its Western neighbor's Moleson Creek via the
Corentyne River ferry. The Eastern part of this country contains the Tumuk Hamak Mountains and
the Maroni and Nickerie rivers, while its namesake river contains the (*) Brokopondo Reservoir,
which helps power its aluminum mining industry. Jopie Pengel Airport serves Zanderij in this country,
whose other cities include Saramacca, Albina, and Lelydorp. Including Julianatop in the Bakhuys range, it
borders Brazil and separates Guyana from French Guiana. For 10 ponts, identify this South American
country, a former colony of the Netherlands whose capital is Paramaribo.
ANSWER: Republic of Suriname [or Sranan]
New York's DUMBO neighborhood is named for one of these structures. An early example of these things
at Clifton was designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel. The largest example of this type of structure, named
Akashi Kaikyo, is a few miles from downtown Kobe, Japan. The son of John Roebling, a pioneer of these
edifices, was injured while building one of their caissons. One of these in California is continually painted
international orange; another, nicknamed Galloping Gertie, collapsed into Puget Sound. For 10 points,
name this type of two-towered, gap-spanning structure supported by cables, whose examples span Tacoma
Narrows and the Golden Gate.
ANSWER: suspension bridges [accept bridges, road bridges, or bridge overpasses before "Clifton" is read and prompt on them on or after "Clifton" is read; accept train bridges before "Clifton" is read, but do NOT accept or prompt on it on or after "Clifton" is read]
It's not Chinese, but the "Sheng language" is based on this language and is primarily spoken among
the urban underclass. One of the first known documents in this language is an epic poem about Byzantine
Emperor Heraclius called "The Story of Tambuka." Julius Nyerere translated The Merchant of Venice into
this language. When Germany seized Tanganyika, it made this language a colony-wide administrative
language. One phrase in this language that translates as "There are no worries" is "Hakuna matata." For 10
points, name this Bantu language that is the official language of Tanzania and Kenya.
ANSWER: Swahili [or Kiswahili]
One of this language's dialects is spoken on the island of Lamu, while another was used by the Germans in
their administration of Tanganyika. "States" named for this language spread from Sofala to Mogadishu, with
one of their fortresses on the island of Pemba. It was spread through the interior by Arab trade caravans,
and its name comes from an Arabic word. While much of this language's lexicon is derived from Arabic, its
grammar is Bantu. FTP, name this language used in trade along the east coast of Africa.
ANSWER: Swahili [accept kiSwahili]
The Francis Beidler Forest is located in one of these areas known as the "Four Hole" one. One of these
locations was set to be the location of a DuPont titanium mining operation that was scuttled in 1997 due to
public protest; that location of this type was the origin of the Bugaboo Scrub Fire. Lake Drummond is
located in one of these places that was the location of a maroon colony. One of these places can be accessed
at Stephen Foster State Park and is located on the Suwanee River. Revolutionary War general Francis
Marion was known as a "fox" of these places. For 10 points, name these wooded wetland areas, examples
of which include the Great Dismal and the Okefenokee.
ANSWER: swamps
The Bahr el Zaraf, or Sea of Giraffes, is part of one of these locales in Sudan called the Sudd. The
Vasyugan is an example of this type of site found east of the Ob River in Siberia. The largest example in the
US is the Atchafalaya Basin in Louisiana, while a "blackwater" one of these locations, defined by its
accumulation of peat, straddles the Florida-Georgia border. FTP what are these marshy areas including the
Okefenokee and Great Dismal?
ANSWER: swamps
The Sudd, in South Sudan, is a large example of one of these areas. Brazil's Pantanal becomes one of these
for many weeks in June. George Washington surveyed one of these areas in 1763, forming a company with
others to reclaim it. That Great Dismal one of these areas is in North Carolina and Virginia, while another
example of one of these areas straddles the Florida-Georgia border and is called Okeefenokee. FTP what
are these land areas suffused or submerged under water, featuring woody plants?
ANSWER: swamps (prompt on "flood plain"-not really right but understandable)
Lake Drummond is located within one of these larger geographical features, which forms the subtitle of
Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel Dred. The largest of these features in the United States is named for
Atchafalaya and is home to the endangered Louisiana black bear. Muskegs and fens are types of them. One
on the border between Georgia and Florida has a name translating as "land of the trembling earth." The
Great Dismal one in Virginia and the Louisiana bayous are examples of these features. Alligators and
crocodiles live together in one of these places, which is nicknamed "River of Grass". For 10 points, name
these natural features exemplified by the Everglades.
ANSWER: swamps [or marshes; or wetlands; or bogs; or bayous; muskegs or fens before mention]
This country's city of Piggs Peak is located near its Phophonyane Nature Reserve. The Bhunu Mall and
a handicrafts market are two sites in this country city of Manzini. This country is divided administratively
into fifty-five constituencies called tinkhundla. Every year, this country has a six-day first fruits ceremony
called the Big Incwala. This country's traditional capital is Lobambo, but its administrative capital and
largest city is Mbabane. For ten points, name this small landlocked kingdom in Africa that is bordered by
Mozambique to the east and everywhere else by South Africa.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Swaziland [or Umbuso weSwatini]
One waterfall in this country can be translated "Troll's Bonnet;" that waterfall is on a river draining its
largest lake, Vanern. This country's highest point is Kebnekaise, and its westernmost point is Stora
Drammen island. A tunnel-bridge combination across Oresund connects it to another country's island of
Zealand. Located west of the Gulf of Bothnia, its oldest university is in the city of Uppsala, while its
northernmost province, shared with its eastern neighbor, is Lapland. For 10 points, identify this
Scandinavian country with its capital at Stockholm.
ANSWER: Sweden [or Sverige]
This country's only Caribbean colony was St. Bart's, held until 1878. The longest river in this
country is the Klar-Gota, while large lakes include Vanern, Vattern, and the agriculturally important
Lake Siljan (seel-yahn) and (*) Storsjon (storrs-yohn). Its largest island has its capital at Visby and is
called Gotland. Ystad, Uppsala, and Malmo are among this country's largest cities. For 10 points, name this
Scandinavian country with capital Stockholm.
ANSWER: Sweden or Sverige
The Great Copper Mountain is located in Falun in this country's historical province of Dalarna. Its largest
city lies on Lake Malaren, and this country contains the third-largest lake in Europe, Lake Vanern. This
country shares with its eastern neighbor a northern region called Lappland. The Oresund strait separates this
country's southern province of Scania, which contains the city of Malmo ("mall-muh"), from the island of
Zealand. This country lies across the Gulf of Bothnia from Finland, west of the Baltic Sea, and east of
Denmark. For 10 points, name this country home to cities like Gothenburg and Stockholm.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Sweden [accept Konungariket Sverige]
This country's second largest city is a leading producer of ball bearings thanks to the company SKF and
was the home of this nation's East India Company, which was co-founded by Colin Campbell. This nation's
capital contains the world's oldest open-air museum. One of its northern provinces, whose flag features a
big red man holding a club, has a capital at Kiruna. Its Tornedalian minority migrated from a neighboring
nation and speaks Meankieli. Gutnish is spoken on this country's largest island. This country's
southernmost region of Scania is separated from its southern neighbor by the Sound, or Oresund. Major
universities in this country are at Umea and Uppsala, and its second largest city is Gothenburg. For 10
points, name this Scandinavian country whose capital is Stockholm.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Sweden [or Konungariket Sverige]
This country's cities of Eskilstuna and Vasteras lie in the valley of Lake Malaren. Its highest peak,
Kebnekaise, lies within the Fjallen mountain range. Its longest river, the Klaralven-Gota alv, drains
this country's largest question of water, Lake Vanern. Visby lies on this country's largest island,
Gotland, and other cities in this country include Umea, Helsinborg, Gothenburg, and (*) Uppsala. The
Oresund Bridge connects this country's city of Malmo to the island of Zeeland. This country is bordered to
the east by the Gulf of Bothnia, to the south by the Kattegat and the Baltic Sea, and to the west by Norway.
For ten points, identify this Scandinavian country with capital at Stockholm.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Sweden
Various dialects of this country's language are known as its "Rinkeby" form, named for an
immigrant-heavy district of its capital city. This country was unified after the suppression of the Folkung
movement in the thirteenth century. This country has a unicameral legislature with three hundred forty-nine
members called the Riksdag. For 10 points, name this Scandinavian country flanked by Finland and
Norway.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Sweden [or Konungariket Sverige]
This country's city of Bellinzona is known for three castles that guarded the route into its Ticino
region, and other castles in this country include one in the center of the town of Neuchatel and the
Chillon Castle near a city that hosts a popular jazz festival, Montreaux. Tourists are attracted to this
country by resorts in Verbier and (*) Zermatt as well as a castle that may have been designed by
Leonardo da Vinci in Locarno and the covered Chapel Bridge in Lucerne. Its second most populous city of
Basel is located on the Rhine, while the Jura Mountains rise above its city of Lausanne. For 10 points, name
this country that is home to Zurich and Geneva.
ANSWER: Switzerland [or Swiss Confederation]
This country's early railways include the spiral tunnels of the Gotthard line, and its Glacier Express railroad
has a terminus at St. Moritz. This home of the vineyard terraces at Lavaux ("luh-VOE") is home to a castle
where Lord Byron's poem "The Prisoner of Chillon" is set. This country hosts the yearly World Economic
Forum at Davos. This country includes about eighty thousand speakers of Romansh, its fourth official
language. For 10 points, name this landlocked European country home to Lake Lucerne, whose Alps
include the north face of the Matterhorn.
ANSWER: Switzerland [or Swiss Confederation; or Schweiz; or Suisse; or Svizzera; or Svizra]
This country's Central Plateau is divided by rivers such as the Thur and the Aar. Its highest point
is Monte Rose, which is the second highest mountain in the (*) Alps. This country includes the city that
is the home of the International Olympic Committee, Lausanne. For 10 points, name this country divided
into cantons with capital at Bern and its largest city at Zurich.
ANSWER: Switzerland [or Swiss Confederation; or Confederation Suisse; or Schweizerisch Eidgenossenschaft; or Confederazione Svizzera; or Confederaziun Svizra]
Cities in this country include Carouge, famous for its gardens, and Monthey, in which is centered the
roller coaster design company Bolliger & Mabillard. Lakes located in this country include the Zug
and the artificial Sihlsee. The reworking of the Linth River improved the availability of fertile land,
and tributaries of the Rhine in this country include the Toss, Birs, and Thur Rivers. Its largest lake is
(*) Neuchatel, and it contains a mountain famous for having caused the death of much of Edward
Whymper's party, the Matterhorn. For 10 points, name this landlocked, neutral country with capital at Bern.
ANSWER: Switzerland [or the Swiss Confederation]
The central plateau of this country is bordered by the Jura Mountains to the north. Lake Maggiore is the
lowest point in this country, only a short distance from the highest peak, Monte Rosa, located in the city of
Valais in this country. Some regions of this country, such as Graubunden, are notable for speaking
Romansh. Near Schaffhausen in this country, the Rhine River passes through the Rhine Falls, Europe's
largest waterfall. For 10 points, name this country whose other geographical features include Lake Geneva
and the Matterhorn, with its capital at Bern.
ANSWER: Switzerland [or Swiss Confederation; or Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft; or Confederatio Suisse; or Confederazione Svizzera; or Confederazuin Svizra]
The most populous area of this nation is called the middle land which contains much more temperate
weather conditions where most of the farming and grazing occurs. Lesser known rivers in this country are
the Inn, Aire, and Ticino. The tallest point contained within this country is the Dufourspitze of the Monte
Rosa. The Lauterbrunnen Valley in this country contains 72 glaciers, and also contains the Jungfrau Munch
Eiger group of peaks. Large lesser than known lakes in this country include Lake Neuchatel, and Lake
Constance. For 10 points, name this country, which most of the major rivers of Europe run through, has
Lake Geneva, and has a namesake alps named for it.
ANSWER: Switzerland
Regions of this country include Glarus, St. Gallen, and Ticino. It includes the northern part of
Lake Maggiore, and the largest lake entirely within this country is Lake Neuchatel. Its namesake
plateau lies between the Jura Mountains and the Alps. It shares Lake (*) Constance with Germany and
Austria, and it has four official languages, including Romansh. For 10 points, name this country which is
divided into cantons and which is home to Geneva.
ANSWER: Switzerland [or the Swiss Confederation]
Vladimir Ashkenazy was appointed chief conductor of this city's symphony in 2009, which resides in
a building designed by Jorn Utzon. The world's second oldest national park, Royal National Park,
lies midway between this city and Wollongong. Cathy Freeman lit the torch for the (*) 2000 Summer
Olympics held in this city, which used venues like Bondi Beach and its famed opera house for competition.
Marked by Darling Harbour and Botany Bay, for ten points, name this capital of New South Wales, the
largest city in Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney
This city's Royal Botanic Gardens contain a carved stone seat called Mrs. Macquaries' Chair. One of
its oldest neighborhoods survived controversial renovation in the 70s and is known as "the Rocks."
This city is bounded to the west by the Blue Mountains and to the north by the Hawkesbury River. In
this city, the Gladesville Bridge and a bridge nicknamed "the Coat Hanger" cross its major river the
Parramatta. Like London, its historic red light district is called (*) Kings Cross. This city's beaches
include Manly Beach and Bondi Beach, and it lies on Port Jackson, the largest natural harbor in the world.
The Cooks River and the Georges River flow through this city and in to Botany Bay. For 10 points, name
this home of a Jorn Utzon designed opera house, the largest city in New South Wales and all of Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney
This city's central business district includes the neighborhood of Circular Quay (KEY), and popular
beaches in this city include Manly and Bondi. This city surrounds the harbor of Port Jackson, which is
spanned by the world's widest bridge. Another landmark in this city is a building located next to the Royal
Botanic Gardens on Bennelong Point that was designed by Jorn Utzon, this city's namesake Opera House.
For 10 points, name this capital of New South Wales, which is the largest city in Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney
This city benefited when gold was discovered at nearby Bathurst. Its tourist destinations include Bondi
Beach, which is on its Pacific coastline. The Hawksberry River runs through this city, which is bounded to
the north by the Blue Mountains. It was settled after the HMS Endeavor, helmed by James Cook,
discovered and named Botany Bay. It has a famous Jorn (YORN) Utzon-designed opera house. For 10
points, name this capital of New South Wales, the most populous city in Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney, Australia
The Kurnell Peninsula lies south of this city, while to its east lies the popular Bondi beach. This
city is encircled by the Hawkesbury River and was the main site of the Rum Rebellion. This city was
first established after the landing of the HMS Endeavour at (*) Botany Bay. One building in this city
designed by Jorn Utzon uses large concrete shells for its distinctive roof and is used mainly as an opera
house. For 10 points, name this site of the 2000 Summer Olympics, the provincial capital of New South
Wales and largest city in Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney, Australia
A notable attraction in this city, The Chinese Garden of Friendship, can be found in its Chinatown,
while another attraction, Mrs. Macquaries- Chair, can be found in its large public park called The
Domain. The Hawkesbury River, which lies to north of this city, is home to its namesake sandstone,
while it is also home to the popular Manly and (*) Bondi beaches. Telstra Stadium was constructed for
the 2000 Summer Olympics held here. Its Kingsford Smith Airport lies on its Botany Bay, and another bay
in this city is home to its namesake Harbour Bridge and Opera House. For ten points, name this capital of
New South Wales and most populous city in Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney
This city contains a "Chinese Garden of Friendship" in its Darling Harbour neighborhood. A museum
can be found at its Observatory Hill. Transported convict Francis Greenway designed such buildings in this
city as the Hyde Park Barracks and Macquarie Lighthouse. Danish architect Jorn (YORN) Utzon designed
this city's shell-encased, expressionist opera house. For ten points, name this capital of New South Wales
and most populous city in Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney
In 1879, John Robertson founded the world's second national park just south of this city. Pulbah
Island is in a saltwater lake north of this city. One annual event in this city involves running up from
Pitt Street Mall to the top of its tallest building, which used to be called the AMP Tower and is now
known as its Tower Eye. In this city's City2Surf run, runners end up in the suburb of Bondi Beach.
In the 19th century, (*) Lachlan Macquarie opened economic opportunities to the Emancipists in this city.
The long steel-arch bridge over Jackson Harbor in this city is sometimes called the Coathanger. Jorn Utzon
designed the distinctive shell appearance of its opera house. For 10 points, name this capital of New South
Wales and most populous city in Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney
This city's oldest hospital was funded by Governor MacQuarie's imported rum. The world's tallest
steel arch bridge spans this city's harbor just northwest of Bennelong Point, home to a Jorn Utzondesigned building with seven white concrete (*) shells. This city lies on Botany Bay, where, in 1770,
James Cook landed the HMS Endeavour. For 10 points, name this home to a notable Opera House, the
capital of New South Wales and most populous city in Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney
This city is bounded by the Blue Mountains to the east and Lake Macquarie to the south. Bennelong
Point is a place named from a native interpreter for the British, and is the site of this city's most famous
building, designed by Jorn Utzon. This city overlooks Botany Bay and hosted the 2000 Summer Olympics.
For ten points, name this place whose shell-like opera house overlooks its harbor, the largest city in
Australia.
ANSWER: Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
This city's namesake university is the home of the S.I. Newhouse journalism school. This city
originated from the village of Webster's Landing and the brine-harvesting center of Salina. The Everson
Museum of Art and the Erie Canal museum are located in this city, which is the seat of Onondaga County
and is found about halfway between Albany and Buffalo. For 10 points, name this central New York city
which hosts a private college that plays sports as the Orangemen.
ANSWER: Syracuse
This nation contains a boiling lava field called Al-Safa. The Ghab Plain in this nation had been
flooded by the Orontes River for years before being drained to make arable land. In 1973, this nation
built the Tabqa Dam and created an artificial lake named for its president, the father of its current
president. A short part of this country's northeastern border is formed by the Tigris River. Its Homs
Gap lies between this nation's An-Nusayriyah Mountains and separates this nation from Lebanon.
The Umayyad Mosque is in this nation's most populous city of Aleppo. Name this Middle Eastern
country whose capital is Damascus.
ANSWER: Syria [or Syrian Arab Republic]
This river is crossed by the Puente de San Martin as well as the Alcantara Bridge, which lies beneath San
Servando Castle. It flows through Aranjuez and Talavera de la Reina downstream from its source in the
Albarracin Mountains, and El Greco painted it in "View of Toledo." The Pepper Wreck, a 17th-century
caravel returning from India, sank in its estuary, which is visible from Belem Tower and the Vasco da Gama
Bridge. FTP, identify this longest river of the Iberian Peninsula that divides Portugal and passes through
Lisbon.
ANSWER: Tagus River (or Tajo River; or Tejo River)
The Scandinavian-inspired mansion Vikingsholm sits near the coast of Emerald Bay in this question of
water. The only island in this question of water is Fanette Island, and Eagle Falls flows directly into it.
The Truckee River flows directly from this (*) lake to Pyramid Lake. Towns near this lake include the
host of the 1960 Winter Olympics, Squaw Valley. The closest major city to it is Reno, Nevada. For 10
points, name this lake on the California-Nevada border, which is a major tourist attraction due to its
numerous nearby ski resorts.
ANSWER: Lake Tahoe
Lora Knight built the Tea House on Fanette Island in this lake's Emerald Bay where an eccentric
named Captain Dick enjoyed displaying his self-amputated toes to guests. This lake's watershed
includes Freel Peak and its native inhabitants spoke a language isolate called Washo. Goodwin
Knight was convinced by Alexander Cushing to support an event on its shores that featured the
release of 2,000 pigeons orchestrated by Walt Disney. This question of water is drained by the Truckee
River to Pyramid Lake and is bordered by the (*) Carson Range. Currently, this question of water is
suffering from eutrophication from settlement of cities like Stateline, reducing this lake's clarity in part due
to traffic from around Homewood and Squaw Valley, which hosted the 1960 Winter Olympics. For 10
points, identify this lake on the border of Nevada and California in the Sierra Nevadas.
ANSWER: Lake Tahoe
Simon Bolivar Square in Garden City can be reached by going south from this location alongside the
Mogamma, the center of the municipal bureaucracy. It can also be accessed from Zamalek by the 6th
of October Bridge, from the north by the Corniche, and from the east by a street named for Talaat
Harb. It was formerly home to the headquarters of the National Democratic Party, and (*) Lara
Logan was sexually assaulted here. A museum on its north side was broken into and damaged during a
period in which its Hardees was a makeshift hospital for some of the million people camped in it. The Nile
runs just west of, for 10 points, what main square in central Cairo?
ANSWER: Tahrir Square [or Liberation Square; or Maydan al-Tahrir]
A Tudor-style Story House in this city offers information about the city and its tea industry, and this city
is also the location of the Museum of Drinking Water. This city commemorated people massacred in 1947
by renaming a park the 228 Peace Park. A museum dedicated to aboriginal people from the island of this
city is called the Shung Ye Museum. In 2004, the Petronas Towers were replaced by a namesake 101
building in this city as the world's tallest building. For ten points, name this Asian capital city that is also the
location of a memorial hall named for Chiang Kai-shek.
ANSWER: Taipei
(2009) It is designed to withstand typhoon winds of 134 mph and the strongest earthquakes likely to occur
in a 2500 year cycle. A 660 metric ton steel pendulum was designed to act as a tuned mass dampener; the
pendulum sways to offset movements in the building caused by strong gusts. From 6 PM to 10 PM each
evening, its lights display one of the seven colors of the spectrum, each coordinating to a day of the week. It
also features the world's fastest ascending elevator and the largest countdown clock. The main tower is
made up of 8 segments of 8 levels which prescribes to the Chinese belief in the number eight being a
symbol of prosperity, abundance, and good fortune. At 509.2 meters, this structure was the first to break the
half-kilometer mark in height. FTP, name this tower in Taiwan which has been the world tallest completed
skyscraper since 2004.
ANSWER: Taipei 101
This island is the home of bird species Styan's Bulbul and Steere's Liocichla ("lee-yo-cheech-la"). Yu
Shan is the highest point of this island's Chung-yang range and this island's Liwu river carved its
Taroko Gorge. This island's southernmost point is at Eluanbi, seventy miles below the port of
Kaohsiung. The [*] Pescadores islands, along with Quemoy and Matsu, populate the Formosa Strait, which
separates this island from the mainland. This island lies at the intersection of the Okinawa, Philippine, and
Yangtze tectonic plates. For 10 points, name this large island off the coast of China whose largest city is
Taipei.
ANSWER: Taiwan [accept Zhong Guo Tai Bei]
This polity claims all of Mongolia and parts of Tajikistan and Afghanistan in its territory. Due to the shape
of this polity, those in the Minnan division often call themselves "the children of the Sweet Potato."
Spanning the Tropic of Cancer, this polity also contains the Pescadores, Green Island and Orchid Island. Its
northernmost county is also the namesake of its capital, a city which contains the National Palace Museum
and the world's second tallest building, which has 101 floors. Name this polity, which claims sovereignty
over the People's Republic of China, the exiled government of the Republic of China since 1949, whose
capital is Taipei.
ANSWER: Taiwan [accept Republic of China until it is mentioned, but do not prompt on "China"]
The southern tip of this island is Eluanbi, in the Hengchun region. This island's highest peak is Yushan,
which lies off of this island's north-south Central Mountain Range. The largest city in this island's south is
the port of Kaohsiung. The Pescadores are found to the west of this island, which was hit by Typhoon
Morakot in 2009. This island's largest city contains a one hundred and one story bamboo-shaped
skyscraper. For 10 points, name this large island off the coast of East Asia, whose largest city is Taipei.
ANSWER: Taiwan [or Republic of China; or Formosa; do not accept "China"]
Since three of the four branches of the Austronesian language family are exclusive to this island, it is
believed to be that family's homeland. Mark Moskowitz studied the odd practice of stripping at
funerals on this island. Apart from the Kavalan tribe, tribes of aboriginal plains-dwellers have not
been recognized on this island, though they still typically support the Pan-Blue Coalition. Major fault
lines caused the 1999 921 earthquake on this island, where the formerly Dutch fort Zeelandia is
located. The (*) Portuguese named this island for its beauty and named a group of islands to the west after
their fisherman. The Pescadores are located west of this island, where a giant New Year's fireworks show
takes place at a tower with 101 floors. For 10 points, name this island formerly known as Formosa, which
contains most of the Republic of China.
ANSWER: Taiwan [or Isla Formosa until "Formosa" is read]
One landmark in this country is a park commemorating the 2-28 massacre, and another site in that
city is the Snake Alley night market. It controls the Penghu islands and the Pescadores, and one island it
owns that was bombed is Quemoy. Its major port is at Keelung, and the major mountain range is the
Chang-yang Shan-mo. It is involved in a dispute with Malaysia, the Phillippines and Vietnam over
control of the Spratley islands, and its capital city contains the Chiang kai-Shek Memorial Hall. For 10
points, name this island nation centered on Taipei.
ANSWER: Taiwan [or Republic of China; prompt on Chinese Taipei]
This country is the home of the aboriginal Tao people, who share space with the Lanyu nuclear waste
facility on its Orchid Island. The Chelung-pu Fault that runs through this country caused the devastating
Chi Chi earthquake here in 1999. This country controls the once-threatened islands of Quemoy and Matsu,
as well as the Pescadores. In 1971, this country lost its seat at the United Nations to its larger rival. Once
known as Formosa, this country competes in the Olympics under the name of its capital. For 10 points,
name this island country on the west of the Philippine Sea which is claimed by China.
ANSWER: Taiwan [or Republic of China; or Chung-hua Min-kuo; or Chinese Taipei; do not accept or prompt on "China" alone]
This building is surrounded by a four-thousand-square-mile Trapezium Zone in which emissions are strictly
controlled. This building is surrounded on three sides with red sandstone walls with the fourth side left open
to the Yamuna River, and it is flanked by two similar buildings also in red sandstone. The most famous
view of this building is of its south side and shows its main dome along with a pair of smaller domes on
each side as well as the four white minarets on each corner of its square base. That view of this building
also features a reflecting pool on its bottom leading up to this building's gates. FTP, name this white
marble mausoleum built by Shah Jahan to honor his dead wife, located in India.
ANSWER: Taj Mahal
The French traveler Jean-Baptist Tavernier originated the legend that a corresponding "black" structure
to this one was built on the opposite side of the river. Ustad Ahmad Lahauri was the chief architect of this
building, which was restored under Lord Curzon after the stripping of lapis lazuli from its exterior during
the Sepoy Mutiny. A reflecting pool lies outside this mausoleum. For ten points, name this white marble
Agra landmark commissioned by Mughal emperor Shah Jahan.
ANSWER: Taj Mahal
This nation's Fedchenko Glacier is the largest non-polar glacier in the world, and cities in its interior
inclube Kulob and Gharm. Rivers in the northern part of this country include the Vanj and Zeravshan, and
large rivers in the south include the Kofarnihon and the Vakhsh, which contains both the Nurek and Rogun
dams, the tallest in the world. This nation is the location of Lake Kara-Kul as well as Mt. Lenin and Ismoil
Somoni peak, formerly known as Mt. Communism. It is dominated by the Pamir and Alai mountains, and
much of its southern border is the Amu Darya River, which separates it from Afghanistan. For 10 points,
name this nation, the smallest in area of the Central Asian steppe countries, whose capital is Dushanbe.
ANSWER: Tajikstan
The southern terminus of the Alay Mountains lie at the end of the Kofamihon River in this country,
which contains the Northern boundary of the Wakhan Corridor. The highest mountains in this
country are all in the Academy of Sciences Range, and with its northern neighbor it shares the Gissar
Range. Another notable feature is Qarokul, a crater lake in the (*) Pamirs. Its capital was renamed
Stalinabad between 1929 and 1961, and other important cities include Kulob and Khujand. Most of the
population lives in the shared Fergana Valley, and its border with Afghanistan is made up partially by the
Panj River, and then by the Amu Darya. With its highest point at Isma'il Samani Peak, formerly known as
Communism Peak, FTP, name this former Soviet republic whose capital is Dushanbe.
ANSWER: Republic of Tajikistan
This city hosts free Shakespeare-in-the-park called the "Southern Shakespeare Festival." A defunct
airport in this city was named for a casualty in a 1922 dirigible disaster, the crash of the Roma. Besides
Dale Mabry Field, this city contains an administrative building from which the odd demand for 666
Dunkin's Donuts was issued from student protester Marshall Ledbetter in 1991. Near this city was the
Battle of Natural Bridge during the Civil War, in which students from what would become a major state
university prevented the Union from capturing a certain Confederate capital. That university included a
president named Doak Campbell and has an athletic team called the Seminoles. For 10 points, name this
capital of Florida.
ANSWER: Tallahassee
The 1865 Battle of Natural Bridge protected this city, the goal of General John Newton, from capture by
Union forces. The site that became this city was selected by commissioners appointed by Territorial
Governor William Duval in 1823 because of the discovery of a waterfall which is currently found in this
city's Cascade Park. The Buckman Act of 1905 instituted in this city a state college for women that became
co-educational in 1948, and this city's Leon Hotel took its name from the county in which it's located.
Selected as a state capital because of its equidistance between Pensacola and St. Augustine, FTP what is this
city in Florida's panhandle?
ANSWER: Tallahassee
Its eponymous sardine and the variants of its Tropheus genus inhabit all four of its major geographical
divisions and over 98% of this question of water's cichlid species is endemic. The Ruzizi River enters it from
the north after leaving Lake Kivu and its other major source is the Malagarasi River, which empties into it
about 25 miles south of Kigoma. Kigoma is also the railhead for the train connecting it to Dar es Salaam,
the capital of the nation to whom this lake lent part of its name. Burundi, Zambia, and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, all border, for 10 points, what central African lake that is one of the namesakes of
its eastern neighbor Tanzania.
ANSWER: Lake Tanganyika
The 704 foot Kalambo Falls are located at the southeastern shore of this lake, and cities such as
Mpala and Bujumbura are located on it. The Malagarasi and Ruizi rivers flow into this lake, and this
lake's outlet is the Lukuga River. This lake is the (*) second deepest in the world, and it forms the
boundary between Congo and Tanzania. For 10 points, name this lake, the second largest in Africa.
ANSWER: Lake Tanganyika
An absurd episode in this country's recent history saw the Civic United Front take electoral control
of Lindi and Pwani provinces by pledging to protect citizens from being serially sodomized by the
shapeshifting monster Popobawa, who supposedly lives on Pemba Island. That mass panic has been
likened to a 1962 outbreak in its Kagera state of epidemic (*) laughter. The concept of Ujaama was
espoused in a declaration named for this country's city of Arusha by President Julius Nyerere. Bordered on
the south by Lake Malawi and on the north by Lake Victoria, it contains Olduvai Gorge and Mount
Kilamanjaro. The cities of Dodoma and Dar es Salaam dominate, for 10 points, what African country
formed from Tanganyika and Zanzibar?
ANSWER: United Republic of Tanzania [accept buzzes of Tanganyika or Zanzibar before mentioned as they demonstrate precise knowledge]
The Rungwa River flows into this country's Lake Rukwa, and the saltwater Lake Eyasi is in this country's
Ngorongoro Highlands. Mafia Island is part of an archipelago off this country's eastern coast, which
contains a component of this country that lost a 45-minute-long "war". A prominent landmark on its
northern border is made up on Shira, Mawenzi, and Kibo. Paranthropus boisei hominin fossils were found
in this country's Olduvai Gorge near a plain famous for its lions. For 10 points, name this east African
country home to the Serengeti and most of Mount Kilimanjaro, which formed from the merger of Zanzibar
and Tanganyika.
ANSWER: United Republic of Tanzania
The Ruvuma River forms the southern border of this country, which contains Kalambo Falls and
Gombe National Park, as well as Pemba and Mafia Islands. Lake Natron and Ol Doinyo Lengai are
located in this country's Arusha Region, which also contains the Ngorongoro Crater. With its
northern neighbor, this country shares the (*)Serengeti Plain, and it borders Lakes Malawi and
Tanganyika to the west. Zanzibar is controlled by this country, which contains Africa's highest point,
Kilimanjaro. For ten points, name this country located between Kenya and Mozambique, whose capital
moved to Dodoma from Dar es Salaam.
ANSWER: United Republic of Tanzania
The largest city of this nation is the site of the Askari Monument. The region of Arusha in this country
contains Mount Meru and the Ngorongoro (ENG-guh-RAHN-guh-ro) Crater, as well as the Olduvai Gorge.
This country is the site of the highest peak in Africa, Mount Kilimanjaro. Along with its western neighbors
Burndi and Rwanda, it made up the colony of German East Africa. For 10 points, what country, whose
capital is Dodoma and economic center is Dar es Salaam, was formed by the union of Zanzibar and
Taganika?
ANSWER: The United Republic of Tanzania [or Jamhuri ya Muungano wa Tanzania]
This country was home to "Flo," an animal who was the matriarch of the "F-family." A mountain here
contains a remnant of an icecap called the Furtwangler Glacier. A scientist in this country observed animals
creating tools to extract termites from hills and engaging in cannibalism. In its west, Jane Goodall studied
chimpanzees at Gombe Stream National Park. This country contains the Serengeti National Park and
Africa's highest peak, Mount Kilimanjaro. For 10 points, name this African country whose largest city is
Dar es Salaam.
ANSWER: Tanzania
Among this country's bodies of water are Lake Eyasi and Lake Rukwa, and much of its southern
border is formed by the Ruvuma River. Its cities include the freshwater port Mwanza, and the site of
a 1967 declaration of "villagization" and the Ujamaa principle by this nation's first postindependence leader, Arusha. Gombe National Park lies near its border with Burundi, and its northern
provinces are such locales as Ngoorongoro Crater, Serengeti National Park, and Olduvai Gorge. Mafia,
Pemba, and Zanzibar islands lie off the eastern coast of, for 10 points, what East African nation that is home
to Dodoma and Dar es Salaam?
ANSWER: United Republic of Tanzania
One archipelago off of this nation's coast contains the islands of Mafia and Pemba, and this nation's
southern border is formed by the Ruvuma River. The northwestern portion of this nation is home to the
Ngorongoro Crater, which lies in Serengeti National Park. Its south contains parts of Lake Nyasa, and it
contains the city of Ujiji, which lies on Lake Tanganyika. For 10 points, identify this nation which controls
Zanzibar and is home to Mt. Kilimanjaro, located south of Kenya, which has capital at Dar es Salaam.
ANSWER: Tanzania
Its Arusha National Park contains an active volcano, Mount Meru, while the Umba River flows out of the
Arusha region and has notable sapphire deposits. Other notable features in this country include the Oldovai
Gorge, where the first homo habilis was discovered and where Louis and Mary Leakey made other
archeological discoveries. This country also owns Mafia Island and Pemba, while Lake Victoria and Mount
Kilimanjaro are in its north. For 10 points, name this country that owns Zanaibar and which had its capital
moved from Dar es Salaam to Dodoma.
ANSWER: United Republic of Tanzania or Jamhuri ya Muungano wa Tanzania
The Umba Valley in this nation is the only place in the world where Umba sapphires can be found. A
significant anthropological site in this country is the Olduvai Gorge, where researchers have found
early human skeletons. This country's Arusha region is home to the (*) Ngorongoro Crater. The
western part of this nation is divided from the Democratic Republic of Congo by part of Lake Tanganyika.
Lions, African elephants, and Black Rhinoceros can be found in this country's Serengeti National Park. For
ten points, name this East African nation with capital at Dodoma and home to Mount Kilimanjaro.
ANSWER: United Republic of Tanzania (or Jamhuri ya Muungano wa Tanzania)
This country's Kalambo Falls are notable as a geographical feature and as an anthropological site
discovered by John Clark and known for its examples of early man-made tools. Bodies of water in this
country include the Rufiji River and Mara River, and it shares three major lakes with neighboring polities.
The Ngorongoro crater and Ngurdoto crater lie in this country's Arusha National Park. One active volcano
in that park is called Mt. Meru, and in its northeast is a notable three-peaked, inactive volcano, Mt.
Kilimanjaro. For 10 points, what is this African country with its political capital at Dodoma and former
capital at Dar es Salaam?
ANSWER: Tanzania
This country controls the Toten Island, which is located in a bay named for this country's most
northerly seaport city, Tanga Bay. The community of Nansio is located on this country's Ukerewe
Island, the largest inland island on its continent. In the northeast of this country lies the Eden of
Ngorongoro, a volcanic crater with an extraordinarily high diversity of wildlife. This country has (*)
relocated its capital to the center of the country, though its economic center is still on its eastern coast. For
10 points, identify this African country, home to the islands of Zanzibar, the Olduvai Gorge, the Serengeti
National Park, and Mount Kilimanjaro, with largest city Dar es Salaam.
ANSWER: United Republic of Tanzania [accept Jamhuri ya Muungano wa Tanzania]
One island in this question of water is Lord Howe's Island. Cities on its eastern side include Greymouth and
New Plymouth, while cities on its western side include Newcastle and Wollongong [WOOL-ung-gong].
Norfolk Island lies in its northern part, near its border with the Coral Sea. Its namesake also gives his name
to an island whose capital is Hobart and which is separated by the Bass Strait from mainland Australia. For
10 points, name this question of water between Australia and New Zealand.
ANSWER: Tasman Sea
Storm Bay and the Bay of Fires lie off the coast of this island, whose northwest contains a temperate
rainforest, the Tarkine. It contains Cradle Mountain and its tallest point is at Mount Ossa. Many dolerite
columns named "Organ Pipes" lie on this island's Mount Wellington, which overlooks its largest city as
well as the Derwent estuary. Its namesake peninsula contains Port Arthur, a former settlement for convicts,
and another name for it is van Dieman's Land. It is separated from the mainland by the Bass Strait and its
capital is Hobart. For 10 points, name this island off the southern coast of Australia.
ANSWER: Tasmania
The D-Entrecasteaux Channel separates this state from Bruny Island while the Mercury Passage lies
between it and Maria Island. Named after its first Chief Justice and created by damming up the
Serpentine River, its largest question of water is Lake Pedder while its longest rivers include the Huon,
Tamar and Derwent. Large cities include Burnie, Devonport and Launceston while its highest point is at
Mount Ossa. Originally named Van Diemen's Land, for 10 points, name this Australian state with capital
at Hobart, an island known for its namesake "devil."
ANSWER: Tasmania
The city of Collinsvale on this island was originally named Bismarck for its German population, and
German immigrants built and settled its Butlers Gorge Dam. There is a conservation area in the
northwest of this island called Tarkine Forest. Wine production in this place is centered in the Tamar
Valley in its northeast, near the city of Launceston. Mount Ossa is the highest point on this island,
which is separated by the Banks Strait from Clarke and Cape Barren Islands. This island was initially
named Van Diemen's Land after its Dutch discoverer. The Bass Strait separates it from Australia,
of which it is a state with capital Hobart. Name this island home to a marsupial called its "devil".
ANSWER: Tasmania
While not Greece, this island contains a Mount Ossa, which lies within its Cradle Mountain-Lake St
Clair National Park. It governs Macquarie Island, and Wollongong lies on a large sea to its
northwest with a very similar name. This island's second largest city is (*) Launceston and it was
originally named for its discoverer's financier, Anthony van Diemen. Lying within the Roaring Forties, it is
separated from a much larger landmass to its north by the Bass Strait. For ten points, name this island south
of the Australian state of Victoria with capital at Hobart, known for its namesake "devils."
ANSWER: Tasmania
Asbestos Range National Park lies on this island's north coast, close to the mouth of the Tamar River upon
which the city of Launceton lies. This island's capital lies on Storm Bay at the mouth of the Derwent River
in the southern portion of this island. There are populations of Little Penguins on this island which is
separated from a larger landmass by the Bass Strait, and other distinctive wildlife on this island included a
namesake tiger which went extinct in the 1930s. For 10 points, name this island with capital at Hobart
which lies south of Australia and has a namesake marsupial devil.
ANSWER: Tasmania
Invasive species of the Brown tree frog highly populate the South Bruny National Park on this island. The
largest river on this island supports the only city in the world run solely on hydroelectricity, Launceston. A
question of water to the north of this island contains Cape Barren Island. This island's largest city is overlooked
by Mount Wellington. The Bass Strait separates the mainland from this island, which is southwest of New
Zealand and has its capital at Hobart. For 10 points, name this island to the south of Australia, home to a
namesake devil.
ANSWER: Tasmania
This city has a Confucian garden donated by the Taiwanese government, a garden commemorating the
fortieth year of the United Nations, and its country's national zoo in its El Picacho park, which is also the
site of the "Cristo del Picacho" statue. This city is home to an equestrian statue of its native son Francisco
Morazan. The meaning of this city's name is disputed, although a common claim is that it means "hills of
silver." This city was combined in 1938 to form the Central District with a neighboring city located across
the Choluteca River. For ten points, name this city that was combined with Comayaguela and which serves
as the capital of Honduras.
ANSWER: Tegucigalpa [or Tegus]
On one side of this city is the winter recreation area Towchal Ridge, and other parts of it extend into the
Kavir Desert. This city was a small village until Agha Mohammed Khan made it the capital of the Qajar
(KUJ-ur) dynasty in 1785. Residents of this city can view the peak of Mount Damavand, as it sits near the
Elburz Mountains. After 1979, many roads in this city were renamed, including the former Pahlavi
Boulevard and Shah Reza Street. For 10 points, name this capital of Iran.
ANSWER: Tehran
Fort Campbell straddles this state's northern neighbor and its own city of Clarksville. The Hunter
Museum of American Art is located in one of this state's major cities. The busiest cargo airport in the
United States is found in this state, in a city located at the confluence of the Wolf and Mississippi
Rivers. A landmark in this state includes several tombstones in its Meditation (*) Garden, and a
"Jungle Room" that was used as a recording studio. Centennial Park, located in this state's capital, is home
to a replica of the Parthenon, as well as the Grand Ole Opry House. For 10 points, name this home state of
Elvis Presley whose largest cities are Memphis and Nashville.
ANSWER: Tennessee
This state is the home of bodies of water such as Lake Isom, which is a National Wildlife Refuge area,
and Reelfoot Lake. The city of Murfreesboro is the geographic center of this state, and attractions like the
National Civil Rights Museum, found in the former Lorraine Motel, and Graceland are found in this state's
city of Memphis. For 10 points, name this state, with capital in Nashville.
ANSWER: Tennessee
The eastern part of this state is home to the Unaka Range and many other mountain ranges, one of which
contains its highest point, Clingmans Dome. One city in this state, which saw the execution of Sam Davis
and the formation of the Ku Klux Klan, is Pulaski. Like Mississippi, this state is the site of one end of the
Natchez Trace. Civil War battles in this state include the Battle of Murfreesboro and the Battle of Shiloh,
while major cities in this state include Chattanooga and Knoxville. For 10 points, name this state home to
Nashville and Memphis.
ANSWER: Tennessee
The Clinch and Powell Rivers flow through the eastern part of this state, which also contains the Tims Ford
reservoir. The Fugitive Poets wrote I-ll Take My Stand in this state, which is divided into "Grand
Divisions," and this state contains the musically important Beale Street. This state contains both Franklin
and Fort Donelson, disputed in the Civil War. This state's electoral districts were the subject of dispute in
Baker v. Carr, and the Unaka Mountains dominate this state's eastern border, where Clingman's Dome rises
over 6,600 feet. The site of the Scopes Monkey Trial, for 10 points, name this state also notable for being
the site of the Battle of Shiloh, with major cities Memphis and Nashville.
ANSWER: Tennessee
This state's Pennyroyal Region is located on the north of the Highland Rim, a plain that surrounds its
second-largest city. That city, in this state, is combined with Davidson in a metropolitan area. This state is
the location of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Clingman's Dome, the highest peak in the Great
Smoky Mountains. The original name of this state was Franklin, and it is now home to Murfreesboro. For
10 points, name this state whose flagship university is found in Knoxville.
ANSWER: Tennessee
The eastern border of this state lies along the Unaka range and the Bald Mountains. The "highland rim"
surrounds the "central basin" of this state, and the seat of its Rutherford county is Murfressboro, which saw
the battle of the Stones River during the Civil War. Near its border with North Carolina lies Clingman's
dome. This state's namesake river begins at the confluence of the French Broad and the Hoiston Rivers, and
passes through a city which is home to the Sunsphere. Another city in this state is home to the Grand Ole
Opry and is called the "Music City." For 10 points, identify this state which includes cities such as
Chattanooga, Knoxville, and Nashville.
ANSWER: Tennessee
Tributaries include the Clinch, the Duck, and the Big Sandy Rivers. The official start of this river was
moved upstream 51 miles in 1933 from Lenoir City to where James White's Fort lies at the confluence of
the Holston and the French Broad Rivers. Huntsville, Alabama lies on this river, on whose shores you can
find Fort Henry. Named for a town now submerged by Tellico Lake that used to be a capital for the
Cherokee, it flows into the Ohio River near Paducah, Kentucky. With its headwaters in Knoxville,
Tennessee, for 10 points, name this river with a namesake "Valley Authority" created by the New Deal
which shares its name with a state whose capital is Nashville.
ANSWER: Tennessee River
Glaciers in this mountain range include Skillet Glacier, which is found on Mount Moran. Jenny Lake is
located at the base of this range, and the 1925 Gros Venture landslide occured in this range. The first
recorded observation of these mountains was made by John Colter. The highest mountains in this region are
found in the Cathedral Group, which includes the Schoolroom Glacier, Mount Owen, and the namesake of
the national park that contains much of this range. For 10 points, name this Wyoming mountain range,
which contains the city of Jackson.
ANSWER: Teton range
This polity's eastern border includes Caddo Lake. Van Zandt County contains a large salt deposit near
Grand Saline, while the Edwards Plateau lies within its Blackland Praries region. Its north-eastern border is
defined by a tributary of the Atchafalaya and Mississippi Rivers, the Red River. The Brazos flows through
this state on Louisiana's western border, and its Big Bend region lies near an international border. Its
Coastal Bend region includes Beaumont, Galveston, Corpus Christi, and the seat of Harris County,
Houston. For 10 points, name this second-largest U.S. state with capital Austin.
ANSWER: Texas
Along the eastern border of this state lies a lake with the largest cypress forest in the world. Large
reserves of natural gas are found in the Barnett Shale, which underlies a major city in this state.
Another city in this state, home to the western part of Caddo Lake, is paired with the most violent
city in the world. The Chihuahuan Desert extends into this state's (*) Big Bend National Park. This
state's northernmost region is known as its panhandle. It contains the cities of El Paso and Fort Worth. For
10 points, name this second-largest US state.
ANSWER: Texas [prompt on Lone Star State]
This state's Governor's Mansion was damaged by a Molotov cocktail thrown in 2008. Near the
town of Sanford in this state, the Canadian River is dammed and forms Lake Meredith. One of its
cities was devastated by a 1900 (*) hurricane that is still the deadliest to hit the United States. Rivers in
this state include the Nueces, the Brazos, and the Pecos. This state has been ruled under six different flags,
and its cities include Galveston and Corpus Christi. For 10 points, name this state which houses the Alamo
mission in its city of San Antonio.
ANSWER: Texas
The Canadian River cuts across this state's panhandle. Guadalupe Peak is this state's highest point.
Before being admitted to the Union in 1845, this Republic passed a resolution claiming the Californias for
it over Sam Houston's veto. For 10 points, name this state whose border with Mexico is formed by the Rio
Grande.
ANSWER: Texas
Though the Buffalo Soldiers were formed in Kansas, much of their service was done at Fort Davis
and Fort Clark in this state. Part of its eastern border is formed by the Sabine River, and a region of
its southern border is called the Big Bend. The southernmost point of this state, the location of the
Battle of Resaca de la Palma, is the city of Brownsville. The town of Lubbock is just south of its
panhandle, which includes Amarillo [aa-muh-RIL-oh]. Its largest metropolitan area contains Plano,
Irving, and Fort Worth. Name this state that, in addition to Dallas, contains the city of San Antonio,
home of the Alamo.
ANSWER: Texas
This country's southernmost province of Patani has been the site of insurgency since 2004. The
Tenasserim Hills along this country's western border contain the Three Pagodas Pass, and this
country was once home to a state known as Lanna, which was also called the Kingdom of a Million
Rice Fields. This country's eastern region of Isan rests on the Khorat Plateau, and Chiang Mai is its
largest city in the north. This country's capital lies on the Chao Phraya River, which flows into its
namesake gulf, an arm of the South China Sea. This country's capital was moved to Thonburi by
Taksin after the sacking of Ayutthaya. This country shares the Kra Isthmus with its western neighbor
Myanmar, and the Malay Peninsula with Malaysia. Once known as Siam, for 10 points, name this country
of Southeast Asia with capital at Bangkok.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Thailand [or Ratcha Anachak Thai]
One island in this country, which is not Sri Lanka, was once known as "Junk Ceylon." That island in
this country contains the Two Heroines monument and was where a ten-year old girl named Tilly Smith
used her grade-school geography knowledge to save countless lives. Its largest island is a resort-laden spot
on the Andaman Sea which was devastated by the 2004 tsunami, called Phuket. Several "friendship
bridges" connect this country to its eastern neighbor, Laos. For 10 points, name this country ruled by King
Rama IX from Bangkok.
ANSWER: Thailand
In this nation, the Khorat Plateau creates eastern highlands. The Chao Phraya River flows through this
nation's largest city and into this country's namesake gulf. This nations's northern border is formed by the
Mekong River. This nation's major cities include Chiang Mai and Phuket, and it is bordered by Myanmar,
Cambodia, Laos, and Malaysia. For 10 points, name this Southeast Asian nation, with capital at Bangkok.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Thailand or Ratcha Anachak Thai or Prathet Thai
This country's Khorat Plateau is found in its Isan region. The Mae Klong and Tapi Rivers flow into the
namesake gulf to the south of most of this country. This nation is bordered on the west by Burma and to the
east by Cambodia and Laos. For ten points, name this Asian nation with capital Bangkok.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Thailand
This country's Dong Phayayen-Khao Yai forest complex is a watershed for most of its rivers. Its
Mae Hong Son province has Karen refugees from Myanmar. Nakhon Ratchasima is the largest city
in this country's Khorat Basin, which contains significant Khmer and Vietnamese minorities. In this
nation's capital, a district called Rattanakosin Island features the Grand Palace building complex.
The Isthmus of Kra connects two portions of this nation, one on the Malay Peninsula and the other
in Southeast Asia. The Chao Phraya River flows through this nation's capital. Name this nation
with a capital at Bangkok.
ANSWER: (Kingdom of) Thailand [or Prathet Thai or Ratcha Anachak Thai]
A city in this country holds an annual Monkey Festival to celebrate its large population of crab-eating
macaques. People from this country perform a formal greeting similar to namaste called wai. Its northern
region of Isan is just to the east of its ancient capital city, Lopburi and the resort beach Patong is located on
its largest island, Phuket. This country is the namesake of a kind of kickboxing nicknamed "the art of eight
limbs." One can travel from this country's namesake gulf to the Indian Ocean by passing through the Straits
of Malacca or over the Isthmus of Kra, which this country shares with its neighbor Myanmar. For 10 points,
name this Southeast Asian kingdom with its capital at Bangkok.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Thailand [or Prathet Thai; or Ratcha Anachak Thai]
A limestone column that extends vertically from Phang Nga (FONG NWAH) Bay in this country is
known as "James Bond Island." Between that bay and the Andaman Sea lies this country's resort of Phuket
(FOO-ket). It is bordered to the west by Myanmar, to the north and east by Laos, and to the southeast by
Cambodia. For 10 points, name this Southeast Asian country which is ruled by the Chakri Dynasty of kings
named Rama, who live in a palace in Bangkok.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Thailand [or Ratcha Anachak Thai]
The northeastern portion of this nation is a region called Isan, which takes its name from the capital of the
Chenla Kingdom and includes the Khorat Plateau. This country's north contains the provinces of Chiang Rai
and Chiang Mai, and the resort island of Phuket is located in this nation's south. This country's capital
contains waterways called "Khlongs" formed by the Chao Phraya River, and it sits on a namesake gulf
jutting out from the South China Sea. For 10 points, identify this nation formerly known as Siam which
borders Burma and Laos and has capital at Bangkok.
ANSWER: Thailand
This country's town of Mae Hong Son is called the "City of the Three Mists" because it is perpetually
covered in fog. Residents of this country celebrate the New Year in the Songkran Festival, which lasts for
almost a week in its city of Chiang Mai. This country borders Malaysia to the south, and its northern
borders with Laos and Myanmar are partially formed by the Mekong River. For 10 points, name this
Southeast Asian country which saw October 2011 floods threaten Bangkok.
ANSWER: Thailand
This country's Pattani River ends at its namesake town in the Yala Province on its east coast. Its largest lake
has a northern portion going up to the Ranot Region and a smaller southern portion in its namesake
Songkhla Region. Part of its western border is formed by the Kraburi River on the Kra Isthmus. This
country also contains the coastal town of Rayong, where a chemical explosion killed twelve people in 2012.
Its northeast region contains the Khorat Plateau, and much of its northeast border is formed by the Mekong
River, which separates this country from the capital of Laos, Vientiane. Its southern region is between
Myanmar and Malaysia. Name this country whose capital-located at the mouth of the Chao Phraya [PRYah] River-is Bangkok.
ANSWER: Kingdom of Thailand [or Ratcha Anachak Thai or Prathet Thai]
Early tributaries of this waterway include the Ock, Pang, Wey, and Mole rivers, while oddly-named
islands in it include Headpile Eyot, Eel Pie, and one not named after Taiwan called Formosa. During
World War II, the Maunsell fortifications were built along this river for defense and recently the Jubilee
canal has been built to control flooding. With landmarks including Fry, Canvey and Sheppey islands, this
waterway begins in the Cotswolds near Kemble in Gloucestershire. For 10 points, name this river which
flows through Windsor, Oxford and London.
ANSWER: River Thames
The River Ock joins this question of water at Abingdon, roughly forty miles southwest of the River Churn,
another tributary that is likely this river's source on the western edge of the Cotswolds. Downstream,
this waterway passes through Goring Gap between the Chiltern Hills and Berkshire Downs then joins the
Rivers Pang and Kennet in Pangbourne and Reading, respectively. For 10 points, name this river, which is
known as the Isis in Oxford, and which comes to an end as an estuary at The Nore sandbank after
flowing through London.
ANSWER: River Thames (or Tamesis; or Tamesa; prompt on River Isis before mention)
In 1984, a ship called the Jupiter crashed into a bridge over this question of water, which at one point
was the site of a structure called the "Nonsuch House." The 1858 "Great Stink" was due to massive
amounts of human waste being dumped into this question of water. The southern part of this river
contains Teddington Lock. Islands on this river include Thorney Island and (*) Magna Carta Island,
with the former being the site of Westminster Abbey. For 10 points, name this river which flows through
central London, the longest river entirely in England.
ANSWER: the River Thames (temz)
An annual tradition on this river is the rounding up of swans or "swan upping." In the eighteenth century,
"mudlarks" scavenged this river, which was heavily contaminated by human waste in the 1858 Great Stink.
At its point of Teddington Lock, it was the assembly point for the flotilla used in the Dunkirk evacuation.
Thorney Island, on this river, was where Westminster Abbey was built. For 10 points, name this longest
river entirely in England, which flows through London.
ANSWER: River Thames
This river's source is near the village of Kemble, and its estuary is situated near the town of
Southend. Pedestrians can cross this river on the Millennium Bridge. Its Canvey Island was flooded
in 1953. Landmarks on the banks of this river include Cleopatra's (*) Needle and a massive Ferris
wheel known as the "Eye." Cities this river passes through include Reading, Windsor, Richmond, and
Oxford. For 10 points, name this river which runs through London.
ANSWER: River Thames
Over fifty people died on this river during the 1989 Marchioness disaster. Others were killed when the
sea flooded this river's Canvey Island. The area of it known as the Tideway is downstream from
Teddington Lock. The artificial Jubilee River contains this river's overflow and was named for the
Diamond Jubilee. Pollution in this river reached alarming levels in the 1858 Great Stink, and it has been
blamed for giving Prince Albert his fatal case of typhoid. For 10 points, name this longest river entirely in
England, which flows through London.
ANSWER: River Thames
Fry's Island and Canvey Island lie within this river with tributaries that include the Churn, Leach, Cole, Ray,
and Windrush Rivers. T.S. Eliot makes many references to this river in part three of The Wasteland, and
artists including Canaletto, Monet, Whistler, and JMW Turner have all based major works on this river.
Ending after Teddington Lock near the lighthouse at Nore is, for 10 points, what river that empties into the
North Sea and flows through central London?
ANSWER: River Thames
This was the last major structure to be surveyed by John L. Savage. This structure sits atop two major
seismic fault lines and receives the vast majority of forty million tons of sediment, greatly altering
biodiversity. A population of the critically endangered Siberian Crane is suffering because of this structure,
which also contributed to the extinction of the Baiji dolphin. This structure is fully operational apart from
one ship lift, and it is second only to the Itaipu Dam in electricity generation. For ten points, name this dam
on the Yangtze River in China.
ANSWER: Three Gorges Dam [or Changjiang Sanxia Daba]
John L. Savage, a civil engineer working for the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, surveyed the site for this
project in 1944, but worked on it was stopped three years later. The poem "Swimming" is about a project
very similar to it and was written in 1956 by Mao Zedong. The Itaipu Dam and this structure are currently
tied for the most amount of electricity generated by a dam. For 10 points, name this dam, controversial for
its great environmental damage, located in southern China.
ANSWER: Three Gorges Dam
The Bogda Mountains is an eastern extension of this mountain range, and this mountain range is the
source of the Chu River. Tianchi is an alpine lake in this mountain range, which runs north of the
Turpan Depression. The South Ingylchek Glacier is the largest area of ice in this mountain range and
lies under Khan Tengri, which along with Pik Pobedy is one of the highest peaks in this range. The
(*) Naryn River rises in this mountain range and is the main feeder of the Syr Darya. This mountain range
runs near Urumqi and the Taklamakan Desert and it contains the large Lake Issyk-Kul as well as the city of
Bishkek.FTP, name this mountain range that runs through Xinjiang Province in China and through
Kyrgyzstan, which has a name that means heavenly mountains.
ANSWER: Tian Shan (or Heavenly Mountains before mentioned)
This region's Yarlung River forms a "Grand Canyon," the deepest in the world. This region is where the
practice of blessing land with "prayer flags" originated. Lakes Siling and Namu are found in this region's
northern Changtang area. Its traditions include ritually incising a corpse and leaving it to be eaten by
vultures in a "sky burial." An animist religion called Bon is native to this region. The capital of this region
contains Jokhang Temple, built by Songtsen Gampo, and Potala Palace. It is located southwest of Qinghai
and directly south of Xinjiang. For 10 points, name this Himalayan region with a capital at Lhasa,
controversially taken over in 1951 by China.
ANSWER: Tibet [or Xizang]
The first piece of cultivated land in this region is Zortang, and its soil is still highly valued. The inhabitants
of this polity believe that their first king inhabited Yungbulakang Palace within the Yarlung Valley.
Monasteries within this political unit include the Sera, Ganden and Drepung ones, which all practice
Yellow-Hat Buddhism. Its capital is home to the Potala Palace, which is where Tenzin Gyatso lived until he
fled to Dharamsala. The capital of this place is Lhasa, which sits on the base of the Himalayas. For 10
points, name this region of China that constantly seeks its own autonomy, whose spiritual leader is the Dalai
Lama.
ANSWER: Tibet
This region lies south of the Kunlun Mountains. In 2006, a railway was completed linking the
capital of this region to Golmud and Xining (SHIN-ing). Mt. Kailash lies in the western part of this
region, and the Yarlung (*) Tsangpo River cuts a deep canyon through this region before becoming the
Brahmaputra. Jokhang Temple and Potala Palace are found in this region's capital. For 10 points, name this
plateau region with a capital at Lhasa that is bordered to the south by the Himalayas.
ANSWER: Tibet [or Xizang]
This region is home to Lake Manasarovar, the source of the Karnali River. The Kunlun Mountains are at the
northern edge of this region, beyond which sits the Tarim Basin. This region is separated into subregions
including Amdo and Kham, and the Karakoram Range marks its southwestern border. Bordered by
Xinjiang, this region is the source of the Mekong and Yellow rivers, and it contains the Potala Palace in its
capital city of Lhasa. For ten points, name this region bordered to the south by the Himalayas, a highaltitude plateau in China, sometimes called the "roof of the world."
ANSWER: Tibet (accept Tibetan Plateau or Tibet Autonomous Region)
In this region, the confluence of the Sengge and Gar rivers gives rise to the Indus river. This
region includes the lakes Siling and Nam. This region is often called the "roof of the world" due to its
location on the highest and largest plateau in the world. (*) Potala Palace is found in this region's
capital of Lhasa. For 10 points, name this place whose namesake form of Buddhism is led by the Dalai
Lama, a formerly independent monk-state that is now ruled by China.
ANSWER: Tibet
A lake sacred to Hindus, Lake Mapam, is located in this region, and rivers with sources in this region
include the Tsangpo and Salween. It borders the disputed regions of Aksai Chin and the Tawang Valley,
and the Ladakh range sits on this region's western border with Kashmir. The Kunlun Shan form this
region's border with Sinkiang and Qinghai, and the Potala Palace is a notable structure located in this
region. For 10 points, name this autonomous Chinese region north of the Himalayas which is situated on a
namesake plateau and has its capital at Lhasa.
ANSWER: Tibet
Oil was discovered at this geographic area in Manantiales, and its native peoples include the Ona and
Alacaluf. The town of Porvenir is the capital of its namesake province, and its peaks include Monte
Sarmiento. Its Isla Desolacion receives one hundred and eighty inches of rainfall a year. Its islands of
Lennox, Picton, and Nueva are disputed between two countries, and its base lies on the Beagle Channel. For
10 points, name this archipelago that is separated from the mainland of South American by the Strait of
Magellan and whose name means "Land of Fire."
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego
This region's Navarino Island is home to artifacts of the Yaghan culture. Another native group, the Selknam,
was moved to this region's Dawson Island. The major island in this archipelago has its highest point at
Mount Darwin, and is bounded to the south by the Beagle Channel. Towns here include Porvenir and Puerto
Williams, as well as its largest city Ushuaia. Separated from the mainland by the Strait of Magellan, it lies at
the bottom of Patagonia and is home to some of the southernmost settlements in the world. For 10 points,
name this archipelago off the southern tip of South America.
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego
The Yamana are the only still extant native tribe from this region. Though not in Mexico, this region
includes Lapataia and Ensenada Bays. One mountain range in this region is known as the Cordillera
Darwin. The city of Ushuaia in this region calls itself the "End of the World," lies on the Beagle Channel,
and is the southernmost city in the world. For 10 points, name this region between the Strait of Magellan
and the Drake Passage, which is split between Chile and Argentina and whose name literally means "land
of fire."
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego
This place is the location of a country's only oil field at Manantiales, and its native peoples were the
Ona, Yahgan, and Alacaluf. An island called Staten Island is separated from this group by Le Maire Strait,
and its mountains include Monte Darwin. An underwater ridge in the Scotia Sea connects this formation
with Palmer Land. Its main island is separated from Navarino and Hoste by the Beagle Channel, and its city
of Ushuaia is the southernmost city in the world. Cape Horn is located in this group, and this island group
is separated from the mainland by the Strait of Magellan. For ten points, name this archipelago on the
southern end off of South America.
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego
This archipelago (ar-kih-PEH-lah-goh) was the home of the Selknam people, who became extinct after
being moved to Dawson Island. This archipelago also was the home of the Yaghan people, one of whom
became known as Jemmy Button. Its largest city is Ushuaia, and, before the Galapagos Islands, it was
visited by the first two missions of the HMS Beagle. The region south of this archipelago is the Drake
Passage, and its northern boundary is the Strait of Magellan. Name this group of islands, the southernmost
portion of Patagonia, shared by Argentina and Chile at the tip of South America whose name means "Land
of Fire".
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego [accept Land of Fire before the end]
Julio Popper recruited Croatian immigrants to found Porvenir during this archipelago's gold
rush, in which its Selknam people were massacred. Because these islands are exempt from VAT, they
have recently become a hub for laptop manufacturing. It is not in Greece, but this archipelago's
Navarino Island is home to a midden created by its native Yagan people. This archipelago's highest
point, Mt. (*) Darwin, was so named because it was surveyed by the HMS Beagle. Ushuaia is the capital of
a province on this archipelago northwest of the Scotia Sea. These islands lie north of the Drake Passage,
and they are separated from the mainland by the Strait of Magellan. For 10 points, name these islands
shared by Chile and Argentina.
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego [or Land of Fire]
This region was home to Port Famine, a city founded by Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa. This region was
divided by the Boundary Treaty of 1881. The Yaghan were early inhabitants of this region, whose major
cities include Puerto Williams, Porvenir, and Punta Arenas. Jemmy Button, a native of this region, was
taken along with three others by Robert FitzRoy upon his 1830 voyage here. This archipelago includes Isla
Navarino, which is close to Cape Horn. Its largest city, and the capital of half of this region, is Ushuaia. For
10 points, name this region that is divided between Argentina and Chile, named for the Spanish for "land of
fire."
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego [prompt on TF; prompt on Land of Fire]
This region's native Jemmy Button spoke its indigenous Yaghan language, which has only one native
speaker left. Its largest island is home to a regional capital at Porvenir and the rainy town of Ushuaia. Its
highest peak, Mount Darwin, lies near Beagle Channel. This region is separated from Patagonia by the
Strait of Magellan. For 10 points, name this archipelago south of Chile and Argentina which was named
after Magellan saw distant fires rising from it.
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego
Environmentalists are concerned that North American beavers introduced to this archipelago in the 1940s
might migrate to the mainland. Yamanas, the aboriginal inhabitants of this region, resided in huts around
Lapataia Bay. Porvenir is the capital of one of the two political units located in this archipelago, while
Puerto Toro and Puerto Williams are located on Navarino Island across from its main island. Another city
located in this region is Ushuaia, which is situated on the Beagle Channel near the Cordillera Darwin. Punta
Arenas lies on the mainland across the Strait of Magellan from it. For 10 points, identify this archipelago
split between Argentina and Chile at the southern tip of South America.
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego
The biggest environmental issue in this region began when the American beaver was introduced here in
1940. The early 20th century saw a sharp decline in the native Selkham and Yagan tribes located here,
which were part of the Ona language group. That decline was likely the result of a gold rush here led by
Julius Popper. The largest city here, Ushuaia, claims to be the southernmost city in the world. By taking the
Drake Passage, one can round this region's southernmost point, Cape Horn. The Strait of Magellan
separates this area from the mainland. For 10 points, name this archipelago shared by Argentina and Chile.
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego
Its indigenous people include the Yaghan, whose language has one native speaker, and Robert
Fitzroy brought four natives of this location back to England. Though not New York, one segment is
sometimes called Staten Island, and its highest point is Monte [*] Darwin. Its west end, Isla Desolacion,
can receive 800% more rain than the east end, and Ushuaia, its largest city, is generally considered the
southernmost city in the world. Containing the Beagle Channel, for 10 points, name this archipelago,
bordered to the north by the Strait of Magellan, that is divided between Chile and Argentina and whose
name means "Land of Fire."
ANSWER: Tierra del Fuego
On this river lies the controversial Ilysu Dam and the endangered ancient city Hasankeyf. Ctesiphon and
Seleucia sit on opposite banks of this river downstream from Samarra. Its tributaries include the Great and
Little Zab Rivers, which flow down from the Zagros Mountains. At Qurna, it joins a more western river to
form the Shatt-al-Arab. Along this river, Nineveh lies across from Mosul, and Tikrit lies farther
downstream. It comprises Syria's easternmost border with Turkey, and a brief stretch of Syria's border with
Iraq, whose capital, Baghdad, straddles this river's banks. For 10 points, name this river, Mesopotamia's
second-longest, which joins the Euphrates.
ANSWER: Tigris River [or Dicle Nehri; or Nahr Dijlah]
The ancient labyrinth of Chinkana lies on the shores of this lake. The Ramis and Coata are the two
largest rivers that feed this lake, and major islands in it include Uros and Amantani. The Strait of
Tiquina connects the two separate basins that make up this lake. It supposedly means "Rock Puma"
in the local (*) Quechua language, and cities on this lake include Copacabana and Puno. To the south of
this lake lies the Altiplano, and it is often referred to as the highest navigable lake in the world because of
its overall elevation. For ten points, name this South American lake that lies on the border of Peru and
Bolivia.
ANSWER: Lake Titicaca
While exploring this question of water, Jacques-Yves Cousteau discovered a species of frog that
apparently never comes up for air. It contains floating reed islands collectively named after the Uro tribe,
which include Toranipata and Santa Maria, and on its banks is the city of Puno. The Island of the Sun and
Island of the Moon are on the Bolivian side of this lake in the Andes Mountains. For 10 points, name this
highest navigable lake in the world, split between Peru and Bolivia, the largest freshwater lake in South
America.
ANSWER: Lake Titicaca
One island in this question of water is Suriqui, the inhabitants of which helped Thor Heyerdahl craft the reed
boats Ra II and Tigris. The so-called Uros, a group of over 40 man-made islands, are a tourist attraction in
this question of water, and it also features an Isla del Sol and an Isla de la Luna. The two biggest cities on its
shores are Puno and Copacabana, which are in Peru and Bolivia, respectively. The highest navigable lake in
the world, FTP name this question of water in the Andes, the name of which is not funny.
ANSWER: Lake Titicaca
In this question of water, invasive trout threaten a massive species of namesake water frogs which grow to
20 inches long and have excessive skin all over their bodies. During the 20th century, the SS Ollanta was
stationed in this question of water, where potatoes are grown on Amantani island. Its indigenous people used
reeds to build the Uros, dozens of artificial floating islands, and its real islands include the Isla del Sol. This
endorheic lake is in the Tinajani basin, and its parts are connected by the Strait of Tiquina. For ten points,
name this lake on the Altiplano between Peru and Bolivia.
ANSWER: Lake Titicaca
Uros, Amantani, Taquile, and Isla del Sol are a few islands located in this question of water, and the Taraco
and Yampupata Peninsula protrude into this question of water. This question of water is fed by the Ilave, Coata,
and Ramis Rivers among others, and it empties into the Desaguadero River. Divided into two parts by the
Strait of Tiquina, it has the highest elevation of any major lake in the world. Located on the border of Peru
and Bolivia is, for 10 points, what second largest lake by area and largest by volume in South America?
ANSWER: Lake Titicaca
Although the origin of its name is unknown, it is thought to mean "rock puma" because of its resemblance
to a puma hunting a rabbit. It is made up of two nearly-separate sub-basins which are only connected by the
Strait of Tiquina. The Uro people, who live on floating islands made of totora reeds, inhabit this lake, while
the Aymara people live along its shores and along its only natural outflow, the Desaguadero River. In all it
contains 41 islands, with notable examples being the Isla del Sol and the Isla de la Luna. Located in the
Andes Mountains, it borders both Peru and Bolivia. FTP, name this lake, the largest by volume in South
America.
ANSWER: Lake Titicaca
Its northeast is the home to Bloody Bay River and Man of War Bay, and the Buccoo Coral Reef is on
its coast. A mile north of this island is its "little" version or (*) Bird of Paradise Island. Its major city,
the seat of St. Andrew parish, sits on Rockly Bay and is named Scarborough. Since 1987, it has had internal
autonomy from its larger counterpart to the southwest, which governs from Port of Spain. For 10 points,
name this Carribean island, part of a namesake country with Trinidad.
ANSWER: Tobago
A fifty-four story tower in this city is the key component of this city's Roppongi Hills complex. In
November of 2011, this city's Sky Tree became the tallest tower in the world. This city has a bridge with
444 solar-powered lamps that can change colors, which led to the name of the Rainbow Bridge. The
artificial island and shopping district Odaiba (oh-dah-EE-bah) and the business district Shiodome
(shee-oh-DOH-may) are found here. For 10 points, name this largest city and capital of Japan.
ANSWER: Tokyo
The western part of this city is called the Tama Area, and it is the site of an amusement park called
Sanrio Puroland. This city has many museums located in its Ueno (oo-EY-noh) Park, including the
National Museum of Western Art. Shopping can be done in this city's commercial district called Ginza. The
second-tallest structure in the world is this city's namesake Skytree. This city's Imperial Palace is in its
Chiyoda ward, and Shibuya is the site of its Meiji (MAY-jee) Shrine. For 10 points, name this city that has
the largest metropolitan area in the world and is the most populous in Japan.
ANSWER: Tokyo
One famous statue in this city is of a little girl wearing red shoes, and a new tower in this city is
called its namesake Sky Tree. This city's bay is traversed by the Rainbow Bridge, and it is divided
into twenty-three "special wards." This city hosted the 1964 Olympics, and includes the (*) Diet
Building in the Chiyoda ward. Its other sections include Shinjuku. For 10 points, name this city on the
island of Honshu, the capital of Japan.
ANSWER: Tokyo
The creation of a "sea forest" landfill is one of this city's green initiatives, which began under a
mayor who called on his country to "Say No" to America in a 1989 book. This city's 23 wards are all
confusingly called "cities" in English. A firefighting deity inspired the name of the "Field of Autumn
Leaves" in this city, which has the most Michelin stars of any in the world. (*) Roppongi Hills is a real
estate development in this city, where a giant "Skytree" was completed in 2011. The Sevii islands were
probably inspired by the "Seven" Izu islands that extend south of this city. This city's name was changed to
mean "Eastern Capital" at the end of the Edo period, and it contains Frank Lloyd Wright's Imperial Hotel.
For 10 points, name this capital of Japan.
ANSWER: Tokyo-to [or Eastern Capital until it is read; prompt on "Edo"]
Public transit riders in this city pay with the RFID-based PASSMO system, and operators of its trains
include JR East and TX. This city is the point of departure for luxury excursions on the "Romancecar"
lines, and drivers here may use the "Aqua-line" tunnel under its namesake bay. This city's rail system is
comprised of the Metro and Toei networks, and it is the busiest subway in the world despite only a fifth of
its traffic going underground. It is the larger of two cities connected by the original "main trunk line"
high-speed trains. For ten points, identify this city whose transport system was attacked with sarin gas in
1995 by Aum Shinrikyo.
ANSWER: Tokyo
This city has eleven Michelin three-star restaurants, more than any other in the world. It is divided into
twenty-three wards, and was the site of Frank Lloyd Wright's Imperial Hotel, which survived the 1923
earthquake here. This city's most expensive department stores are in Ginza. It is served by the Narita
Airport
and was once called Edo. The most populous city on Honshu is, for 10 points, what capital of Japan?
ANSWER: Tokyo
This is the largest city within the Keihin Industrial Zone. This city's namesake bay is enclosed by the
Miura and Boso peninsulas. The Kyo and New Bridges are the borders of this city's Ginza shopping
district, and this city originated on the Sumida estuary. This city's National Museum of Western Art was
designed by Le Corbusier and is located in Ueno Park, which is noted for its cherry blossom festival. The
city of Kawasaki is located between this city and another city in this city's metro area, Yokohama. For 10
points, name this capital city of Japan.
ANSWER: Tokyo
This city includes a Buddhist temple on a pond called Benten-do (BEN-ten-doh), and its tallest building will
soon be its Sky Tree. One of the tourist destinations in this city used to be called Big Egg City. One site in
this city has had a hotel built on it three times, the second one being a Frank Lloyd Wright design in the
shape of the letters I and H. This city also contains a slightly larger version of the Eiffel Tower. Name this
city which contains an Imperial Palace built on the site of Edo Castle, the capital of Japan.
ANSWER: Tokyo [accept Edo before it is mentioned]
831 "koban" in this city are the substations of its police department, which is headquartered in an iconic
triangular building with a spiraling tower on top. In this city, a large fireworks display is held on the last
Saturday of July over the Sumida River. Its subway system, the world's busiest, was the target of a sarin gas
attack in 1995. This city is home to the fashion district Harajuku. For 10 points, name this city, the home of
the Japanese Imperial Palace.
ANSWER: Tokyo
When E. Cardon Walker dedicated this location in April 1983, he said he hoped it would be a "symbol
of the spirit of cooperation and friendship" between nations. An entertainment complex at this location is
Ikspiari, which is close to the Maihama train station. This location's entrance area is a shopping center
called the "World Bazaar," which is similar to the American counterpart, "Main Street U.S.A." It is the
third most visited theme park in the world behind the Magic Kingdom and a park with the same name in
Anaheim. For ten points, name this theme park in Japan which features Cinderella Castle.
ANSWER: Tokyo Disneyland
A structure of this type in Batalha Monastery is surmounted by a gothic-style metal crucifix. One of these
structures was the only part of the Saxon Palace not demolished in the destruction of Warsaw. The first
modern eternal flame in Europe was lit at a structure of this type at the Arc de Triomphe. Bouquets from
British royal weddings are laid at this structure in Westminster Abbey, which was dedicated on Armistice
Day, 1920; the American structure of this type was dedicated the following year. For 10 points, name this
type of structure, an example of which is the final resting place of "An American Soldier, Known but to
God" at Arlington National Cemetery.
ANSWER: Tombs of the Unknown Soldier of World War I [or Tomb of the Unknown Warrior of Worl War I; or monuments for the unknown soldiers; accept obvious equivalents; prompt on "monuments"]
The peak of this area's namesake phenomenon is in late spring, as opposed to the late fall "Dixie"
counterpart. This area is created by the intersection of the different characters of air from the Sonoran
Desert on its southwest, the Rocky Mountains on its west, and the Gulf of Mexico on its southeast. This
area includes North Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas, and sees several storms rated on the Fujita scale. For 10
points, name this Plains area where twisters are the most common in the U.S.
ANSWER: Tornado Alley
This city's metropolitan area includes such towns as Oshawa, Pickering, and Oakville. Rivers to intersect it
include the Humber River from the west and the Don River from the east. This city was home to the world's
tallest free-standing structure decades until the construction of the Burj Dubai in the United Arab Emirates,
and its First Canadian Centre is the tallest occupied building in the country. Located on the shores of Lake
Ontario, FTP, identify this largest city of Canada.
ANSWER: Toronto
Henry Pellatt owned the power company that first supplied this city with electricity and built his mansion
Casa Loma here. The Centreville amusement park is on islands of the same name as this city off its coast.
The first baseball stadium with a fully retractable roof, SkyDome, was built for its team. That stadium is
located near its tallest structure, the CN Tower. Under British rule, this city was the capital of Upper
Canada and is now the provincial capital of Ontario. For 10 points, name this largest city in Canada.
ANSWER: Toronto
General Alexander Lebed led the 14th Army in support of this region, destroying an opposing army in
the Gerbovetskii Forest. This region actually controls the city of Bender, which is de iure under the Joint
Control Commission. This region uses the ruble as currency rather than the leu. Tiraspol is the major city of
this region which retains Russian as an official language and opposed a feared union with Romania. For the
point, name this state that has mostly broken away from Moldova and is named for the river that runs
through Moldova and flows into the Black Sea.
ANSWER: Transnistria [or Transdnistria]
This structure contains an object called the "Ace of Cups" which legendarily was made to block the view
of a barber who was an enemy of the sculptor. The commission for it went to Nicola Salvi only after there
was protest that a Florentine won the assignment. This structure is waded into by Marcello and Sylvia in
the Fellini film La Dolce Vita. This site features in its middle a statue of Ocean carried on a chariot by two
horses jockeyed by Tritons. The practice of throwing money into it is referenced in the song "Three Coins
in the Fountain." For ten points, name this largest Baroque fountain in Rome.
ANSWER: Trevi Fountain
This island's Muslim minority recently founded an Islamic Center in Kelly Village, due east
of its Caroni Swamp National Park, where a habitat for the scarlet ibis is protected. This island's
southwest includes a large natural deposit of liquid asphalt called Pitch Lake. In the nineteenth
century, volcanic activity began at its Devil's Woodyard, near Princes Town. The large and
growing populace of Chaguanas on this island, located along the Gulf of Paria, includes many
people of Indian descent. For 10 points, name this island just north of Venezuela, where the
government in Port-of-Spain also controls a smaller Caribbean island to its northeast called
Tobago.
ANSWER: Trinidad
It was on this island in 1990 that a Muslim group led by Yasin Abu Bakr took over the Red House, seat of
its nation's parliament. This oil-rich island is more famous for the world's largest lake of natural asphalt,
Pitch Lake. This island is indented by the Gulf of Paria, and the narrow Dragon's Mouth and Serpent's
Mouth straits separate it from the mainland. Because it is a continental island, it is not part of the Antilles
chain, but geologically closer to nearby Venezuela. FTP, identify this island with capital at Port-of-Spain
that forms a country with nearby Tobago.
ANSWER: Trinidad (do not accept Trinidad and Tobago)
Caroni Swamp is the home of the national bird of this country, the scarlet ibis. One of this country's islands
is also called Bird of Paradise Island, and it is home to the mud volcano system known as the Devil's
Woodyard. This country contains the asphalt deposit of Pitch Lake, and the major island of this nation is
separated from the South American coast by the Gulf of Patria. This country celebrates Arrival Day for its
substantial Indian minority. For 10 points, identify this nation named for its two major islands which lies
northeast of Venezuela in the Caribbean and has its capital at Port of Spain.
ANSWER: Trinidad and Tobago [prompt on Trinidad]
This city's ruling class was overthrown in a coup led by Ahmed Pasha, who established its Karamanli
dynasty. The USS Intrepid was downed during a blockade of this city's harbor, and this city's ruling family
was defeated at the Battle of Derna; those events are cited in the second line of the US Marines- Hymn
which refers to this city's shores. Its rulers fought the US in the First Barbary War, and King Idriss ruled out
of this city before he was deposed in the September revolution led by Muammar Ghaddafi. For 10 points,
identify this city, the capital of Libya.
ANSWER: Tripoli [or Tarabulus; accept Tripolitana]
The northernmost point of this island group is Bomatu point and the island of Bomapua is located in
Wagwama bay. The first Allied airstrips in the south-west Pacific were built on the island of
Kiriwina in this island group as part of MacArthur's CARTWHEEL offensive to capture Rabual.
Named for the first lieutenant of Bruni d'Entrecasteaux, they are located within the (*) Solomon Sea
and are part of the Milne Bay Province of Papua New Guinea. Inhabitants of the government center of
Losuia might exchange greetings in the native language of Kilivila as they exchange kula in, for 10 points,
what island group whose inhabitants are discussed in The Sexual Life of Savages in North-Western
Melanesia and Coral Gardens and their Magic by Malinowski?
ANSWER: Trobriand Islands [or Kiriwina Islands]
These people write in a close relative of the ancient Phoenician alphabet, the tifinagh script. Women
among these Islam-practicing people do not wear veils, but their men traditionally never take off their blue
veils after age 25. Iyad Ag Ghaly, a member of this ethnic group, founded Ansar Dine (DEE-nay). These
people rebelled against Amadou Toure's government with the goal of creating their own state of Azawad;
they thus initiated the 2012 Mali conflict subsequently taken over by Islamists. For ten points, name these
Berber-speaking desert dwellers of North and West Africa.
ANSWER: Tuareg People [prompt on Berbers before it is read]
This country contains the cities of Kebili and Douz (dooz), which are located by Chott el Djerid, a large salt
lake located at the northern end of the Grand Erg Oriental Desert. This country also contains the city of
Sfax, which lies at the northern end of the Gulf of Gabes, which contains the island of Djerba. Control of
this country was taken by Beji Caid el Sebsi this year after Mohamed Ghannouchi and Zine El Abidine Ben
Ali each resigned. Name this location of the ancient city of Carthage, a nation between Algeria and Libya
on the Mediterranean Sea.
ANSWER: Tunisian Republic [accept Tunes]
In the 1600s, two hundred thousand Muslim emigrants settled in this country's Majardah Valley and
Sharik Peninsula, and its town of Monastir was the birthplace of nationalist leader Habib Bourguiba.
A 1961 battle in this country's city of Bizerte was a rout for paratroopers sent to maintain control
over a naval base, while in 1985 this country's capital was bombed by the IDF after the PLO set up a
headquarters there. Indented by the Gulf of (*) Gabes, this country is led by perpetual Democracy Index
bottom-dweller Zine Ben Ali and contains the easternmost peaks of the Aures range; it is thus the eastern
terminus of the Atlas Mountains. Home to historical locales like Kasserine, Zama, and Carthage, for 10
points, name this former French colony in North Africa between Libya and Algeria.
ANSWER: Tunisia [or Tunisian Republic; or al-Jumhuriyya al-Tunisiyya]
Most sites of the Neolithic Capsian culture are located in the south of this present-day country.
Sicilian immigrants built the port of La Goletta in this country's capital, which is home to the
Cathedral of St. Vincent de Paul. Villagers live in traditional "troglodyte" structures in this
country's southern tourist destination of Matmata. The central thoroughfare of this country's
capital, the Avenue Habib Bourguiba, is named for its first president, and its coastal city of
Monastir was the site of 2010 Jasmine Revolution protests. A suburb of this country's capital was
legendarily sown with salt. For 10 points, name this North African country where Carthage was
located.
ANSWER: Tunisian Republic [or al-Jumhuriyyah at-Tunisiyyah]
One of the islands off the coast of this nation contains cities such as Ajim and Houmt Souk. In addition to
the Kerkennah Islands and Djerba, which are located in the Gulf of Gabes, this nation contains the Gulfs of
Boughrara and Hammamet. This nation contains the third largest Roman amphitheater at El Djem, and
another world heritage site in this country is the Roman ruins at Thugga. Containing the cities of Sfax and
Bizerte, this nation boasts important World War II locations such as Medenine and the Kasserine Pass. The
smallest nation in the Maghreb and the present day location of the Battle of Zama, for 10 points, name this
country home to the ancient kingdom of Carthage, situated between Algeria and Libya
ANSWER: Tunisia [accept Tunisian Republic]
A museum in this country, which owns the largest collection of Roman mosaics in the world, is the
Bardo National Museum. This country's capital contains the Al-Zaytuna Mosque, which was modeled after
another mosque in this country containing the oldest minbar in the Islamic world. The Mosque of Uqba can
be found in this country's city of Kairouan. Tourist destinations here include Hammamet and the home of
many French artists at Sidi bou Said. This country also contains the ruins of the ancient city of Carthage.
For 10 points, name this North African country where the overthrow of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali kicked off
the Arab Spring.
ANSWER: Tunisia
This country's second largest lake, Lake Tuz, which is saline, is located in its central region. The capes of
Gelidonya and Anamur frame the Gulf of Antalya on its southern coast, which also includes the Gulf of
Alexandretta. Its mountain ranges include the Pontic in the north, and the Taurus in the south. Diyarbakyr,
Erzurum, Trabzon, and Yzmir are cities in this nation. In its eastern region are Lake Van and Mt. Ararat, its
highest peak. FTP, identify this country whose capital, Ankara, is located on the Anatolian Plateau.
ANSWER: Republic of Turkey
One group in this country promoted the idea of Sun Language Theory, stating that all human languages
descended from its language. An ethnic minority here speaks Zazaki, which includes the letters "w" and
"x," unlike its main language. Another of this country's languages, commonly spoken in the Kurmanji
dialect, is banned in many schools and public places, because it is viewed as supportive of the PKK. This
country's own alphabet has dotted and undotted versions of the letter "I" and changed from a script that
resembled Persian to a Romanized alphabet. For 10 points, name this country whose majority language was
reformed by Mustafa Kemal.
ANSWER: Republic of Turkey
Among the languages spoken in this country is the language of Zaza, and sites that may be damaged by a
notable project include Zeugma and Hasankeyf. Islands in this country include the Princes' Islands and
Bozcaada (bose-jah-ah-dah), and the Sumela Monastery is located near the town of Macka (mahch-kah) in
this country. Archaeological sites in this country include Ani, Aphrodisias, and Hierapolis, near the
travertine cascades of Pamukkale. More famous are sites such as Mount Nemrut, Pergamum, and Mount
Ararat. Home to cities such as Antalya, Izmir, and Istanbul, FTP, name this country with capital at Ankara.
ANSWER: Turkey
Historically important cities in this country include the former capital of Bursa and the former site of the
Empire of Trebizond, located north of this country's Pontic Mountains. The Cillician Gates are a cool
mountain pass in this country's Taurus mountains. This country contains Lake Van in the east, and it is
home to the headwaters of both the Tigris and the Euphrates. Taking up most of Anatolia, for 10 points,
name this country that is in both Asia and Europe and has its capital at Ankara.
ANSWER: Turkey
The Justice and Development Party dominates the government of this nation, whose longest river is
the Kizil Irmak. Lakes Tuz and Van are found in this country, whose easternmost point shares a
short border with Nahkchivan. Home to the Taurus Mountains, a small portion of this country is
located in (*) Thrace, north of the Sea of Marmara. Found on both sides of the Bosporus and Dardanelles,
the latter of which borders Gallipoli, this country comprises most of the Anatolian Peninsula and forms the
southern shores of the Black Sea. For 10 points, identify this Asian nation whose major cities include
Ankara and Istanbul.
ANSWER: Republic of Turkey
The largest lake in this nation, located in its east about two hundred miles south of Kars, is Lake Van. The
Pontic Mountains rise along the northern coast of this country and run eastward into Georgia. The Taurus
Mountains follow the southern coast. The Euphrates and Tigris Rivers rise in this country before flowing
south into Syria and Iraq. The European portion of this nation is separated by the Bosporus. For 10 points,
name this nation located between the Black and Mediterranean Seas that contains the Anatolian Plateau.
ANSWER: Republic of Turkey [or Turkiye Cumhuriyeti]
The Blue Cruise runs between resort town in this nation such as Didim. Salgam is a purple drink popular
near this country's Cilician Gates. Guest-workers from this country make up the largest ethnic minority in
Germany, and it displays tughras in its Topkapi Palace. One city in this home country of Edirne changed its
name from Smyrna to Izmir, and Da Vinci planned to bridge its Golden Horn. This country surrouns Lake
Van and the Sea of Marmara; it has the largest national population of Kurds, and is split by the Bosporous
near the Black Sea. For 10 points, name this bicontinental nation whose capital of Ankara is less populous
than Istanbul.
ANSWER: Republic of Turkey [or Turkiye Cumhuriyeti]
The "Door to Hell" is a crater in a natural gas field in this country that's been burning since 1971. Much
of the agriculture in this country happens in its Amu Darya oasis, which contains its second largest city of
Charjew. Nearly three-quarters of this country's land is the Karakum Desert. One of this country's leaders
claimed to have written the Ruhnama, a book that would serve as a spiritual guide for his country. That
president, Saparmurat Niyazov, built the "Neutrality Arch" with a golden statue of himself that rotated to
always face the sun in its capital city of Ashgabat. For 10 points, name this Central Asian country.
ANSWER: Turkmenistan
The northern part of this country includes the town of Konye-Urgench, which was an important city
in the Khwarezmian civilization. That northern region, Dashoguz Province, includes Sarygamysh
Lake. The southeastern part of the country includes the city of Mary, which is the site of the ancient
city of Merv, which was a stop on the Silk Road near the border with Afghanistan. The western
part of this country contains Garabogazkol, a large extension of the Caspian Sea. To the north, this
country borders Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan. Name this country whose capital, which is near Iran, is
Ashgabat.
ANSWER: Turkmenistan
The namesake people of this country have traditionally been divided into the Tekke, Ersari, and Yomut
clans. The capital of this country faced chronic water shortages prior to the Karakum Canal's reaching it in
1962. The entire central portion of this country consists of the Karakum Desert. A dictator of this country
constructed the Neutrality Arch, which included a gold statue of his likeness that was designed to
continuously face the sun and he attempted to build a $6 billion lake.That dictator of this nation made an
epic of his life, the Rukhnama, required readings in this nation's schools and was Saparmurad Niyazov. For
the point, name this Central Asian country with capital at Ashgabat.
ANSWER: Turkmenistan
Its western area contains Mount Gessi and Portal Peaks, as well as a national park named for
Elizabeth. The Kidepo River Valley lies in the north of this country, which is home to a city that
contains the Rubaga cathedral and connects to Port Bell to its south. Cities like Lira and Soroti lie
close to its lake Kyoga, while the Kabalega falls downstream connects that lake to Lake (*) Albert,
which along with Lake Edward forms its western border. Margherita Peak on the Eastern face of Mount
Stanley lies in this country, whose Western border shares the Ruwenzori range with the DRC. Also
bordering Rwanda, Sudan, and Kenya, FTP, name this country whose cities include Entebbe and Kampala,
an African country once ruled by Idi Amin.
ANSWER: Uganda
This country contains the northern part of Bukovina, including the city of Chernivtsi, once a center
of Jewish culture. Demographics were completely changed in its far-western city of Lviv by a massive
population transfer in the mid-1940s. This country's second most populous city, which is home to
Freedom Square, was the capital of this country's eastern half when it was split in the 1920s; that
city is called (*) Kharkiv. A major industrial area in the far east of this country is centered on the city of
Donetsk and a coalfield in the Donbass region. This country's capital lies on the Dnieper River, while its
largest port contains the Potemkin Stairs down to the Black Sea. For 10 points, name this country home to
Odessa and Kiev.
ANSWER: Ukraine
This country had a dispute with a neighboring country over Tuzla Island in the Kerch Strait, which
connects the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea. The 2004 Orange Revolution occurred in this country. The
Dnieper (NEE-pur) river flows from the north to south in this country, and an autonomous republic within
this country lies on the Crimean peninsula. For 10 points, name this country in Eastern Europe which
borders Russia and whose city of Pripyat was the site of the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
ANSWER: Ukraine
The Beskides range, home to this nation's highest point of Hoverla, lies in its west. It is home to the
industrial region of Donbass, which contains cities like Kyrvyi Rih and Luhansk. Provinces in this
nation include Poltava and (*) Odessa. This nation's cities of Donetsk and Kharkiv were both used as
venues during the Euro 2012 soccer tournament co-hosted here, and the Dneiper River flows through its
capital. It is the second largest country in Europe behind Russia, and the nuclear power plant of Chernobyl
can be found in this nation. For ten points, name this Eastern European nation, with capital at Kiev.
ANSWER: Ukraine
This country's south-central lowland is home to such rivers as the Inhul and the Southern Bug, and that
lowland is flanked by the Volhynian-Podolian uplands on the west and the Donets range on the east. With
its northern neighbor, this country shares the Pripet marshes, thought by some to be the original homeland
of the Slavs. The Kerch Strait, which connects the Sea of Azov to a larger sea, separates this country's large
southern peninsula from Russia. That peninsula, the Crimea, contains Yalta, the site of a prominent meeting
during World War Two, and Sevastopol, a Black Sea resort. For 10 points, name this large former Soviet
republic in Eastern Europe, a country whose notable cities include Kharkov, Odessa, and its capital, Kiev.
ANSWER: Ukraine [or Ukrayina]
It likely shares its origin with the Olgas and the Hatajuta. Possibly the world's most famous inselberg, it
formed in the early Cambrian, and together with the formations at Kata Tjuta, it lends its name to a national
park. Located to the west of Alice Springs, it was first seen by William Gosse, who named it after his boss,
though the Anangu, who have their own name for it, now tell stories about its creation on tours. Made
mainly of arkose, a type of sandstone, it has iron impurities that give it a trademark reddish-brown color.
For 10 points, name this monolith in Northern Territory, Australia, the largest piece of exposed rock in the
world.
ANSWER: Uluru [or Ayers Rock]
A result of the Petermann Orogeny, this feature was at the center of a fierce battle by the Central Land
Committee eventually mediated by Bob Hawke. Ernest Giles discovered the nearby Finke River and Lake
Amadeus, and may have been out-publicized for the discovery of this feature by William Gosse, who
mapped it after heading North from Mount Woodroffe in the Musgrave Mountains. Similar to the Kata
Tjuta and Conner features, it lies in the Southwest corner of a state that is also home to the MacDonnel
range. For 10 points, identify this feature located in near Alice Springs the Northern Territory, a distinctive
Australian rock formation.
ANSWER: Ayers Rock [or Uluru]
In 2010, after she performed a striptease at this location for a YouTube video, there was a call to deport
French stripper Alizee Sery from one country. Government regulation of this location officially began in
1958, with certain regulations forbidding photography to protect "tjukurpa" obligations. One story about
this place states that the "woma python" Kuniya lived there and fought the poisonous snake Liru. In 1983,
a plan tentatively forbidding climbing at this location was approved by Bob Hawke, although it has yet to
be implemented. This location's namesake had made his fortune as the secretary and managing director of
the "Monster Mine" at the Burra Burra Copper Mines. Sacred to the local Anangu people, it lies about 200
miles southwest of Alice Springs. For 10 points, name this sandstone formation in the Northern Territory in
Australia.
ANSWER: Ayers Rock [or Uluru; or Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park]
Created as a result of the Petermann Orogeny, it is located in the Amadeus Basin. Commonly confused with
Mount Connor, it was originally called Mount Olga by Ernest Giles who was the first non-indigenous
person to spot it. Part of the Kata Tjuta National Park, this sandstone formation has great significance to
the Anangu of the region and it is essential to many local dreamtime rituals. Home of the endangered
Black-flanked Rock-Wallaby, FTP, name this huge sandstone geographic feature located in Australia,
which is most properly called Uluru.
ANSWER: Ayers Rock (accept the technically-more-correct "Uluru" until mentioned)
A river of this name rises in Mount Kruglaya and flows to Atyrau. Lake Karachay in the
mountain range of this name was a dumping ground for radioactive waste. This range has a southern
portion known as the Mugodzhar Hills, and it also has the Polar and Nether-Polar regions. The
largest peak in this range is Mount (*) Narodnaya. For 10 points, name this mountain range located in
Kazakhstan and Russia that forms the traditional boundary between Europe and Asia.
ANSWER: Urals
A period of orogeny named after this mountain range was the last event in the building of Pangaea.
The central portion of this mountain range reaches its top height at Basegi and cradles part of the
Ufa River. The southern end of this range is connected to the Mugodzar Hills and the Iremel Range.
The Kama River rises from its western portion, and its namesake river flows into the (*) Caspian Sea.
Vaygach Island and Novaya Zemlya are extensions of this mountain range, which runs from the Kara Sea in
the north down to the northern border of Kazakhstan. For 10 points, name these mountains that run down
western Russia, often considered a boundary between Europe and Asia.
ANSWER: Ural Mountains
The Pay-Khoy Ridge forms a northern extension of this mountain range, through which the Pechora river
flows. This range is continued in the south by the Mugodzhar Hills, and its central Ore section contains
Mount Yamantaw. Its northern terminus is at Novaya Zemlya. Passing through Perm and Yekaterinburg, its
highest peak is Mount Narodnaya. It is drained by its namesake river into the Caspian Sea, as well as by the
Ob and the Kama, a tributary of the Volga. For 10 points, name this Russian mountain dividing Europe and
Asia.
ANSWER: Ural Mountains
A subset of this mountain range is known as the Research Range and contains Mount Reguly and its tallest
mountain, which is sometimes called "People's Mountain". Their southern end contains Sanarka River and
is at Mugodzhar Hills, and Nazi war plans drawn up by Hitler established this range as a future border of
the Reich. These are near the towns of Orsk and Yekaterinburg, and like the river it shares its name with, it
is located in Kazakhstan and Russia. Name this natural border between the continents of Europe and Asia.
ANSWER: Ural Mountains [or Urals]
The northern terminus of this mountain range is the minor Pay-Khoy Ridge, and its southernmost extension
is a region of uplands known as the Mughalzhar Hills. The most numerous indigenous group in this
mountain range is the Bashkir people, while other minor groups include the Nenets, Mansi, and Khanty
peoples. The northern region of this range includes the chain's highest peaks, including Mount Narodnaya.
Almost the entire eastern slope of this mountain range is drained by the Ob river system, and a major river
on the western slope is the Kama, a tributary of the Volga. Near its southernmost extent, this chain is
drained by its namesake river, which flows into the Caspian Sea. FTP, name this mountain range in westcentral Russia that forms a major part of the traditional boundary between Europe and Asia.
ANSWER: Ural Mountains (also accept Uralsky Khrebet)
To the west of this mountain range lies the Pechora basin, which includes the Illych and Usa rivers, and to
its east lies the Ob basin. This mountain range rises from the Kara Sea in the north, and its nether-polar
region contains its highest peaks, including Mount Karpinsky, and the highest peak of this mountain range,
Mount Narodnaya. During World War II, the Soviet authority moved many factories to its foothills, which
have long been regarded as the major mineral base of Russia. For 10 points, identify this mountain range
that is considered the natural boundary between northern Asia and Europe.
ANSWER: Ural Mountains or Uralskiye gory
This resource is produced by the Cameco corporation on the McArthur river and at a namesake
"city" on Lake Athabasca, both in northern Saskatchewan. This resource, called leetso in the Dine
language, was found at Church Rock on Navajo land. This resource caused an evacuation in Dauphin
County, (*) Pennsylvania. The sale of this material from Niger (nih-JAIR) in the form of an
oxygen-containing powder was investigated by Joseph Wilson, the husband of CIA agent Valerie Plame.
For 10 points, name this metal which is refined into yellowcake, and which melted down at Three Mile
Island while serving its common role as nuclear reactor fuel.
ANSWER: uranium ore [or refined uranium; or enriched uranium; prompt on yellowcake until it is read]
This country's highest point is Mount Catedral, and the Haedo Ridge lies in its north, and the Grande
Ridge is in its southeast. This country shares the Merin Lagoon with a northern neighbor, and Piriapolis is
a major fishing port. The slang language of Portunol is spoken in the town of Rivera in this country, and
it is transverse by the Negro River from the northeast to southwest. Sometimes known as the Oriental
Republic, it is bounded by Brazil to its north and east. For 10 points, name this country, with its capital
on the Rio de la Plata at Montevideo.
ANSWER: Uruguay
Unusually for a Spanish-speaking South American nation, this country is less than fifty percent Catholic.
Part of this country's border with Brazil runs through Lake Mirim, and this country is itself bisected east to
west by the Rio Negro. Its capital sits on the north side of the estuary separating it from Argentina, the Rio
de la Plata. For 10 points, identify this country in the southeastern part of South America, whose capital has
a name meaning "I see a mountain," Montevideo.
ANSWER: Oriental Republic of Uruguay [or Republica Oriental del Uruguay]
In 2010, the International Court of Justice upheld this country's right to operate two paper mills on a
river that forms its western border. This country's northern border is marked by the Cuareim River.
This country contains the western half of the Merin Lagoon. The only UNESCO World Heritage site
in this country is the historic quarter of Colonia del (*) Sacramento. The highest point in this country is
the Cerro Catedral. This country's namesake river has a tributary called the Rio Negro; that namesake river
forms its western boundary. This country has the southernmost capital in the Americas. For 10 points, name
this country on the north shore of the Rio de La Plata, across from Argentina to its south.
ANSWER: Oriental Republic of Uruguay [or Republica Oriental del Uruguay]
One way to traverse this boundary is through the Blackpool Crossing. It is also crossed by the Blue
Water Bridge and the Ogdensburg-Prescott Bridge. This boundary includes a northward prominence at the
Northwest Angle within Lake of the Woods, then runs concurrent with the 49th parallel westward to the
Pacific. For 10 points, identify this longest unmilitarized border in the world, which separates two North
American countries.
ANSWER: U.S.-Canada border [or obvious equivalents]
The southwestern part of this state is home to a cluster of buttes known as Monument Valley. Notch
Peak, a limestone cliff, is a popular tourist attraction in this state, home to the Sevier and Rush
Lakes. Over 80 percent of this state's population lives in the Wasatch Front. The Uinta Mountains,
home to (*) Kings Peak, are located in the northern part of this state, whose Promontory Point is the site
where the Transcontinental Railroad was completed. The Bonneville Salt Flats can be found in this state,
and national parks in this state include Arches, Bryce Canyon, and Zion. For ten points, name this Western
state, home to Provo and Salt Lake City.
ANSWER: Utah
This state's Thousand Lake Mountain is located in Fishlake National Forest, and it was the site of the
Tintic and Walkara wars, but more significantly a conflict led by Antonga Black Hawk. This state's
Uinta Mountains contain Dinosaur National Monument, and its Promontory Summit was the location
of the driving in of the Golden Spike which connected the First Transcontinental Railroad. This state was
part of the short-lived State of Deseret, and it was the site of the 1857 slaughter of the Baker-Fancher party
known as the Mountain Meadows Massacre. This state shares Lake Powell with Arizona, and it is home to
the Bonneville Salt Flats as well as Arches National Park. For 10 points, name this US state whose city of
Provo is home to Brigham Young University.
ANSWER: State of Utah
This state contains the northern part of Lake Powell and the northwestern part of this state is home to the
Bonneville Salt Flats. This state, originally proposed as part of a larger state called Deseret, has its
population centered in north central cities like Orem and Provo. The capital of this state is home to a
massive temple for the Church of Latter Day Saints. For 10 points, name this western U.S. state with
capital at Salt Lake City.
ANSWER: Utah
This state contains the northern terminus of a "Grand Staircase" of exposed sedimentary rock layers.
One national park in this state contains sandstone structures like the pillar "Dark Angel" and "Delicate
Arch." Another national park in this state is home to Kolob and Zion canyons. This state was once
covered by a prehistoric pluvial lake, which gives its name to this state's massive Bonneville salt flats. It
contains the southern part of the Wasatch Range and the northern part of Glen Canyon and Lake Powell.
This state is home to Bryce Canyon National Park, as well as the largest endorheic lake in the Western
Hemisphere. For 10 points, name this state that contains the Great Salt Lake.
ANSWER: Utah
This state contains the southern part of the Flaming Gorge Reservoir and the western part of
Dinosaur National Monument, and a white-and-pink coiling sculpture jutting out from a lake in this
state is Spiral Jetty. Hoodoos are found in a national park in this state, whose largest river flows past
the city of (*) Moab before receiving the Green River. Its highest point, Kings Peak, is located in this
state's Uinta Mountains. The Bonneville Salt Flats can be found in this state, which lies northwest of the
Four Corners. Its cities include Ogden and Provo, and it contains Bryce Canyon and Zion National Parks.
For ten points, name this state east of Nevada, with capital at Salt Lake City.
ANSWER: Utah
One national park in this state contains the "Waterpocket Fold," and another national park in this state
contains the "Fiery Furnace" and the "Devil's Garden." This state that contains Capitol Reef National Park
also owns a huge expanse of canyons and plateaus in its Canyonlands National Park. One of this state's
national parks contains over two thousand of its namesake structures. Bryce Canyon National Park and
Arches National Park are in this state, and its oldest and most-visited national park is Zion National Park.
For 10 points, name this state which contains the Great Salt Lake.
ANSWER: Utah
The Uinta Mountains in this state comprise the highest east-west mountain range in the contiguous United
States and contain Kings Peak. In 2001, the slogan "Where Ideas Connect" was approved for this state by
then-governor Mike Leavitt, whose ancestors have been linked with the Mountain Meadows massacre. Most
of this state's population lives in a chain of cities along the Wasatch Range that includes Provo and West
Valley. In 1849, the settlers here proposed a state including the land of this state and much of Arizona,
California, and Nevada, known as Deseret. For 10 points, name this American state, originally founded by
Brigham Young and the Mormon church with capital Salt Lake City.
ANSWER: Utah
One national park in this state consists of a series of horseshoe-shaped amphitheaters with colorful rock
formations, including spires called "hoodoos." This home of Canyonlands National Park contains an
evaporated lake bed upon which many land-speed records have been set, the Bonneville Salt Flats. The
town of Promontory in this state is home to a "Golden Spike," marking it as the spot where the
Transcontinental Railroad was completed. For 10 points, name this state, the home of Bryce Canyon and the
Great Basin, with capital at Salt Lake City.
ANSWER: Utah
One city in this state contains the Fatehpur Sikri, which was the capital for a mere two years. That
city also contains the Ram Bagh, one of the oldest Mughal Gardens. Another city in this state was the
site of Buddha's first sermon and is the oldest city in its country. In one city in this Indian state, the
Delhi gate is one entrance to a fort built from red sandstone. This state's capital is considered to be
the center of (*) Shiism in India, and it also contains Varanasi. One city in this state contains a structure
with four minarets surrounding a domed tomb. In 2000, its Himalayan portion split off. Its capital is at
Lucknow and the Red Fort and Taj Mahal can be found in its city of Agra. For 10 points, name this most
populous India state.
ANSWER: Uttar Pradesh [prompt on U.P.]
One city in this state is the location of a road called the Panchakosi and hosts a five day dhrupad
festival at the Tulsi Ghat. The capital of this state is located on the Gomati River and is the namesake of a
historic agreement between the Congress Party and Muslim League. The main industrial city of this state is
Kanpur, and this state is the location of the sacred city of Varanasi. A mausoleum for Mumtaz that was
commissioned by Shah Jahan is located in this state's city of Agra, and the capital of this state is Lucknow.
For ten points, name this state that is the most populous state in India and is bordered by the state of Madhya
Pradesh to the south.
ANSWER: Uttar Pradesh
This polity's capital city is home to the Rumi Darwaza or Turkish Gate, which is modeled after Istanbul's
Sublime Porte. The festival of Kumbh Mela occurs in this polity four times every twelve years, and Mathura
in this state is the traditional birthplace of Krishna. It was formed out of the United Provinces, which
included its city of Allahabad, and is also home to the cities of Meerut and Varanasi. In 2000, Uttaranchal
was formed from the Northern section of this state, which borders Nepal and has capital at Lucknow. For 10
points, identify this home of Agra and thus the Taj Mahal, the most populous state in India.
ANSWER: Uttar Pradesh [accept Northern Province]
This people's music is collected in a canon called the Twelve Muqam. Despite speaking a Turkic
language, they use the Arabic alphabet. After two members of this group were killed a a toy factory, they
began a riot targeting the Han in their city of Urumqi (oo-ROOM-chee). This people follows Islam and
populates a region they call East Turkestan. For 10 points, name this Turkic ethnic group that populates
China's Xinjiang (SHIN-jang) region.
ANSWER: Uyghur people
A mosque in this country is named for Bibi-Khanym, the wife of a man who is buried at the Gur-e Amir
in its second-largest city. The hook-shaped western state in this nation, Karakalpakstan, is the location of
the Amu Darya's delta. Like Liechtenstein, this country is doubly landlocked. The fifth-largest producer of
raw cotton in the world, this nation is located on the southern end of the Aral Sea. Timur's capital was
located in this modern-day nation, which borders all four of the other Central Asian "-stans."For 10 points,
name this home of Samarkand and Tashkent.
ANSWER: Republic of Uzbekistan
This city contains a water-management court which has held sessions for over a thousand years. This
city names a province where an annual tomato-throwing fight is held each August. This city contains the
eye-shaped glass dome for the Hemisferic building for its City of Arts and Sciences complex, designed by
hometown architect Santiago Calatrava. The octagonal Micalet bell tower of a cathedral called the Seu is in
this city, which contains the Albufera lagoon, and lies on the banks of the Turia river. Its culinary exports
include a saffron-containing rice dish called paella (pay- EY-yah). For ten points, name this city on the
eastern coast of Spain.
ANSWER: Valencia
A park on a peninsula in this city is supposedly the site where a fisherman was transformed into Siwash
Rock. The Lost Lagoon is an artificial lake south of that park in this city, which is serviced by the SkyTrain
monorail system. The Lions Gate Bridge crosses the Burrard Inlet to connect northern suburbs to this
city's Stanley Park. The ski resort town of Whistler is about a hundred miles north of this city. Because of
immigration from Hong Kong in anticipation of its transfer back to China, this city has one of the largest
Chinese populations in North America. This city is home to the flagship campus of the University of
British Columbia. For 10 points, name this most populous city in Western Canada.
ANSWER: City of Vancouver
In this city, False Creek is an inlet to the east of English Bay that separates downtown from the rest of the
city. It enacted "View Protection Guidelines" in 1990, establishing height limits on buildings to protect
views of the North Shore Mountains that overlook this city. Lost Lagoon an artificial lake at the entrance of
Stanley Park in this city, which is one of the largest urban parks in North America. This city's southern
boundary is created by the Fraser River, which separates it from Richmond. For 10 points, name this city
that is home to the CFL's BC Lions and the NHL's Canucks, the largest city in British Columbia and home
of the 2010 Winter Olympics.
ANSWER: Vancouver
The Dr. Sun Yat Sen Classical Chinese Garden can be found in this city's Chinatown, whose size gives
this city the proportionally-largest Asian population in North America. A seawall surrounds this city's
1000-acre Stanley Park. Greenpeace was founded in this city, which is 78 miles south of the resort
Whistler. This site of the 2010 Winter Olympics is located just north of the state of Washington. For 10
points, name this Canadian city, the capital of British Columbia.
ANSWER: Vancouver, British Columbia
The world's largest natural river bifurcation is located in this nation, where the Casiquiare River
acts as a natural canal between two larger streams. This nation finances a music education program
for youth called El Sistema. The largest city along this nation's namesake gulf is the birthplace of
gaita music. This nation's border dispute with a smaller neighbor involves a claim to all land west of
the Essequibo River. The Rafael (*) Urdaneta Bridge connects Maracaibo to the rest of this country. This
nation derives much of its income from its vast oil reserves, some of which are found in the Orinoco River
delta. For 10 points, name this nation with its capital at Caracas.
ANSWER: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
This country contains Kukenan Tepui (koo-kay-NAHN tay-PWEE), which includes Cuquenan Falls, and
part of its Southeastern border is marked by Mount Roraima. Its third most populous city is Valencia, which
lies next to a lake of the same name. The eastern part of this country sits on the Guiana (gee-AA-nuh)
Shield, and the northeast part of this country is Delta Amacuro, so named because it contains the delta of
the Orinoco River. The northwest part of this country contains the Tablazo Strait, where what used to be a
lake connects to an arm of the Caribbean Sea. Name this home of Lake Maracaibo whose capital is Caracas,
a country headed by Hugo Chavez.
ANSWER: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela [or Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela]
This nation's northeastern region is inhabited by the Warao people, and most of its indigenous population
lives in the western state of Zulia. Its Canaima National Park is its continent's largest, and this nation
controls several islands off of its Araya Peninsula, including Los Roques and Isla de Margarita. The
Casiquiare Channel links this nation's longest river to the Amazon, and another famous landmark overlooks
Devil's Mountain and lies on the Churun River. Home to oil deposits in Lake Maracaibo as well as the
Orinoco River and Angel Falls, name this nation bordered by Colombia, Guyana, and Brazil, whose capital
is Caracas.
ANSWER: Venezuela
In 1895, the U.S. and Britain almost warred over this other country's namesake "boundary dispute." The
boundary in question, on the east of this country, includes the Essequibo (ESS-ay-"KEY"-bo) River. One
feature found in this country is located on Auyantepui ("eye"-"YAWN"-tuh-POO-ee) and is named after an
aviator who crash landed at its top. Another question of water in this country is plagued by a duckweed
infestation. It is home to Angel Falls and Lake Maracaibo (MAR-uh-K"EYE"-bo), and much of this
country's llanos (YAH-noz), or plains, are found along the shores of the Orinoco River. For 10 points, name
this South American country between Colombia and Guyana.
ANSWER: Venezuela
This nation includes the Merida and Sierra de Perija mountain ranges and the Catatumbo River. Major cities
in this nation include Ciudad Guyana, Barquisimento, and, despite not being Spain, Valencia. This nation
contains most of the Orinoco River, and two thirds of this nation's oil production occurs at its largest lake,
which is also the largest lake in South America, Lake Maracaibo. For 10 points, name this nation with
capital at Caracas.
ANSWER: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
This country experiences a unique type of lightning over its Catatumbo River. This country's La
Gran Sabana region contains Mount Roraima and the highest waterfall in the world. The capital of
this country's Zulia region is its second largest city and shares its name with its largest lake,
Maracaibo. This home of Angel Falls is largely covered by the drainage basin of the Orinoco River. For 10
points, name this South American country that borders Guyana, Colombia, and Brazil and
has its capital at Caracas.
ANSWER: Venezuela
One mountain in this nation, Pico Espejo, is the site of the world's longest cable car, and its central
region is called Los Llanos. One major river in this nation has its higher basin in Canaima National
Park. This country contains the Caroni River, but its major river system has its mouth at Delta
Amacuro. This nation's many (*) tepuis [TEP-wees] include Auyantepui [AW-yan-TEP-wee], which is
the site of the world's highest waterfall, Angel Falls. This country contains Lake Maracaibo, and its primary
river is the Orinoco. For 10 points, name this South American country whose capital is Caracas.
ANSWER: Venezuela
Although this country is not Spain, Barcelona is the capital of this country's Anzoategui state. The
Cordillera de Merida mountains, which include this country's highest point, Pico Bolivar, are located in the
northwestern portion of this country, and other highlands in this country are La Gran Sabana, which include
Angel Falls. The mouth of the Orinoco can be found in this country, and another notable question of water is
the oil-rich Lake Maracaibo. For 10 points, name this South American country bordered to the west by
Colombia and to the south by Brazil with capital at Caracas.
ANSWER: Venezuela
The delta of this country's principal river contains the El Pao Iron Mine on a mountain known as El Florero.
In 2004, this country declared a state of emergency when 18% of its largest lake's surface became infested
with Lemnoideae, or duckweed. Air masses bounded by the Perija Mountains and the Cordillera de Merida
produce storms that generate over 200 lightning strikes per hour near the mouth of this country's Catatumbo
River. The Churun River flows over the Auyan tepui in this country, producing a feature named for an
American aviator that is the world's tallest waterfall. For 10 points, name this country home to Lake
Maracaibo, Angel Falls, and Caracas.
ANSWER: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
This city features a building with an entrance called the Porta Della Carta, which was designed by Giovanni
and Bartolomeo Bon. Lord Byron gave the nickname to a structure designed by Antoni Contino in this city,
which was supposedly the last thing that condemned convicts saw - that structure is the Bridge of Sighs. A
book which introduces ridigdity and grotesqueness as the "Nature of the Gothic" is named after this city and
was written by John Ruskin. Although it is not in Rome, Byzantine mosaics are found in this city's Church
of Gold, which is named after St. Mark. Historical sites here include the Piazza San Marco and the Doge's
Palace. For 10 points, name this city home to many canals.
ANSWER: Venice
Lido is located off the coast of this city. Napoleon stole the "Triumphant Quadriga," bronze statues of
four horses, from a basilica in this city. A bridge over the Rio de Palazzo in this city is named because, in
medieval times, passersby could hear prisoners sighing as they went off to their deaths. Murano is the
center of this city's famed glassmaking industry. A symbol of this city is the lion, an emblem of St. Mark.
The Rialto Bridge spans this city's Grand Canal. For 10 points, name this city on the Adriatic Sea in Italy,
famed for its gondolas.
ANSWER: Venice
Kras, Slovenia, was deforested to supply foundations for the buildings in this location, which is connected
to Porto Marghera by the Ponte della Liberta. Neighbored by Lido to the southeast and Murano to the
northeast, this comune is divided into six sestiere. The acqua alta phenomenon results in flooding of
Chioggia and this area, but is not related to the 20th century subsidence of this settlement. Though it
includes an island called Giudecca, Cannaregio in the north was the site of its famous Jewish ghetto. For 10
points, what city on the Adriatic is home to historic sites such as the Rialto Bridge and the Grand Canal?
ANSWER: Venice (or Venezia or Venesia but certainly not "Veneto", which is a region)
.This state's Mount Equinox is the highest point of the Taconic Mountains, and the statewide highest point,
known as "the Chin", is on Mount Mansfield. Its largest city is smaller than that of any other state, and is
located in Chittenden County, which is named after its governor from when it was an independent republic.
Its northwest border is created by a question of water which contains Isle la Motte and drains into the Richelieu
River. Its eastern border is the Connecticut River, and its shore with Lake Champlain contains Burlington.
For 10 points, identify this New England state which contains the Green Mountains and has a capital at
Montpelier.
ANSWER: Vermont
The Marsh-Billings-Rockefeller National Park lies in a less famous Woodstock, a town in this state,
which is also home to Lake Bomoseen in its western part. Four of the five towns in its Grand Isle
County lie on islands, while its other town lies on the Alburgh Tongue. Its rivers include the
Winooski, the Ottauquechee, and the Otter River, its longest, while its Rutland County is home to the
city Hubbardton. The Red Sandrock Hills extend along its shore of Lake (*) Champlain, while Mount
Mansfield, its highest point, lies in its Green Mountains. For 10 points, name this state whose cities include
Burlington and Montpelier.
ANSWER: Vermont
The Algonquin Round Table often vacationed in this state's Neshobe Island, which lies within Lake
Bomoseen. A memorial in its city of Sharon commemorates one of this state's native sons, Joseph Smith.
Its state quarter features the distinctively shaped mountain Camel's Hump. The Rock of Ages granite
quarry is located near its city of Barre. Its capital is the least populous of American state capitals, and is
dwarfed in population by Burlington. This state's name has the same meaning as its primary mountain
range, the Green Mountains. For 10 points, name this state with capital at Montpelier which is nestled
between New York and New Hampshire.
ANSWER: Vermont
Publius Decius Mus and Titus Manlius Torquatus defeated some residents of Latium at a battle here
in 340 BC. Joseph Wright of Derby has painted three different works centering at this place,
including one from nearby Posilipo. Probably the most famous location with a name derived from the
Oscan language, its slopes are used to produce a wine called the Lachrymae Christi. An eyewitness
account of this location's most notable event was given by Pliny the Younger, whose uncle Pliny the
Elder perished because of this structure. Similar to the landmark of Stromboli, for 10 points, identify this
mountain responsible for the destruction of Stabiae, Herculaneum and Pompeii, an Italian Volcano.
ANSWER: Mt. Vesuvius
This is the name of an area that used to be an island but is now connected to Lekki Peninsula by a
land bridge and that is located just south of Lagos Island in Nigeria. This is also the name of a peak
sometimes called Mount Austin in Hong Kong. This name is also used for the second largest island
in Canada, the capital of Seychelles, and the capital of British Columbia. It is the name of the state
in Australia which includes Melbourne. Identify this name used for a large waterfall on the border of
Zambia and Zimbabwe, as well as for a large lake on the border of Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania,
both of which are named for an English queen.
ANSWER: Victoria
This state contains the world's only Leadbeater's possums, which can be found in the Healesville
Sanctuary in its Yarra Valley region. Artifacts of its 1850s gold rush include intact mine shafts in Bendigo.
This state's northern border is formed by the Murray River. Its capital was founded along Port Philip Bay
by the illustrious John Batman. Its city of Ballarat is near the southern terminus of the Great Dividing
Range and is the site of an 1854 stockade built by disaffected miners. It is bordered to the west by South
Australia, to the north by New South Wales, and is separated from Tasmania by the Bass Straight. For 10
points, name this Australian state named for an English queen.
ANSWER: Victoria
The northeastern portion of this question of water, which contains Rusinga Island and the port city of Kisumu,
is Winam Gulf. The largest river that flows into this lake is formed by the Ruvuvu River and features
Rusumo Falls; that inflow is the Kagera River. This lake has two outlets: the Katonga River, and another
river which flows near Entebbe and Kampala before crossing Uganda and reaching Sudan. Once thought to
be the source of the White Nile, this lake also borders Kenya and Tanzania. For 10 points, name this largest
lake in Africa, which shares its name with a British queen.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria [or Nam Lolwe]
The Ripon (RIP-uhn) Falls at the outflow of this question of water are now submerged. Its features include
the Winam (WIN-am) Gulf and the Sese (SAY-SAY) archipelago. Its Speke (SPEAK) Gulf is named for
one explorer of this lake. Much of the water coming into this lake goes through the Kagera (kuh-GAIR-uh)
River. Kampala (KAHM-pah-lah), the capital of Uganda, is located nearby. This lake's only outlet is the
Nile. For 10 points, name this largest lake by surface area in Africa, named for a British monarch.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria [or Victoria Nyanza]
The Ripon Falls are a natural outlet of this lake, and the Kendu and Homa Bays lie in its Winam Gulf. Near
the city of Jinja, the Owen Falls Dam, which creates the Nalubaale Power Station, regulates the primary
outflow of this lake. Ukerewe Island is the largest island in this question of water, which also contains the Ssese
Islands. The cities of Entebbe and Kampala lie on this lake, and it is the source of the White Nile. For 10
points, name this lake bordered by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, which is the largest lake in Africa.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria [prompt on White Nile until "lake"]
In this lake, James Ogwang used Neochetina weevils to combat water hyacinth infestations and save the
cichlid population. This lake's outlet at Jinja provides hydroelectric power, and its drainage to Lake Kyoga
forms the upper White Nile. The Kagera river empties into this lake, which was discovered by John Speke.
For 10 points, name this lake bordering Uganda and Tanzania, the largest in Africa.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria [or Nam Lolwe; or Victoria Nyanza]
The introduction of invasive fish species into this lake have driven many of its native cichlid species to
extinction which, in turn, is theorized to cause the increasing algal blooms on this lake. Another possible
theory of the increasing algal blooms is the rapidly increasing population of the cities on its shores, such as
Kisumu and Jinja. The Soga, Luo, and Sukuma languages are spoken on this lake's shores. The first
European to see this lake was Englishman John Hanning Speke, and Henry Morton Stanley was able to
confirm Speke's claim of this lake being the source of the Nile. For 10 points, name this largest lake in
Africa.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria
This question of water's northern end features Ripon Falls, which was submerged in 1954 by the
construction of the Owen Falls Dam. The film Darwin's Nightmare examined the introduction of perch into
this lake. It was named by John Speke, who discovered it independently from Richard Burton, and claimed
it was the source of the longest river on the continent. The White Nile flows out of this question of water,
which is divided between Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania. For 10 points, name this largest lake by area in
Africa, which is named after a British queen.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria [or Victoria Nyanza; or Ukerewe; or Nalubaale; or Sango; or Lolwe]
The film Darwin's Nightmare discussed the loss of biodiversity in this question of water, which was treated
with weed weevils in early 1990s to stop an infestation of water hyacinth. The Agreed Curve governs the
loss of water from the Owens Fall Dam on this question of water. Lake George is connected to this question of
water by the Katonga River. This lake's largest inflow is the Kagera River, and Entebbe is on a peninsula
on this lake, the southern terminus of the White Nile. For ten points, name this Rift lake, the largest in
Africa.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria
This lake was once home to more than 500 species of haplochromine cichlids (SICK-lids). Water
flowing out of this lake is used by the Kiira and Nalubaale (NAH-loo-BAH-lay) power stations. The
northern shore of this lake is the site of Port Bell, not far from the cities of Entebbe and Kampala. The first
European to find this lake was the Englishman John Hanning Speke. For 10 points, name this lake that is
the largest in Africa and the main source of the Nile.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria
A large population of albino people lives on this lake's largest island, Ukerewe
(OO-kay-RAY-way) Island. The Winam Gulf of this lake is the site of Homa Bay and the port city of
Kisumu (kiss-OO-moo). James Ogwang brought South American weevils to combat this lake's
problem with the invasive (*) water hyacinth. This lake receives the Kagera (kah-GAIR-uh) River to its
west, and is the source of the White Nile. For 10 points, name this East African lake that is the second
largest freshwater lake in the world and the largest overall in Africa.
ANSWER: Lake Victoria
This city is the headquarters of the scandal-ridden Bawag bank, and President Bush's order for
states to uphold conventions made in this city was the focus of the recent Supreme Court case of
Medellin v. Texas. Its International Centre houses the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
headquarters of OPEC. This world capital is also home to Chancellor Alfred Gusenbauer and Federal
President Heinz Fischer and formerly to rulers like Bruno Kreiskly. For 10 points each, identify this site of
a famous Congress held by Metternich, the capital of Austria.
ANSWER: Vienna, Austria
In this city, a baker legendarily made a basilisk explode with a mirror in the year 1212; that legend is
inscribed on the wall of a house overlooking the "beautiful lantern alley" near the "Holy Cross courtyard"
here. This city's climate is mediated by the "Lufterl" breeze and by namesake woods keeping the cold air of
the Alps at bay. Its skyline contains St. Stephen's Cathedral and a landmark Ferris wheel in the Prater
amusement park. This city was divided into four occupation zones and an inner international zone for ten
years following World War II. For ten points, name this longtime seat of Hapsburg power which remains the
dominant city of Austria.
ANSWER: Vienna [or Wien]
This city houses the headquarters of OPEC as well as the International Atomic Energy Agency. In 1857,
this city's ancient walls were demolished in favor of a Ringstrasse, now lined by many notable buildings
such as the Rathaus, the Hofburg Palace, and the State Opera. This city's St. Stephen's Cathedral features a
distinctive tiled roof characterized by its colored zigzag pattern and prominent double-headed eagles. This
city's Schonbrunn Palace was the summer residence of rulers like Maria Theresa and Franz Joseph. For 10
points, name this former center of Habsburg power and current capital of Austria.
ANSWER: Vienna
This city's Augarten park contains two half-finished anti-aircraft towers too solid to be safely
demolished. For many years, the world's tallest Ferris wheel was in the park called the Prater in its district
of Leopoldstadt. When this city's second through ninth districts were added, the old city walls were
replaced by the road called the Ringstrasse. The Schonbrunn Palace was the summer residence for this
city's Habsburg monarchs. For 10 points, name this capital of Austria.
ANSWER: Vienna, Austria [or Wien, Osterreich]
In this city, horse chestnut trees line the Hauptalee road through the Prater park, which is also home to
the old Riesenrad Ferris wheel. Its other landmarks include circular Ringstrasse boulevard and the site of
the first modern zoo at Schonbrunn Palace. This European city, the headquarters of OPEC, lots its status as
a capital after the Anschluss, though it regained it. For 10 points, name this northernmost capital city on the
Danube river, the capital of Austria.
ANSWER: Vienna
The highest point of this city is the Hermannskogel. A 20-ton bell made from captured Turkish cannons
can be found in this city's St. Stephen's Cathedral. This city's chief park, the Prater, is known for its giant
Ferris wheel. This city is home to the Ringstrasse (RING-strah-suh), on which stands the Rathaus. This city
is the headquarters for the International Atomic Energy Agency and OPEC, and this city is located on the
Danube River. For 10 points, name this capital of Austria.
ANSWER: Vienna
The indigenous people living in this country's highlands are variously known as the "Degar" or
"Montagnards." This country contains the remains of the Cu Chi tunnel complexes. This country continues
to claim the Paracel Islands taken from it by China in 1974. Slightly under a quarter of this country's
population is concentrated in the Red River Delta. This country extends in an "S" shape from its northern
border with China to the southern Gulf of Thailand. For ten points, name this country in southeast Asia
where the United States fought a costly war in the late '60s and early '70s.
ANSWER: Vietnam
The Bahnar and Sedang groups are some of the "Montagnards" who live in the hills of this country, which
was the birthplace of the secret society known as the Hoa Hao. Descendants of immigrants often live in
Cholon, and its highest areas may be found near the Clear River. A notable museum here is the Cercle
Sportif, while a refugee movement from this country in the 1970s was the origin of the term "boat people."
Its large cities include Hua and a capital found on the Red River. For 10 points, name this country which
also includes the Mekong River, the Gulf of Tonkin, and the city of Hanoi.
ANSWER: Vietnam
The ancient capital of this country is bisected by the Perfume River, which has its source in the Annamite
Range. The Lake of the Returned Sword, or Hoan Kiem, is found in the capital of this country. The Can
Tho Bridge crosses the Bassac River in this country, which is home to the Tay and Kinh ethnic groups. The
world's largest cave, the Son Doong, is found in this country, which also contains the UNESCO Word
Heritage sites of Ha Long Bay and the city of Hue. The Red River flows through the capital of this country,
whose far south contains the Mekong Delta. For 10 points, name this Southeast Asian country that contains
Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi.
ANSWER: Socialist Republic of Vietnam [or Cong hoa Xa hoi chu nghia Viet Nam. Accept SRV.]
On the eastern side of this geographical landmark, there is a 3000 foot near vertical headwall as well as the
most dramatic vertical relief on Earth. It was first discovered in 1935 in the Sentinel Range by American
explorer Lincoln Ellsworth. Bugueno Pinnacle, Chaplin Peak, Rada Peak, and Mount Rutford are some of
the names that were given in 2006 to subsidiaries of this peak in honor of the members of the first
expedition to the summit led by Nick Clinch. In 2004, NOVA sent a team to film in high definition the first
ever climb up the east face, where one wrong move could have led to a fall onto the Upper Dater Glacier.
For 10 points, name this peak of the Seven Summits that lies above the Ronne Ice Shelf, and is the highest
point in Antarctica.
ANSWER: Vinson Massif [prompt on "Mount Vinson"]
The first expedition to climb this mountain landed at McMurdo Sound in December of 1966, and, led by
Nicholas Clinch, all seven members reached its peak. In 2001, NOVA sponsored a group including author
Jon Krakauer to ascend its East Face, and that expedition logged its height at about 16,000 feet. Located in
the Sentinel Range of the Ellsworth Mountains, the highest point at its southern end is Mount Craddock.
The second-shortest and by far the southernmost of the Seven Summits, this is, for 10 points, which tallest
mountain in Antarctica?
ANSWER: Vinson Massif [I think "Mount Vinson" is acceptable too]
The first person to fully see this mountain was known as the "Flying Grandfather" and surveyed its
dangerous side known as the "Dark Cliff." The first ascent from the east face of this mountain was led by
Rob Raker, John Armstrong, Lisel Clark, Dan Stone, Andrew McLean, Dave Hahn, Conrad Anker, and Jon
Krakauer Since then, over 300 people have climbed this mountain that is located in the Ronne Ice Shelf and
claimed by Chile. Contained within the Sentinel Range, for 10 points, name this mountain climbed by Jon
Krakauer in 2001, and the largest mountain in Antarctica.
ANSWER: Vinson Massif
Anegada is the northernmost island in this archipelago, as well as the only one of non-volcanic origin. The
Soggy Dollar Bar is a well known tourist destination on this archipelago's island of Jost Van Dyke, which is
about five miles from another member, Tortola. The southernmost island in this archipelago is also the
largest and has residents who refer to themselves as Crucians. Split between the US and Great Britain, FTP,
what is this archipelago which includes St. John, St. Thomas, and St. Croix [croy].
ANSWER: Virgin Islands (accept answer of "British Virgin Islands until "Crucians" is said)
This state's Mossy Creek is a famous trout fishing stream. This state is home to the U.S.- oldest
sporting competition, which is held at Natural Chimneys Park. The highest point in this state is
Mount Rogers and this state borders a series of class 5 and 6 rapids at (*) Great Falls park. This state's
Hanover County was the site of the Battle of Cold Harbor and the Battle of Petersburg occurred just south
of its capital. This state's northwestern quarter is part of the Piedmont Region and the Blue Ridge
Mountains line this state's Shenandoah Valley. For 10 points, name this state located south of Washington
D.C. with capital at Richmond.
ANSWER: Virginia
Indian tribes exclusive to this state like the Nansemond and Nottoway are not among its only two
reservations that are held by the Mattaponi and the Pamunkey. This American state has the counties of
Prince Edward, Brunswick, and Halifax, all of which predate Canada. Its highest point is Mount Rogers.
The state flag of this place has a toga-clad man standing on the chest of a fallen toga-man atop this state's
state motto. Historic sites on the Historic Triangle of this state can be found in a part of this state that holds
cities such as Poquoson and Newport News, the Hampton Roads area. This Old Dominion state contains
Shenandoah National Park. For 10 points, name this state home to Charlottesville and Richmond.
ANSWER: Virginia
A statue and a park in this city is named after The King and I actor Yul Brynner, who was born here.
After a 1974 arms summit held in this city, Gerald Ford gave his foreign counterpart the coat off his back in
a sign of friendship. In 2012, this city hosted the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit, requiring
construction of the longest cable-stayed bridge in the world to connect the mainland to Russky Island.
Located at the head of the Golden Horn Bay, it is the home base of the Red Banner Pacific Fleet, and it was
connected to Moscow with the Trans-Siberian Railway. For 10 points, name this city, the largest Russian
port on the Pacific Ocean.
ANSWER: Vladivostok
This city's Dynamo Stadium hosted a 1996 music festival that was lauded as a key event in its country's
cultural freedom. Russky Island is separated from this city by the so-called "Eastern Bosporus," referencing
similarity to Constantinople that inspired the name of Golden Horn Bay. It lies between the Ussuri and
Amursky Gulfs, and was closed to foreigners for decades due to its housing a naval force that had earlier
lost the Battle of Tsushima. Sergei Witte oversaw a major project connecting the capital to this city, the
Trans-Siberian Railroad. For 10 points, identify this city lying across the Sea of Japan from Honshu, the
largest Pacific port owned by Russia.
ANSWER: Vladivostok
The Rybinsk Reservoir is located on this river's northern course, and the Zhiguli Hydroelectric Station
creates its Samara Reservoir. The fortress Svyazhsk on this river helped Ivan the Terrible overthrow the
Khanate of Kazan. This river is connected to the Don river by a canal located near a city named for this
river. This river rises in the Valdai Hills and empties into the Caspian Sea. For 10 points, name this river in
Western Russia that is the longest in Europe.
ANSWER: Volga River
This start of this river's delta is demarcated by the beginning of its tributary the Buzon River; other
tributaries include the Oka and Kama. 2.5 billion tons of sewage is estimated to be dumped in this river,
making only 3% drinkable and badly damaging the Beluga Sturgeon population and attendant caviar
production. It flows past cities like Samara and Saratov before passing Astrakhan as it empties into the
Caspian. FTP what is this river of Central Russia, considered the longest in Europe?
ANSWER: Volga
This river's namesake Germans founded villages like Lauwe, but were sent to labor camps during
World War II. A dam on the river created the Rybinsk Reservoir, and the Kama and Oka rivers are
among its tributaries. Rising in the Valdai Hills, this river flows in a bend around Samara and
empties into the (*) Caspian Sea. This river flows through such cities as Kazan, Nizhny Novgorod, and
one formerly known as Stalingrad. For 10 points, name this longest river in Europe, which flows through
Russia.
ANSWER: Volga River
One city located on this river, which is home to the White Trinity Church, is Tver. Oil is extracted near this
river from the Zhiguli Mountains, which overlook the city of Samara. The Soyembika Tower is located in
another city on this river, Kazan. A city near the mouth of this river that was a historical base for attacks
against nomads is Astrakhan, and this river also flows through Nizhniy Novgorod and a namesake city that
was the site of a bloody fifteen-month German siege. This river is connected by a canal to the Don River
not far before where it empties into the Caspian Sea. For ten points, name this longest river in Russia.
ANSWER: Volga River
Medieval tombstones are the only surviving writing of this geographical feature's namesake dialect
of the Bulgarian language. The podtzol soil around this river is notoriously poor, and it sections are
marked by confluences with the Oka and Kama after it starts in the (*) Valdai Hills. A canal running
along the Tsimiyank Reservoir from the city of Krasnoarmeysk on this river connects it to the southwesterly
Don. A namesake city on this river was formerly known as Stalingrad. For 10 points, name this Russian
river, the longest in Europe.
ANSWER: the Volga River
The Rybinsk reservoir is made up of water from this river, and is found north of the Uglich Highlands.
It runs past Saratov, and its tributaries include the Oka and Vyatka. It has hydroelectric power stations
at Ivankovo, and this river rises in the Valdai hills and has a Baltic canal. Its major tributary is the Kama,
and this river flows past Nizhy Novgorod and Samara. It has a reservoir at Volgograd and flows out of
Astrakhan into the Caspian after its canal with the nearby Don. For 10 points, name this longest Russian
river.
ANSWER: Volga River [or Ra; or Etil]
This river's namesake city is also situated near the Don River. The Kama and Oka are two of its
tributaries. The city of Astrakhan is located near this river's delta, slightly north of the Caspian Sea. The
Moscow Canal connects the Moskva River to this river. For 10 points, name this longest river in Europe,
located in central Russia.
ANSWER: Volga River
The Saratov Bridge runs across this river to Engels. The largest tributary of this river is the Kama River and
joins this river at Samara Reservoir. The Sheksna River connects this river to Lake Onega and to the Baltic
Sea through the Rybinsk Reservoir. The Oka River flows into this river at Nizhny Novgorod. The Ivankovo
Reservoir connects this river to the Moskva River through the Moscow Canal. Before flowing into its
namesake delta, one part of this river splits into the Akhtuba River near the city formerly known as
Stalingrad. For 10 points, name this river that starts in the Valdai Hills and flows through western Russia
into the Caspian Sea, the longest river in Europe.
ANSWER: Volga River [or Volga-Matushka; or Itil; or Atil; or Rav; or Jul]
Over one hundred people died when a boat sank on this river in 2011. It is the longest river starting from the
Valdai Hills, and its two largest tributaries are the Kama and Oka Rivers. A canal connects this river to the
Don River, and the Mariinsk Canal System connects it to the Baltic Sea. Its delta is near Astrakhan on the
Caspian Sea. Name this river that goes through Nizhny Novgorod, the longest river in Europe known as the
national river of Russia.
ANSWER: Volga River
This river is the namesake of a group of ethnic Germans whom Catherine the Great invited to settle along its
banks in the late 1700s. The Mariinsk Canal system connects this river to the Baltic Sea, and a famous song
beginning "Eh, ukhnyem!" is named for boatmen who pulled barges on this river. Flowing through Nizhniy
Novgorod and Samara, this river's canal to the Don provides the most direct connection between the Sea of
Azov (AH-soff) and the world's largest lake. FTP, name this river which drains most of western Russia into
the Caspian Sea, the longest river in Europe and the namesake of a city once called Stalingrad.
ANSWER: Volga River
An island in this lake has a namesake Princess cruise boat for carrying tourists. In addition to being the
site of Dodi Island, this lake is also located next to the border of Digya National Park. Triton Logging owns
the largest underwater logging license for the trees submerged in this lake. The original plan for building a
dam to form this lake was created by Albert Ernest Kitson. This lake receives water from Black and White
rivers of the same name, and its namesake river was used to create this lake through the Akosombo Dam.
For ten points, name this largest manmade lake by surface area, which is located in Ghana.
ANSWER: Lake Volta
This lake is located in a small basin between the Gamburtsev Mountains and the Dome C region. In the
nineteenth century, Peter Kropotkin theorized this lake could exist, and that it was formed by the immense
pressure of ice sheets above. In March 2013, a new type of bacteria was discovered in this lake's waters,
which was only 86% similar to any other known type of bacteria. It shares its name with the research
station where the world's coldest temperature was recorded. For 10 points, name this Antarctic lake.
ANSWER: Lake Vostok [or Ozero Vostok]
This river is named for a section which is limestone-bottomed and was once incredibly clear. One dam on
this river created a lake named for a politician, J. Edward Roush. A set of faults in a seismic zonenamed for
this river caused a magnitude 5.2 earthquake in 2008 felt in West Salem, Mt. Caramel, and Belmont. The
United States suffered its worst-ever military defeat at the hands of Native Americans, St. Clair's defeat at
the hands of the forces of Little Turtle and Blue Jacket, near this river's banks. The Tippecanoe, White, and
Vermilion rivers flow through it, and it passes through Lafayette, Vincennes, and Terre Haute before
flowing into the Ohio. For 10 points, identify this river whose name appears in Indiana's state song.
ANSWER: Wabash River
Its border with the Wirral Peninsula is formed by the river Dee, while other rivers include the Usk
and the Afon Goch, which itself contains Aber Falls. The Gower peninsula and the Lliw uplands are
found within its county of Swansea, while the Harlech dome is found in the foothills of the Snowdonia
Range, which also contains this polity's highest point, Mt. Snowdon. Other members of its Seven Wonders
include the Overton Yew trees, St. Giles- church in the city of Wrexham, and the falls of Pistyll Rhaeadr.
For 10 points, identify this state of Great Britain whose inhabitants celebrate the eisteddfod, with capital at
Cardiff.
ANSWER: Wales [or Cymru]
The first recorded finding of a trilobite fossil was in this region, which lends its name to the first
period of the Paleozoic era. This region was separated from Mercia by Offa's Dyke. A city in this
region acquired the nickname of "Copperopolis" for its major smelting works in the nineteenth
century, and is its second-largest city, (+) Swansea. Plaid Cymru (PLIDE COM-ree) advocates
independence for this region and holds three seats in the Parliament of the (*) United Kingdom. For
10 points, name this country whose "prince" is the heir apparent to the monarchy of the United Kingdom.
ANSWER: Wales [or Cymru until it is read; prompt on Great Britain until "Swansea" is read; prompt o United Kingdom until "Swansea" is read; do not accept or prompt on "England"]
Pen y ["uh"] Fan is located in this country's Brecon Beacons national park. The north of this country is
home to castles like Conwy and Caernarfon ["kah-EER-nah-fon"]. Its capital is home to the St Fagans
history museum. A small town in this country has over two dozen bookstores and is on the Wye river. The
Menai Strait separates its mainland from the large island Anglesey to its northwest. People in this country
celebrate artistic festivals called eisteddfodau. This country is bordered to the West and North by Cardigan
Bay and the Bristol Channel. Its highest mountain is Snowdon and its largest cities are Swansea and Cardiff.
For 10 points, name this country west of England.
ANSWER: Wales [or Cymru, which sounds sort of like "KUM-bree"; prompt on "UK," "United Kingdom, "Great Britain," etc., but do NOT accept or prompt on "England" or "Scotland"]
In 2007, one of this polity's northern counterparts adopted a "National Conversation" spurred in part by the
population of this polity's smallest city, St. David's, named after its patron saint. The Usk River rises in this
country's Brecon Beacon's Park, and flows to a question bounded by Hartland Point and St. Govan's Head,
Bristol Channel Channel, after earlier passing the city of Newport. Geological studies in this country led to
the classification of the Ordovician and Silurian periods, where Cardigan Bay composes part of the coast of
Snowdonia. Also including the city of Swansea, for 10 points, name this country in the U.K. whose capital
is Cardiff.
ANSWER: Wales [or Cymru [prompt on UK or United Kingdom]
The highest waterfall in this political unit is called the Devil's Appendix and is located on the side of
Cwm (k-OOM) Idwal. An grove of Yew trees at Overton may be the oldest in this place, where a causeway
known as "the cob" connects the town of Holyhead to Anglesey. A Beaker people site at Llethryd Tooth
Cave is located on this component country's Gower Peninsula, which also includes an unusual rock
formation called the Hog's Head. People in this region hold spoken word festivals called eisteddfodau, and
it includes the Wye River valley as well as a large earthern wall separating it from its eastern neighbor,
Offa's Dyke. For 10 points, identify this component country of the United Kingdom represented on its
official flag by a dragon.
ANSWER: Wales [do not accept or prompt on "United Kingdom," etc]
The highest peak in this region is Mount Snowdon, and the westernmost point on its mainland lies on the St.
David's Peninsula. Cities here include Wrexham, Neath, and Swansea, and a small portion of its eastern
border is formed by the Wye River. Bodies of water bordering this region include Cardigan Bay to the west,
the Bristol Channel to the south, and the Irish Sea to the north. The Cambrian mountain range dominates,
for 10 points, what member country of the United Kingdom with capital at Cardiff?
ANSWER: Wales [do not accept or prompt on "United Kingdom," "UK," "Great Britain," or "England" at any point]
The Brecon Beacons are a mountain range in the south of this country, home to a type of mountain pony
named for this nation. Its boundary with its eastern neighbor is mostly defined by Offa's Dike, which runs
south from the River Dee to the Wye River. Its eight "Preserved Counties" include Gwent, Dyfed, and
Glamorgan, the last of which includes its capital, which sits on the Bristol Channel. FTP what is this part of
the United Kingdom bordering England on its east, with capital at Cardiff?
ANSWER: Wales
This country's Skomer Island and Ramsey Island are located within St. Bride's Bay, which, along with
Cardigan Bay, indents this country's western coast. Carmel Head is on its island of Anglesey, and the
Cambrians cut through its middle. Snowdonia is a region in this country, which is north of the Bristol
Channel, on which lie Swansea and Cardiff, its capital. For 10 points, name this constituent country of the
United Kingdom, located west of England.
ANSWER: Wales [or Cymru; prompt on UK or United Kingdom until "capital" is read; do not accept or prompt on "Britain," "England," etc.]
This constituent country's Brecon Beacons National Park was designated in February 2013 as the fifth
international dark sky reserve. This area's mythology was compiled by Lady Charlotte Guest into the
Mabinogion. This constituent country's "Green Desert" makes up the area dominated by the Cambrian
Mountains. The south part of this country is home to coal fields that make up an important part of this
country's economy. Seaside cities in this country include Swansea and Cardiff. For 10 points, name this
country of the United Kingdom, which occupies much of the western portion of Britain.
ANSWER: Wales
Two dishes from this country are laverbread, made by boiling seaweed into paste, and "speckled bread,"
or bara brith. Two of this country's national parks are the Brecon Beacons in the south and Snowdonia in
the north. The Isle of Anglesey is located off its northwest coast. Symbolized by a red dragon, this country
has two national flowers, the daffodil and the leek. 20% of its people speak a Brythonic language called
Cymraeg. For 10 points, name this western region of Great Britain whose "prince" is Prince Charles.
ANSWER: Wales [prompt on the United Kingdom; prompt on Great Britain; do not accept or prompt on "England"]
In China, Handan had some of the largest examples of these while the second longest one of a certain
type of this is located near Gorgan in Iran. One of these commemorates John Lennon in Prague while
another is now home to the East Side Gallery. Another one of these can be found between the al-Aqsa
and Dome of the Rock Mosques, construction of that one was completed under the rule of King
Agrippa II, the great grandson of Herod the Great. (*) For ten points, name these structures which
include the Western one in Jerusalem and one attacked by sledgehammers in Berlin in 1989.
ANSWER: walls
Leandro and Enrico Marconi were architects mostly active in this city, who designed its Great
Synagogue in the 1870s. Though it's not Copenhagen, this city's coat-of-arms features a mermaid. Saxon
Garden and Bruhl Palace, in this city, were both destroyed during World War II. This city's Castle Square
is the home of Sigismund's Column, though its largest square is named for Josef Pilsudski. The 1942
"Grossaktion" of this city deported many of its residents to Treblinka. This city on the Vistula River is
home to the Frederic Chopin Museum. For ten points, name this capital of Poland.
ANSWER: Warsaw
This state contains the Sun Lakes near an enormous extinct waterfall in its Channeled Scablands region and
used to contain the Glines Canyon Dam, which was removed as part of the Elwha Ecosystem Restoration
project intended to reinvigorate salmon runs into the region. This state contains a pass that George
McClellan failed to build a road through, the Naches Pass, just south of the more used Snoqualmie Pass.
This state is home to one of the few temperate rainforest in the United States, the Hoh. Its highest point
hosts the Nisqually and Cowlitz glaciers and is the most topographically prominent point in the contiguous
United States. For 10 points, identify this Pacific Northwest state home to Glacier Peak, Mount Olympus,
Mount Adams, and Mount Rainier, where one can find the Space Needle in Seattle.
ANSWER: State of Washington
The Juan De Fuca and Georgia Straits border this state's San Juan Islands. Minor cities in this state in
include Walla Walla and Pullman. One mountain in this state saw its summit reduced by over 1000 feet in
1980. That peak, Mount St Helens, still stands about 6000 feet lower than the state's highest point, Mount
Rainier. Separated from Oregon in the south by the Columbia River, for 10 points, name this state that is
home to the city of Seattle and its capital of Olympia.
ANSWER: Washington (state)
An offshoot of the Latter Day Saints in this state spawned a figure who called himself one of its
city's namesake "Jesus," William W. Davies. Indian conflicts in this state included those against
Nisqually chief Leschi and chief Kamiakin. It is home to the cities of Pasco, Richland, and
Kennewick, which make up its "Tri-Cities." This state is home to such peaks as Mt. Adams and Mt.
Baker, as well as the town of (*) Walla Walla. For 10 points, name this state, home to cities like Everett
and Redmond, in which companies such as Boeing, Microsoft, and Starbucks were founded.
ANSWER: Washington state
In 1983, the Elwha ferry ran aground off this state's Orcas Island. Ferries also serve its Vashon Island and
Bainbridge Island as well as Bremerton, which is also accessible via a bridge that collapsed because of
resonance in 1940 into the Narrows. 1910 saw the deadliest avalanche in US history at this state's Stevens
Pass, which leads to Wenatchee and Lake Chelan. Usually, however, commuters in this state have no
trouble reaching Bellevue or Tacoma or crossing the Cascades en route to Spokane. For ten points, name
this state home to Olympia and Seattle.
ANSWER: Washington
The Missoula Floods created this state's Channeled Scablands in its eastern portion. The Franklin D.
Roosevelt Lake was created from a dam built in this state. A bridge in this state collapsed in 1940, and the
Grand Coulee Dam was built on the Columbia River in this state. This state contains several volcanoes in
the Cascades, including Mt. St. Helens and Mt. Rainier. Its largest city lies on Puget Sound, as does
Tacoma. For 10 points, name this state in the Pacific Northwest, whose cities include Olympia and Seattle.
ANSWER: Washington
One city in this American state was named for the road running through it and is the home of Wild Waves
Theme Park. Another top ten city in this state was the site of a shingle-weavers strike in 1916 that led to a
deadly confrontation between police and the IWW. This state's largest city has the only elected poet
laureate in the U.S., known as the "poet populist." Another city in this home to Federal Way has its water
supply controlled by the Howard A. Hanson dam on the Green River. This state is the location of Cornish
College of the Arts, the city that hosted the 1962 World's Fair under the banner of the so-called "Century
21 Exposition," and the cities of Kent and Yakima. For 10 points, name this home state of Boeing, the
Space Needle, and Microsoft.
ANSWER: Washington
The national park of Rock Creek is in the middle of this city. Diagonal streets intersect its street
grid at traffic circles as part of the city plan of Charles L'Enfant. The Freer Gallery has a large
collection of Asian art in this city and is part of a larger (*) museum group that includes the Hirshorn
Gallery and the Air and Space Museum. This home to the Smithsonian at one time contained land now part
of Arlington County. For 10 points, name this capital of the United States.
ANSWER: Washington, D.C. [or Washington, D.C.]
This city contains a statue of Martin Luther King carved out of the "Stone of Hope" and standing in
front of a wall covered in his quotations. This city has restricted the height of residential buildings to 90
feet. Yukio Ozaki's gift of cherry trees to this city is commemorated every year by the Cherry Blossom
Festival. A landmark in this city consists of a black wall gouged into the earth and covered with names of
soldiers; that artwork was designed by Maya Lin. For 10 points, name this city that contains the Vietnam
Veterans memorial as well as the Jefferson and Lincoln memorials.
ANSWER: Washington, D.C. [or Washington, D.C.; or Washington, District of Columbia]
Though not New York or any city in Montana or Antarctica, this city features a foot bridge to Theodore
Roosevelt Island. This city's Lambda Rising bookstore recently closed near its gay-friendly neighborhood
of Dupont Circle. Benjamin Latrobe designed the building at the center of this city, whose other important
buildings include Dumbarton Oaks. It is located right next to the site of military funerals at Arlington
Cemetery. Its four divisions include Northwest and Southeast and the Tidal Basin is near its Watergate
Hotel. For 10 points, name this city on the Potomac and Anacostia rivers between Maryland and Virginia.
ANSWER: Washington, District of Columbia [accept either underlined part; prompt "DC"]
This city's parks were outlined in a plan led by James McMillan. While surveying the land that became
this city, Andrew Ellicott set up various milestones that still exist today, including some placed by
Benjamin Banneker. Its Fairlawn Park area was once known as Anacostia Flats and is where the Bonus
Army camped. The Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts is found in this city. For 10 points, name this
city on the Potomac River where the White House is.
ANSWER: Washington, D.C. [or the District of Columbia; or D.C.]
Until 2002, a house named after this man was the residence of Hawai'i's governor. The Texas
Declaration of Independence was signed in a city on the Brazos named after this man. A bridge connecting
Fort Lee, New Jersey with Manhattan is also named after, for 10 points, what man whose name also graces
the forty-second state and the nation's capital city?
ANSWER: George Washington
One of these locations features a semicircular portion known as the Garganta del Diablo, or Devil's
Throat. Another one of these sites starts on the Auyan-Tepui, or Devil's Mountain, and was named for an
American who crash-landed his plane nearby. The largest one of these sites creates a mist that led it to be
named "The Smoke that Thunders" and occurs along the course of the Zambezi River. Iguazu, Angel, and
Victoria all name, for 10 points, what areas of rapidly descending rivers?
ANSWER: waterfalls
The Romans created the largest man made one of these near Terni named Marmore. The four tracks
of King, Roarer, Rocket, and Queen are present in another located in Karnakata called Jog. The
strongest European one is located near Husavik in Iceland and is named (*) Dettifoss. One of these
features a U-shape given the name the Devil's Throat and is located on the Brazil-Argentina border, named
Iguazu. For 10 points, name this geographic feature notably including such examples as Victoria, Angel,
and Niagara.
ANSWER: waterfalls
This question of water surrounds the Jason Peninsula and can be entered through the Bransfield Strait.
Extensively explored by William Bruce, it got its original name from an earlier discoverer who called it the
George IV Sea. Cape Norvegia lies to its east, along with Coats Land and the Princess Martha Coast. First
sighted by a man aboard the Jane, it is inhabited by a namesake type of seal, and the Endurance sunk in this
question of water. The Larsen and Filchner Ice Shelves lie in it, while the South Orkney Islands lie to its north.
Bordering the Ronne Ice Shelf and situated east of the Antarctic Peninsula, it now bears the name of an
American whaler. For 10 points, identify this sea of the Atlantic Ocean that lies on the opposite side of
Antarctica from the Ross Sea.
ANSWER: Weddell Sea
This region is divided up into three administrative divisions labelled A, B, and C. The highest point in this
region is Tall Asur and is located in the Ramallah and Al Bireh regions. A city in the south of this region
contains Rachel's Tomb and the Cave of the Patriarchs; that city is Hebron. Controversy erupted recently
due to an announcement to construct 500 new houses here in response to the murder of a family in an illegal
settlement. Bordered on one side by a separation barrier and on the other by the Jordan River, for 10 points,
what is this territory of contested status in relation to Israel which, along with the Gaza strip, forms the
Palestinian territories?
ANSWER: West Bank [prompt on "Palestine"]
This state contains the northern half of the National Radio Quiet Zone, which is designed to aid the radio
astronomy telescope at Green Bank, where the Drake Equation on extraterrestrial life was presented.
Violent labor disputes shook this landlocked state's towns of Paint Creek and Matewan in the 1910s and
20s. This state is home to the highest east-of-the-Mississippi vehicular bridge, an enormous steel arch over
New River Gorge. For ten points, identify this state where coal mining wars took place decades after it
broke off from its eastern neighbor during the Civil War.
ANSWER: West Virginia
8th-graders in this state who perform well on a history exam can win a golden horseshoe,
commemorating this modern-day state's exploration by the Knights of the Golden Horseshoe. Spruce
Mountain is in this state, where the Mothman sightings occurred in the vicinity of Point Pleasant.
Established by the Wheeling Convention, it borders Kentucky and Ohio to the west and Pennsylvania to the
north. For 10 points, name this "wild and wonderful" state that broke off from the Old Dominion during the
Civil War.
ANSWER: West Virginia
This state was where the oldest terrestrial material ever found was located, coming from this state's
Narryer Gneiss Terrane in the Jack Hills. This state's nine administrative regions include Wheatbelt and
another named for the Gascoyne River. The port city of Wyndham in the north of this state is connected to
the state capital by the Great Northern Highway. The eastern border of this state travels along the 129th
meridian east for 1,157 miles, part of which is with the Northern Territory. For ten points, name this state
with capital Perth that is also the largest state of Australia.
ANSWER: Western Australia
This region contains the mineral rich Pilbara area, which is home to the Hamersley Mountains, and
its Kimberley region is located to the west of the Joseph Boneparte Gulf. Its cities include Geraldton
and Bunbury, and this region contains the large monolithMount Augustus. The city of Kalgoorlie in this
province is the western terminus of the world's longest straight railway, which runs through the Nullarbor
Plain. Containing the city of Fremantle at the mouth of the Swan River, for 10 points, name this largest state
of Australia which has its capital and Perth, so named for its location on the left side of the continent.
ANSWER: Western Australia
The program known as MINURSO took place in this region, which has seen riots in a city formerly
known as Villa Cisneros. This region was the subject of a 2000 U.N. plan led by James Baker. A
government that professes to control it may have backed the Independence Intifada and is based in Tindouf,
Algeria. This region has long been disputed with Polisario Front-controlled independent government, the
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, by Morocco. For ten points, name this disputed, sparsely populated
region located on the coast of an African desert.
ANSWER: Western Sahara [or the SADR until it is read; or Sahrawi until it is read]
Agracha and Bu Craa are some of the exciting mine centers of this place, which borders Cape Bojador and
includes the city of Smara. The indigenous population of this area is composed mainly of ethnic Sahrawis,
although many have been displaced and they may now be outnumbered by government-sponsored settlers. It
is among the least-densely populated regions in the world, and over half its population lives in the largest
city, El Aaiun. It is comprised of the former Spanish colonies of Saguia al-Hamra and Rio de Oro, and the
Polisario Front seeks its independence. For 10 points, name this semi-independent area formerly claimed by
Morocco.
ANSWER: Western Sahara [or Sahara' Al-Gharbiyah]
The Table Rock Lake near Branson, Missouri was formed by damming a river with this name, and another
river of this name flows through Indianapolis and is the main tributary of the Wabash River. Its also the
name of a mountain range whose namesake member is the third highest peak in California, and another
mountain range by this name features Cannon Mountain and the Presidential Range. The cities of
Courmayeur and Chamonix are found near the base of a European peak with this name, and the sea by this
name is bordered by the Kanin and Kola Peninsulas and includes the port town of Arkhangelsk. For 10
points, identify this color denoting the highest Alpine peak and an arctic Russian sea.
ANSWER: White [accept Blanc or Bianco after mentioning Courmayeur]
Big Pine lies between the Inyo Mountains and a range by this name, while the Pemigewasset River fed a
feature in another range with this name, Cannon Peak's recently-collapsed Old Man of the Mountain.
Besides those New Hampshire mountains, this adjective also describes a New Mexico area rich in Gypsum
and namesake of a research site. Onega, Dvina, and Mezen bays indent a question of water with this name that
is bounded by the Kola Peninsula and is home to the city of Arkangel'sk. For 10 points, identify this color
which describes some "Sands" in the Southwest as well as Sea in Northern Russia that narrowly connects to
the Baltic.
ANSWER: White
One of its deltas forms the Sudd wetland region, and the Jonglei canal was proposed to reroute part of it
around the Sudd. Its headstreams include the Luvironza, and the Owen Falls Dam used it for hydroelectric
power until 2006. This river forms the Bujagali and Murchison Falls in its "Victoria" incarnation, and it
also contains a segment named after Lake Albert. Called the Bahr al Jabal upon entering Sudan and joining
the Bahr el Ghazal at Lake No, it originates near Jinja in Lake Victoria. This is, for 10 points, what river
that ends in Khartoum and unites with its blue counterpart as part of the longest river in the world?
ANSWER: White Nile [prompt on "Nile"]
The astronomer James Keeler names a needle of this mountain, which was almost named Fisherman's
Peak after the profession of its first climbers. The town of Lone Pine can be found to its east in the Owens
Valley. This southern terminus of the John Muir Trail is located in both the Inyo National Forest and the
Sequoia National Park. The Badwater Basin, the lowest point in North America, is located a mere
eighty-five miles from, for 10 points, what mountain in California, the highest in the contiguous United
States?
ANSWER: Mount Whitney
In 1965, the U.S. government rejected a proposal to rename this peak after Winston Churchill. While eating
his lunch here, Byrd Surby was killed by a lightning strike, prompting the construction of the Smithsonian
Institution Shelter. A 1969 Hawthorne Nevada Airlines flight crashed into this mountain, killing 35 people.
It was named after a man who referred to John Muir as "a mere sheepherder" while serving as the head of
the Geological Survey of the state where this peak is located. The Badwater Ultramarathon begins at Death
Valley and ends at the trailhead to this peak near Sequoia National Park. For 10 points, name this mountain,
the highest in the contiguous United States.
ANSWER: Mt. Whitney
The amateur National Baseball Congress is located in this city. El Dorado Lake and Cheney Reservoir
can be found on the outskirts of this city. The Beech and Cessna aircraft corporations were founded in this
city, which was the "air capital of the world" in the 1920s. Dennis Rader, the "BTK" killer, murdered 10
people in and around this city. This seat of Sedgwick County is located on the Arkansas River, about 140
miles southwest of Topeka, and is the home of a 2013 Final Four team. For 10 points, name this largest city
in Kansas.
ANSWER: Wichita, Kansas
Michel Cadotte led a trading post on Madeline Island, one of this state's black bear-filled Apostle
Islands. The most recent advance of the Laurentide ice sheet is a glaciation named for this state, the
southwest area of which lacks significant till and outwash because it escaped that glaciation and is
thus known as the "Driftless Area". The land in its Sauk County was exalted in a book which coined
the term "land (*) ethic", Aldo Leopold's Sand County Almanac. A sandstone gorge on this state's
namesake river lends its name to a nearby waterpark-filled tourist trap, its namesake "Dells". Its eastern
Door Peninsula separates Lake Michigan from Green Bay. For 10 points, identify this Midwestern state
whose major cities include Racine, Milwaukee, and Madison.
ANSWER: Wisconsin
According to a Chippewa legend, the Great Spirit told the tribe to settle on Madeline Island in this
state, near Chequamon Bay. The Fox River flows out of the largest lake in this state, Lake
Winnebago, and the St. Croix River rises in this state near Solon Springs. A tourist destination in this
state is near its namesake (*) "Dells." The Door Peninsula borders a colorfully-named arm of a Great
Lake that juts into this state's northeast, Green Bay. For 10 points, name this Midwestern state west of Lake
Michigan whose cities include Madison and Milwaukee.
ANSWER: Wisconsin
This state is home to the first major U.S. city to elect a socialist mayor, and its city of Victory was the
site of the Battle of Bad Axe. The most populated areas of this state can be found in the southeast, in
cities likes Beloit and Racine ,while a city in its northeast lies along the Fox River. Lake Winnebago
lies in the eastern portion of this state, where one can find the city of Oshkosh and in the northeast
this state is bordered by Upper Michigan. For 10 points, name this U.S. state home to the cities of Green
Bay and Milwaukee.
ANSWER: Wisconsin
The Penokee Mountains border the Chequamegon National Forest in this state. The town of Bayfield
hosts an annual Apple Festival in this state where Madeline Island, one of the Apostle Islands, is located.
Eau Claire, La Crosse, and Wausau are cities in this state, whose Door County juts into Lake Michigan.
This state is home to namesake Dells. Fond du Lac and Oshkosh are located on Lake Winnebago in this
state, whose largest city is Milwaukee. For 10 points, name this state with capital at Madison.
ANSWER: Wisconsin
The northernmost part of this state is the Apostle Islands, the largest of which is Madeline Island.
A path following a moraine across this state is the Ice Age Trail. Like Missouri, it contains a Lake
Winnebago, and this state's version is surrounded by towns such as Neenah and Fond du Lac. Its
east coast includes the towns of Manitowoc and Sheboygan, and Washington Island is just past the
end of its Door Peninsula. The town of LaCrosse is on its western border with Minnesota. Name this
state bordering the Upper Peninsula of Michigan that contains the city of Milwaukee.
ANSWER: Wisconsin
This state's Aztalan State Park is home to some notable Native American ruins, and in 1897, the Boaz
mastodon was found here. This state is home to the ancient Gogebic and Baraboo mountain ranges, the
latter of which forms the eastern border of the Driftless Area, and it controls the Apostle Islands. The site of
the Bad Axe Massacre in 1832, in which the Sauk and Fox followers of Black Hawk were killed, this state
is home to the Door Peninsula, which juts into Lake Michigan, as well as Lake Winnebago. For 10 points,
name this Midwestern state whose cities include Green Bay and Milwaukee.
ANSWER: State of Wisconsin
The towns of Warroad, Baudette and Kenora lie on the shores of this question of water, as does Zippel
Bay State Park. This question of water was first explored by Jacques de Noyon, and Fort Saint Charles
once stood on its Magnuson's Island. One island in this question of water was the site of a massacre of
twenty French and Cree, while a notable peninsula which protrudes into it is named after Father
Jean-Pierre Aulneau. Fed by Kakagi Lake, Shoal Lake and the Rainy River and drained by the Winnipeg
River, this question of water is bordered by the Northwest Angle, the only part of the continental US not below
the 49th parallel. For 10 points, name this lake between Manitoba, Ontario and Minnesota.
ANSWER: Lake of the Woods [or lac de Bois]
This building complex was called "purposeless giantism" by Lewis Mumford, and it featured narrow
windows reflecting architect Minoru Yamasaki's fear of heights. This site, which had its own zip code, was
where six hundred employees of Cantor Fitzgerald were killed. The space it occupied is now adjacent to the
building once known as "Freedom Tower." For ten points, name this New York City building with "twin
towers" that was destroyed on September 11, 2001.
ANSWER: World Trade Center [or WTC; or Twin Towers until it is read]
This state's Fremont County is home to the Boysen Resevoir. This state is home to the southern part of the
largest sub-range of the Rocky Mountains, the Absaroka Range. Its southeastern portion contains both
Bridger and Medicine Bow Peaks, and its southern portion contains the town of Green River. Home to
Shoshone National Forest, this state contains the oil hub of Rock Springs, and the John D. Rockefeller Jr.
Memorial Parkway runs through one of its National Parks. That same national park was decimated by a
1988 forest fire, and contains the largest super volcano in North America, a namesake caldera. Its lone
university lies in the city of Laramie, and it also includes the cities of Jackson Hole, and Casper. For 10
points, name this home to the Grand Teton and Yellowstone national parks, a western state with capital at
Cheyenne.
ANSWER: Wyoming
The Riverton Reclamation Project in this state cares for land that used to be part of the Wind
River Indian Reservation; that project is responsible for Ocean Lake near the Owl Creek Mountains.
This state is the site of Sweetwater River, which is near the route through the Rockies called South
Pass. This state contains the Cathedral Group of mountains, including Mount Owen, and its highest
mountain is Gannett Peak. In addition to containing Grand Teton National Park, this state is home
to Old Faithful, a geyser in Yellowstone National Park. Name this home of Devils Tower located
south of Montana, a state with its capital at Cheyenne.
ANSWER: Wyoming
In 1988, fires in this state consumed part of the John D. Rockefeller Jr. Memorial Parkway. It is home to
a location frequently used for Native American vision quests, the Medicine Wheel National Historic
Landmark. A popular site for trapping in this state is called Jackson Hole. This state contains the first
United States National Monument, a site known as "Bear Lodge" by the Lakota. The least populous of the
fifty states, it is the primary location of Grand Teton and Yellowstone National Parks. For 10 points, name
this western state whose capital is Cheyenne.
ANSWER: Wyoming
One natural monument in this state can be viewed through a modern sculpture by Junkyu Moto called the
Wind Circle. This state's Lake Gosiute contains Green River Formation fossils. The eastern part of this
state is known as the High Plains. The Lower Basin of one area in this state contains the Fountain Paint Pot.
Its highest point, Gannett Peak, lies in the Wind River Range. The Medicine Bow Mountains lie near its city
of Laramie. This state was the first to grant women's suffrage, for which it is called the Equality State.
Franklin Roosevelt declared Jackson Hole a National Monument in this state, which includes Devil's
Tower. One geyser here erupts about once an hour and is called Old Faithful. For ten points, name this state
which contains the Grand Teton and Yellowstone National Parks.
ANSWER: Wyoming
The city that was this state's largest until the 1980s involves such suburbs as Bar Nunn and Mills,
while the center of this state contains Ten Sleep and Thermopolis. It contains the ten-thousandsquare mile Sweetwater County, and a third of the U.S.'s uranium reserves. Tourism in this state
centers on (*) Big Horn Canyon, Fort Laramie, and Devil's Tower; it also contains the majority of
Yellowstone. For 10 points, name this sparsely populated state, home to Casper, Jackson Hole, and
Cheyenne.
ANSWER: Wyoming
One of this state's national parks was home to a 1972 meteor that was caught on film. This state's
highest mountain is located in the Wild River range. Two parks in this state are connected by the John D.
Rockefeller, Jr. Memorial Parkway. This state includes the headwaters of the Snake River, and in 1995 the
federal government controversially re-introduced wolves into this state. This state is home to America's
first National Monument, a massive igneous rock called Devil's Tower. For 10 points, name this state that
is home to such cities as Gillette, Casper, and Cody, and most of Yellowstone National Park.
ANSWER: Wyoming
In 1997, rioting broke out in this region after the execution of 30 activists in the city of Gulja, which
lies on the Ili River. The northern half of this region is dominated by the Dzungarian Basin and
contains Turpan, a city located on the northern part of a trade route that branched out to avoid the
Taklamakan Desert. Lop Nur is a major nuclear test site in this resource-rich region. Migration to
this province's city of (*) Kashgar has fueled ethnic unrest, while the summer of 2009 saw major rioting in
this region's Han-dominated capital of Urumqi. For 10 points, identify this province of northwestern China,
often referred to as the autonomous region of a certain predominantly Islamic ethnic group.
ANSWER: Xinjiang [or Uyghur Autonomous Region; accept Sinkiang; accept Eastern Turkestan or Chinese Turkestan or Uyghuristan from a Uyghur nationalist]
The Dabancheng Wind Farm, the largest on its continent, is located in this region. Aydingkol Lake,
which used to be freshwater, lies in this region's Turpan Depression. Nuclear testing has occurred at a
location in this region that is now a dried-up lake, Lop Nur. The separatist group East Turkestan Islamic
Movement operates in this region. A recent influx of people of Han ethnicity to this region has caused cities
such as Urumqi to rapidly grow, but has also led to civil unrest between them and the dominant ethnic
group here, the Uyghurs. For 10 points, name this autonomous region, the Muslim-dominated largest
administrative region of China.
ANSWER: Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region
James Gamble Rogers washed many of this institution's buildings with acid to make them look older. In
the 60s, it built two residential areas whose floor plans have no right angles. This institution runs the
Peabody Museum of Natural History, where Othniel Marsh's dinosaur bone discoveries are displayed. Its
modern architecture includes residential areas named for Ezra Stiles and Samuel Morse, and a hockey rink
designed by Eero Saarinen often called "The Whale." This institution was the law school of Bill Clinton
and the undergraduate alma mater of both George Bushes. For ten points, name this Ivy League university in
New Haven, Connecticut.
ANSWER: Yale University [or Yale College]
Sup'ung Lake was created along this river at a dam near Sinuiji, and it arises from T'ien Lake in the
Ch'ang-pai Mountains. Its main tributaries include the Herchun, Changjin, and Tokro rivers, and it
flows south to Hyesan before sweeping 130 kilometers northwest to Linjiang in the Kirin province. It
eventually empties near the city of Dangdong into an arm of the Yellow Sea named for one of the
countries it borders. For 10 points, name this river that forms the boundary between China and North
Korea.
ANSWER: Yalu River [or Amnok River]
The official source of this river is a glacier on Geladandong Mountain in the Dangla Mountain
Range. Yichang City's Gezhouba Dam lies on this river in Hubei Province, while this river's third
dam, the Xiluodu Dam, is under construction. This river turns 180 degrees at Shigu in Yunnan
Province, and joins with the Jialing and Han Rivers. This very (*) polluted river flooded several times
in the early 20th century, each resulting in over 100,000 deaths. The Three Gorges Dam is built on, for ten
points, what longest Chinese river, which lies south of the Yellow River?
ANSWER: Yangtze River (also accept Chang Jiang)
In 1548, the Great Jingjiang Levee was constructed on this river, which caused a rising of the bottom of
Dongting Lake. The triple city of Wuhan lies at the confluence of the Han and this river. This river was the
home to the freshwater dolphin, baiji, which is now functionally extinct. A hydroelectric dam located near
Yichang on this river is the largest in the world and is the Three Gorges Dam. For ten points, identify this
Chinese river, the longest in Asia and third-longest in the world.
ANSWER: Yangtze river [or Chang Jiang; or Ch'ang Chiang; or Da Jiang; or The Great River]
In 1871, the USS Monocacy charted this river, and it is home to the only species of of alligator found
in the Eastern Hemisphere. The Battle of Red Cliffs occurred near this river's banks, and its sources
are the glaciers at Geladandong in the Tanggula Mountains. With its longest tributary being the (*)
Han, this river connects with Lake Poyang, and it features the world's largest hydroelectric power station.
That station is the new but problematic Three Gorges Dam, and this river passes through Nanjing before
emptying into the East China Sea at Shanghai. For 10 points, name this Chinese river, which is the longest
in Asia.
ANSWER: Yangtze River [or Chang Jiang]
The upper reaches of this river are called the Jinsha River, and the Battle of Red Cliffs was fought on this
river. Dongting Lake and Lake Poyang both empty into this river, which is joined by the Huangpu near its
mouth. Wuhan, Nanjing, and Chongqing lie on this river that runs through the Sichuan basin. This river is
also the site of a large hydroelectric dam project at its Three Gorges. For 10 points, name this river that
ends near Shanghai, the longest river in China.
ANSWER: Chang Jiang or Yangtze River
Declared functionally extinct in 2006, the baiji species of freshwater dolphin was found only in this river.
This river has its source at Geladaindong Mountain on the Tibetan Plateau in Qinghai Province and
converges with the Jialing River at Chongquing. Hangzhou and Nanjing are major cities in this river's
delta, sometimes referred to as the "golden triangle." The world's largest hydroelectric power station was
created as a result of the Three Gorges Dam on this river and it empties into the East China Sea at Shanghai.
For 10 points, name this Chinese river, the longest in Asia.
ANSWER: Yangtze River [accept Chang Jiang]
The first bridge built to cross this river goes from Tortoise Hill to Snake Hill. This river originates
in the Tanggula [tahng-goo-lah] Mountains, and its source is generally considered to be the
Wulanmulun [woo-lahn-moo-loon] River. It was the home of the baiji, a recently extinct species of
dolphin. From 1994 to 2012, this river was the construction site of the most powerful hydroelectric
project in the world, the Three Gorges Dam. This river flows into the East China Sea at Shanghai.
Name this longest river in Asia, often referred to as Chang Jiang [chayng jayng].
ANSWER: Yangtze River [accept Chang Jiang or Da Jiang before "Chang"- prompt on Long River or Great River]
This river originates in a glacier west of Geladandong Mountain. The Baiji, a dolphin endemic to this
river, went extinct due to pollution from cities such as Nanjing, as well as the construction of the Three
Gorges Dam. It receives the Yalong and Min rivers, and it empties into the East China Sea For ten points,
name this longest river in Asia.
ANSWER: Yangtze River [or Yangzi; or Chang Jiang]
A 1938 flood of this question of water prevented Japanese forces from capturing Zhengzhou. The Song
Dynasty artist Ma Yuan depicted this river "breaching its course." A 1642 flood of this question of water was
used by the Ming Governor of Kaifeng in an attempt to destroy rebellious peasants led by Li Zicheng. The
basin of this river is in the Yueguzonglie basin of the Bayan Har Mountains. The People's Victory Canal
connects this question of water to the Wei River. This river is known as the "cradle of Chinese civilization"
and "China's sorrow." For ten points, name this second-longest river in China.
ANSWER: Yellow River [or Huang He]
The ancient Pu Jin Bridge, the first in the world to make use of iron, spanned this river, which flows
through the Zoige Basin from its source near Ngoring and Gyaring Lakes. Site of Hukou Falls, this
river's tributaries include the Fen and Wei Rivers. Flowing through the cities of Kaifeng and Jinan,
it begins in the (*) Bayan Har Mountains of the Qinghai Province and flows for over 3,000 miles before
emptying into the Bohai Sea. Commonly known as "China's Sorrow" due to its constant and often
devastating flooding, for 10 points, identify this second longest Chinese river whose English name describes
this river's color.
ANSWER: Yellow River [or Huang He or Hwang Ho]
The Gate of Ghosts, Gate of the Spirits, and Gate of Man are channels of this river. According to
legend, the emperor Yu the Great tamed the flooding of this river. This river's source is located in the
Bayan Har Mountains, out of which this river flows to create the Ordos Loop. This river flows into the
Bohai Sea after traveling through the Loess (LESS) Plateau; sediment from that plateau led to the name of
this river. For 10 points, identify this river that is the second longest in China after the Yangtze, and is
named for its color.
ANSWER: Yellow River [or Huang He]
A dam at this river's Three Gate Gorge was basically a failure, but contributed to the erosion of its delta. A
massive Water Transfer Project is being undertaken to divert water towards the western end of this river.
This river passes through Lake Gyaring after rising in the Bayan Har Mountains. This river makes a long
loop around the Ordos Desert. It flows into the Bo Hai, which is bordered by the Liaodong and Shandong
Peninsulas and is part of a sea that shares its name with this river. It flows through the Loess Plateau, whose
cities include Xi-an. This river flooded in 1887 and 1931; that fact, along with its frequent, unpredictable
changes of course, leads to its nickname of "China's sorrow". For 10 points, identify the second longest
river in China, named for the color of its sediment.
ANSWER: Yellow River [or Huang He]
One city along this river is home to the tomb of Sultan Paduka Pahala of Sulu and is also home to an
effort by the Himin Group to create a Solar Valley with clean solar energy in response to Silicon
Valley. Drilling through the Bayan Har Mountains to connect this river to its southern neighbor is
part of a proposed plan to divert water to this river. That plan is the western route of the South-toNorth Water Diversion plan. In 1642, 300,000 people died in a (*) flood after the dikes of this river were
destroyed to try to defeat a rebellion led by Li Zicheng. This river winds in the rectangular Ordos loop
before gathering high concentrations of silt from the Loess Plateau. It flows by Dezhou and Kaifeng before
emptying in the Bohai Gulf. China's sorrow is, for 10 points, what second longest river in China?
ANSWER: Yellow River [accept Huang He]
Beginning in the Bayan Har Mountains, in 1960, its first dam, Sanmenxia, was constructed. Siltation
caused by this river's flow through the Loess ["Less"] Plateau reduced the dam's effectiveness. Ending in
the Bohai Sea, the lower course of this river has nearly dried out due to increasing water demand. The
flat topography and dense population on its lower course has caused devastating and deadly floods, earning
the nickname "the Sorrow"; however, it has also aided the development of cities such as Jinan and Wuhai.
For 10 points, name this major river of North China with a colorful name.
ANSWER: Yellow River (or Huang He)
This river forms three sides of a rectangular loop named for the Ordos Desert; the fourth side of that loop
is made by the Wei (WAY) River, which, with the Fen River, serves as this river's largest tributaries. This
river ends in the Bohai Sea after traveling nearly 5,500 kilometers, which makes it the second-longest river
in its country. For 10 points, loess (LESS) picked up by what Chinese River gives it its name and
distinctive color?
ANSWER: Yellow River [or Huang He; or Hwang Ho]
Disasters involving this question of water helped inspire the 1850's Nien Rebellion. This river's source is
located in the Bayan Har mountains. This river forms three sides of the Ordos Loop. Its middle stream
passes through the Loess Plateau. In 1938, Nationalist troops intentionally flooded this river to prevent
foreign invaders from taking the city of Zhengzhou. Notable for the large amount of silt it carries, this
river's constant natural flooding caused it to receive the name of "China's Sorrow." For 10 points, name
this second-longest river in China.
ANSWER: Yellow River [or Huang He]
Tania Branigan of the Guardian reported that severe pollution has made one-third of this river
unusable for agricultural or industrial use. Two tributaries of the this river are the White River and
the Black River. This river is filled with sediment from the (*) Loess Plateau .Notoriously vulnerable to
flooding, this river was purposefully flooded in 1938 by Chiang Kai-Shek to stop the advance of the
Japanese. The cities of Kaifeng and Luoyang lie on this river, which flows into the sea at the coast of
Shandong province, after joining with its tributary the Huai river. For 10 points, name this river which flows
through much of Northern China and is considered the cradle of Chinese civilization.
ANSWER: Yellow River [accept Huang He]
The unique floor of this sea was submerged within the past ten thousand years. This sea's Bo Hai
arm includes Laizhou Bay and is separated from the rest of this sea by the Shandong and Liaodong
peninsulas. Ports on this sea include Nampo and Inchon, and the (*) Huang He and Yangtze rivers
empty into this sea. For 10 points, name this sea, lying between China and Korea, that takes its name from
the color its receives from the sediments of its deltas.
ANSWER: Yellow Sea [or Huang Hai; or Hwanghae; prompt on East China Sea]
This region is bordered to the north by the Gallatin mountains and to the east by the Absaroka range, in
which its namesake river rises. This region's Shoshone Lake as well as its namesake lake both lie south of
its Grand Loop Road, which encircles the Artists Paintpots and the Mud Volcano. The John D. Rockefeller
Memorial Parkway runs south from this region to (*) Grand Teton National Park. Home to the Old Faithful
geyser, for ten points, name this first National Park mostly contained in Wyoming.
ANSWER: Yellowstone National Park
An earthquake near this national park created Quake Lake. A lava flow created its Obsidian Cliff. The
namesake caldera of this national park is also the largest supervolcano in the United States. The largest
bison herd in the country lives in this national park. It was created by the Act of Dedication, signed by
Ulysses S. Grant, making it the first national park. Every ninety-one minutes here, Old Faithful erupts. For
10 points, name this park that contains many geysers and is found in Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming.
ANSWER: Yellowstone National Park
The Lewis River flows through Lewis Canyon in the south of this federal area, and in its north is Obsidian
Cliff. Forest fires devastated this protected area in 1988, and in July 2011, Bryan Matayoshi was killed here
after telling his wife to run. John D. Rockefeller Jr. Memorial Parkway connects this park with Grand Teton
National Park, and an average of over three million people visit it every year. With less than ten minutes as
a margin of error, the world's most predictable geological feature is found here. FTP, name this first U.S.
National Park, created in 1872, located primarily in Wyoming, and home to Old Faithful Geyser.
ANSWER: Yellowstone National Park
This region contains Druid Peak, part of the Absaroka ("ab-SOAR-kah") Range, which is due north of the
confluence of Soda Butte Creek and Lamar River. In this region's south is Heart Lake, which Mount
Sheridan overlooks. A question of water within this region is tinted blue and yellow by bacteria and is known
as Morning Glory Pool. Found north of the the Grand Teton National Park and situated atop a large
supervolcano, its most famous landmark is a regularly-erupting geyser known as "Old Faithful." For 10
points, name this first national park located in northwestern Wyoming.
ANSWER: Yellowstone National Park
The name of this park is thought to be a translation of the Minnetaree word "mi tsi a-da-zi," which describes
the distinctive appearance of the cliffs along its namesake river. Mountain ranges located in this park
include the Absaroka Range which contains the park's highest point at Eagle Peak. This park's namesake
lake is considered the highest and the largest mountain lake in North America; other lakes include the Heart,
Lewis, and Shoshone. One notable geological feature in this park is Obsidian Cliff, a mountain of volcanic
black glass that is one of the largest such deposits in North America. However, more notable features
include Giant, Riverside, Steamboat, Firehole, and Old Faithful geysers. FTP, identify this national park in
northwestern Wyoming, home to the greatest concentration of thermal sites in the world.
ANSWER: Yellowstone National Park
Mountain man Jim Bridger spoke of "fire and brimstone" in this place. This place's assignment to a
single U.S. District Court has caused a legal peculiarity in which it may be impossible to form a
Constitutionally valid jury for crimes committed in certain sections of it. The geologist Ferdinand V.
Hayden convinced Congress to grant a status to this place that was signed into law by President Grant. A
volcanic caldera located under this national park is occasionally referred to a "supervolcano." For 10
points, name this Wyoming national park.
ANSWER: Yellowstone National Park
This place is partially surrounded by the Gallatin, Beartooth, and Absaroka mountain ranges. Its namesake
lake was once known as Eustis, and drains north through its namesake river, whose tributaries include the
Lamar and Bighorn before it hits the Upper Missouri. Its namesake Caldera is the nation's largest
supervolcano, and this area's geothermal activity also causes the world's largest steam eruptions at
Steamboat Geyser, which is still less famous than its regular ninety-minute steam eruption cycle elsewhere.
For 10 points, Old Faithful may be found in what first American National Park, located in Wyoming?
ANSWER: Yellowstone National Park
This river has two segments designated blue ribbon trout streams, including the section that begins as
Rosebud Creek and the area that flows through Paradise Valley. This river hosts whitewater rafting at
Yankee Jim Canyon and cuts out its namesake "grand canyon" after leaving Hayden Valley over a
waterfall. The first trading post on this river was established by John Colter and Manuel Lisa at the place
where it receives the Bighorn. It passes through the city of Billings before entering the Missouri River at
Williston. For 10 points, name this river of Wyoming, Montana, and North Dakota that flows through a
same-named national park.
ANSWER: the Yellowstone River
The Wadi Hadramawt Oasis is a popular tourist attraction in this country. Hadiboh and Qulansiyah are the
major towns found in an archipelago off the coast of this country. This country, which owns the Socotra
archipelago, and the FLOSY and NLF waged war during the independence of this country, whose northern
and southern portions were united during the rule of Ali Abdullah Saleh. This country is situated to the east
of the Bab el Mandeb, and like its eastern neighbor Oman, it shares a portion of the Rub al Khali with its
northern neighbor, Saudi Arabia. For 10 points, identify this country located at the southwest corner of the
Arabian peninsula, whose capital is Sana'a and which has a large seaport named Aden.
ANSWER: Yemen
The Hadhramat is the largest district in this nation, and it contains the southern end of the arid Tihamah.
This nation has over two hundred islands including Socotra [soh-KOH-truh]. The Bab-el-Mandeb straight
sits near a port town in this nation in which the USS Cole was attacked. Saudi Arabia's Rub-al-Khali
stretches south into this nation and its neighboring Oman. Also including the port town of Aden, FTP, name
this country on the Arabian Peninsula with capital at Sana-a [sah-NAH].
ANSWER: Republic of Yemen
Carleton Watkins published a book of "Photographic Views" from this location in 1863. James
Hutchings ran a lodge in this location to help increase its domestic popularity. The Tuolumne
Meadows in this place were protected from sheep grazing after it was made a national park.
Landmarks in this park include the (*) Wawona Tree. A tepee is visible in the background of Thomas
Hill's depiction of this location's Bridal Veil Falls. This national park's highest point is Mount Lyell and its
Mariposa Grove contains many giant sequoias. A red filter was used to capture a white peak in this park in
"Monolith" by Ansel Adams. For 10 points, name this California national park, home to the El Capitan and
the Half Dome.
ANSWER: Yosemite National Park [accept Yosemite Valley or Yosemite Falls before "Tuolumn Meadows"]
This region includes Tenaya Valley, and an old tradition here consisted of pushing a bonfire off a
cliff in a namesake "firefall" on Glacier Point. This park is near a cliff of polygonal basalt columns,
Devils Postpile National Monument, and it includes Bridalveil Fall. Its namesake (*) falls drop into the
Merced River, and, like Sequoia National Park, its creation was instigated by John Muir. Its notable
features include El Capitan and Half Dome. For 10 points, name this national park located in the Sierra
Nevadas of eastern California.
ANSWER: Yosemite National Park
The highest peak in this national park is Mount Lyell. Locations in this park include the Hetch Hetchy
Valley, home to the O-Shaughnessy Dam, and this park contains three forests named for the counties it
covers: Tuolumne, Mariposa, and Merced. One mountain in this park contains a promontory called its
"Diving Board," and in addition to Half Dome, this park contains Sentinel Rock and El Capitan. Containing
Bridalveil Fall and a namesake waterfall that is the highest in North America, for 10 points, identify this
national park located in Eastern California.
ANSWER: Yosemite National Park
This location was named by Dr. Lafayette Bunnell, who entered it while part of a battalion
chasing Chief Tenaya. James Mason Hutchings ran a hotel here, where he employed a ScottishAmerican who had walked from Indiana to Florida in 1867. The Raker Act authorized the
building of a dam in the northern portion of this place at Hetch Hetch Valley. A famous
photograph shows Teddy Roosevelt and this park's major spokesman, John Muir, at Glacier
Point. This park is where the Half Dome and El Capitan can be found. For 10 points, name this
national park in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, which covers the eastern portions of Mariposa
County in California.
ANSWER: Yosemite National Park
In this valley, Emerald Pool is a common resting point along the Happy Isles trail, which runs by a
waterfall that was called Yanopah, before Lafayette Bunnell named it Vernal Fall. In this valley, Tenaya
Creek runs along the bottom of an arete called Clouds Rest. On top of a talus cone in the center of this
valley, one can find Curry Village, which is overlooked by Glacier Point. The Merced River courses
through this glacial valley, that is surrounded by high granite peaks and is in the western part of the Sierra
Nevada range. For 10 points, identify this Californian valley, the namesake of a national park that contains
Half Dome and El Capitan.
ANSWER: Yosemite Valley
The capital of the state by this name is home to Case de Montejo, and the state by this name borders both
Campeche and Quintana Roo and is centered on Merida. The region by this name produces the fiber
henequen and gets water from sinkholes, locally known as cenotes (see-NOH-tays). Islands off its coast
include the Island of Women and Cozumel. It is the site of Chixculub, the impact crater of an asteroid that
may have led to the extinction of the dinosaurs. For 10 points, name this home to Chichen Itza and Cancun,
a peninsula which separates the Gulf of Mexico from the Caribbean Sea.
ANSWER: The Yucatan Peninsula
Sinkholes known as "cenotes" are common geological features of this region, whose name possibly
derived from a phrase meaning "we do not understand your language." The southern part of this
region is home to Peten, while in its north one can find the Uxmal (OOSH - mall) and Tulum ruins as
well as the Chicxulub (*) crater. Comprised mainly of Campeche, Quintana Roo, and a namesake state
with capital at Merida, it is found northeast of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and probably most notable for
sites like Chichen Itza and Cancun. For 10 points, identify this region once home to the Mayan civilization,
a prominent Mexican peninsula.
ANSWER: Yucatan peninsula
This region was discovered in a 1517 expedition by Francisco Hernandez de Cordoba. The islands of
Cozumel and Isla Mujeres lie off the coast of this region. This region contains the Chicxulub impact crater.
The ruined cities of Uxmal, Mayapan and Chichen Itza are located in this region. This region includes the
states of Campeche and Quintana Roo. The northeast coast of this region contains the city of Cancun. The
Chicxulub crater was formed when an asteroid impacted this region, killing off non-avian dinosaurs. For 10
points, identify this peninsula that separates the Caribbean Sea from the Gulf of Mexico.
ANSWER: Yucatan Peninsula [prompt on Mexico; prompt on Central America]
A channel with this name lies between Cape Catoche and Cape San Antonio. A ruin on the side of a
mountain in a state with this name is called the Nine Masks. A state of this name is the site of the Loltun
Caves in its Puuc Region. That same state with this name has a port city called Progreso, which is located
near the impact site for a crater generally named after the village Chicxulub. The city of Merida is the
capital of a state with this name, and the Campeche Bank runs along the coast of a peninsula with this
name. For ten points, identify this name held by a state and peninsula in Mexico that are the locations of
Chichen Itza and Cancun.
ANSWER: Yucatan
A commission headed by Robert Badinter declared that borders within this place were to be considered
frontiers protected by international law. Rebecca West wrote a lengthy travelogue about this place shortly
before its invasion, Black Lamb and Grey Falcon. Italians in this place were killed and thrown in sinkholes
called foiba by Partisans of this place, who also controlled Trieste for forty days in 1945. It was originally
divided into nine provinces called banovinas and later six socialist republics and the autonomous provinces
of Vojvodina (VOY-vuh-dee-nuh) and Kosovo. For ten points, name this country once led by Marshal Tito
which began to break up in 1992.
ANSWER: Yugoslavia
This sub-national political division contains a large collection of distance markers at the "Sign Forest"
outside of Watson Lake. Herschel Island, which lies just off the northern coast of this political division's
mainland, is in the Beaufort Sea. In the southwest of this political division, the Kluane National Park
contains a peak of the St. Elias Mountains, Mount Logan. The towns of Burwasli Landing, Sulphur, Forty
Mile, and Glacier Creek lie on its western border with the United States. For 10 points, Dawson and
Whitehorse are also found within what northwesternmost territory of Canada, which borders Alaska?
ANSWER: Yukon [or the Yukon Territory]
A river of this name has its volume greatly increase at its junction with the Pelley River at Fort
Selkirk, and a prominent tributary of this river is the Tanana River. The Gwich-in peoples are a prominent
First Nation group in a polity of this name. The river of this name has a tributary named the Porcupine
River, and empties into the Norton Sound. Kluane National Park and Reserve is located in the polity with
this name that includes the St. Elias Mountains. That polity of this name is the location of Mount Logan.
For ten points, name this Canadian river that also names a territory that has its capital at Whitehorse.
ANSWER: Yukon
Just over the eastern border of this polity is a neighbor's town of Tungsten, and its northern half is
bisected by the Rock River. Its southwest is home to Kluane National Park, which is located just
beyond its towns of Hains Junction and Destruction Bay. One of this polity's northernmost
settlements is the town of Old Crow on the Porcupine River. Its capital was named for its proxmity to
(*) rapids that reminded settlers of a galloping animal's mane. For 10 points, name this northern neighbor of
British Columbia that also borders the Northwest Territories and Alaska, a Canadian territory with capital at
Whitehorse.
ANSWER: the Yukon Territory
This river plunges through the Five Finger Rapids in its headwaters, where it is joined by the Teslin River
after flowing from Atlin and Tagish Lakes. The Porcupine River is a tributary of this river, which flows into
Lake Laberge. A namesake trail from Skagway to Dawson was used during the Klondike Gold Rush. It runs
through Whitehorse and flows north of Fairbanks. For 10 points, name this river that runs through Alaska
and a namesake Canadian territory.
ANSWER: Yukon River
This river, which passes such mountain ranges as the Kaiyuh and Ray mountains, has such tributaries as the
Teslin, Pelly, Tanana, and Koyukuk. Pastol Bay and Stuart Island lie to the east of its delta. Lakes near this
river's headwaters include Marsh, Bennet, and Tagish, as well as Laberge, just north of Whitehorse. Often
sharing its delta with the Kuskokwim River, this river empties into Norton Sound. Dawson, site of a gold
rush, lies on this river, and Fairbanks lies on a tributary. FTP, name this river in Alaska and a namesake
Canadian territory.
ANSWER: Yukon River
One legend associated with this question of water is that it is inhabited by a god known as Nyami Nyami, and
its tributaries include the Kabompo and the Lungue-Bongo. Another of its tributaries, the Kafue, contains
the Itezhi-tezhi dam, and it forms much of the eastern boundary of the Caprivi Strip. Other dams on this
river include the Kariba and one of Africa's largest hydroelectric dams, Cahora Bossa. Emptying into the
Indian Ocean at Mozambique. For 10 points, name this river that flows over 2,000 miles across Africa from
its source near Kalene Hill in the Central African Plateau, whose name means "Great River" in the language
of the Tonga and whose section on the Zambia-Zimbabwe border includes Victoria Falls.
ANSWER: Zambezi River
An important tributary of this river is the Shire, while the Southern Kashiji River joints it on the Barotse
Floodplain. Lake Karimba is found on one of this river's tributaries, the Munyati, while the Itezi-Tezi Dam
generates power on another of its tributaries, the Kafue. Dams along this river itself include the Cahora
Bassa and the larger Kariba Dam, while the Caprivi Strip was created to give a particular nation access to it.
This river and its tributaries drain Lake Nyasa into the Indian Ocean, and the countries through which it
flows include Angola and Mozambique. For 10 points, identify this fourth-longest river of Africa, which
flows over Victoria Falls on the northern border of Zimbabwe.
ANSWER: Zambezi
One feature located on this river contains a naturally formed swimming area called "the devil's pool," and
this river is home to Chavuma Falls and is on the Barotse Plain. Lake Cahora Bassa was created by a dam
on this river, which receives the Kafue River and the Shire River before emptying into the ocean. This river
forms a border in the Caprivi Strip before being flowing through the Kariba Dam, which provides a large
amount of hydroelectric power. It empties into the ocean at Mozambique. For 10 points, identify this river
which flows over Victoria Falls, the chief river of Southern Africa which forms part of the border between
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
ANSWER: Zambezi River
This question of water drains the Barotse Plain, and sites along this question of water include Chavuma
Falls. Tributaries of this river include the Kafue and Luangwa, and the middle course of this river
contains Lake Cahora Bassa. This river forms part of the border of the Caprivi Strip and was damned
to create Lake Kariba, and it collects water from its tributary the Shire River before emptying into the ocean
north of Beira. Sighted by David Livingstone, this river once made up a basin along with the nearby
Okovango and Limpopo Rivers. Emptying into the Mozambique Channel, for 10 points, identify this river
of Southern Africa which contains Victoria Falls.
ANSWER: Zambezi
This river rises out of a bog near Kalene Hill before meeting the Shire, its last great tributary. Its largest
tributary is the Kafue River, it includes the Ngonye Falls, and after it flows through thr Sesheke Plain, it is
joined by the Cuando River. The Kariba and Cahora Bassa dams lie on it, and it enters the Barotse Plain
after flowing over the Chavuma Falls. This river flows along the Eastern tip of the Caprivi Strip where it
runs roughly parallel to the Okavango, and empties near Chinde into the Indian Ocean. For 10 points,
identify this river which flows along much of the Zambia-Zimbabwe border, a Southern African river that
creates Victoria Falls.
ANSWER: Zambezi
Rising near the Kaline Hill, this question's upper course is the reason for the flooding of the Barotse
Floodplain. Dammed near where the Umniati joins it, this river's other tributaries include the Kafue,
Lungwebungu. Luangwa, and Shire. Notable falls on this river include Ngonye and Chavuma. Dams on it at
Cabora Bassa and Karbia create major reservoir lakes. Overflow of the Okavango system runs off into this
river's system. Forming the northern border of the Caprivi Strip, this river touches Angola, Zambia,
Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, and Mozambique. For 10 points, name this river that contains Victoria
Falls.
ANSWER: the Zambezi River
Each community of the Lozi (LOTE-zee) people, who live along this river, alternates between living in
two villages, one on this river's shores for most of the year and one farther away that is occupied during this
river's flood period. This river forms the northeastern border of a long-contested extension of Namibia, the
Caprivi Strip. At Chinde (CHIN-day), this eastward-flowing river enters the Mozambique Channel.
Upstream, it forms the border between Zambia and Zimbabwe. For 10 points, name this long river of
southern Africa, which flows over Victoria Falls.
ANSWER: Zambezi River [or Zambesi River]
This river creates the Mana Pools, a flood plain that serves as a wildlife conservation area. The Cuando
River flows into this river, whose namesake coastal flooded savanna has been damaged by the destruction
of waterbuck and buffalo by FRELIMO and RENAMO forces. This river, which generates hydroelectric
power at the Kariba and Cahora Bassa dams, contains a feature that includes the Devil's Cataract and six
gorges over which water plunges. For 10 points, name this African river that flows through Zambia and
Zimbabwe and over Victoria Falls.
ANSWER: Zambezi River
Among this country's over seventy ethnic groups are the Bemba, Tonga, and Nyanja peoples. Many of this
country's larger cities, such as Luanshya, are located in a rich copper belt that spans its north-central region,
but its capital is located farther south. Some sources of hydroelectric power for this country are located on
the Lunsemfwa, Mulungushi, and Zambezi Rivers, and its most notable power station is the Kariba Dam,
which it shares with a neighboring country to the south. Until it became independent in 1964, this country
was a British protectorate known as Northern Rhodesia. FTP, identify this south-central African country
with its capital at Lusaka.
ANSWER: Republic of Zambia
Its lowest point is the confluence of the Runde River and the Sabi River in the city of Mahenya. Its city of
Kwekwe is home to the National Mining Museum, while its western region contains Hwange National
Park,. Khami Ruins National Monument, which was made a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1986, is
located in its southwest near the city of Bulawayo. The Limpopo River separates it from South Africa to
the south, while the Zambezi River forms its boundary with Zambia to its northwest. For 10 points, name
this African country led by Robert Mugabe with capital Harare.
ANSWER: Republic of Zimbabwe
In this country the copper mine of Mhangura has been mined near depletion, as have the mines in Munyati.
The Umvukwe Range lies in the northern part of this country, while this country's major languages are
English, Shona, and Ndebele. Lake Kariba makes up part of the northern border of this country. The Shashe
and Limpopo Rivers make up the southern border of this country, while the peak of Mount Nyangani lies on
the border between this country and Mozambique. For 10 points, name this country with capital Harare.
ANSWER: Zimbabwe
In this nation, a series of gravity-defying free-standing boulders located in the Matobo Hills is where Cecil
John Rhodes was buried. Bumbusi, the site of a huge stone wall called the Great Enclosure, is located in this
nation. This landlocked country is home to the Shona people. In 2009, this nation legalized the use of
foreign currencies after it issued hundred trillion dollar banknotes following a period of rampant
hyperinflation. The southern part of Victoria Falls is located in this nation, on its border with Zambia. This
country's name comes from a "Great" civilization of Southern Africa. For 10 points, name this country
which is located between Botswana and Mozambique.
ANSWER: Republic of Zimbabwe
This country's highest peak, Mount Nyangani, is located in its Nyanga National Park. Despite such
governmental operations as "Drive Out Trash" and "Roundup," homelessness is a major problem in its
cities, which include Chitungwiza and Bulawayo. Electric fences mark this country's border with Botswana,
while the more pleasant Victoria Falls are on its border with Zambia. For 10 points, name this landlocked
South African country where fancy new 100-billion-dollar bills can buy you things in its capital, Harare.
ANSWER: Zimbabwe
