An infinite series with first term one and this number as the ratio will converge to four-thirds. This is the
first positive number x for which the tangent of pi x is undefined. This number is the slope of the equation
whose standard form is x minus four y equals ten. This is also the probability of getting two heads in two
tosses of a fair coin. For 10 points, give this number that is also equal to the square of one-half.
ANSWER: 1/4 [or 0.25; or one-quarter; prompt on equivalents that are not in reduced form]
There are this many steps in glycolysis, and the element of this number unusually has the highest value on
the Allen scale of electronegativity. The cranial nerve of this number is responsible for
parasympathetic control of digestion and the heart, and is otherwise known as the vagus. A normal human
has this many metatarsal bones. An increase of 1 on the Richter scale corresponds with multiplying
amplitude by this number. This is the fourth triangular number, and it's denoted by A in hexadecimal. This
integer is raised to a given power when numbers are represented in scientific notation. For 10 points,
identify this integer denoted 1010 ["one-zero-one-zero"] in binary, the base of the common logarithm.
ANSWER: 10 [or X]
IPv6 ["I P v six"] addresses consist of two chunks, each with this many bits. MIME often encodes
binary into text using an algorithm named for the "base" of this number. Java's long type uses this
many bits to represent a number, and modern versions of Windows are available for computers that
use 32 bits or this many bits to address their memory. This value in hexadecimal is "four zero", and
in Minecraft, it is the maximum size of a stack. Give this number that appears in the name of the
most successful computer produced by Commodore, as well as a 1996 console from Nintendo.
ANSWER: 64 [accept base 64 or 64-bit or Commodore 64 or Nintendo 64]
This informed search algorithm was first described in 1968 by Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael. It uses a
heuristic, an estimate of a node's distance from the endpoint, to reduce computation time. It is similar
to greedy best-first search, but will always produce (*) optimal paths, as long as an admissible heuristic
is used, since it takes into account the distance already travelled in its calculations. It is an extension of
Dijkstra's algorithm, which is a special case of this algorithm when the heuristic is always zero. This search
algorithm that maintains an open set of nodes that are scheduled to be traversed, and a closed set of already
visited nodes. For 10 points, name this frequently used algorithm used for pathfinding, with variants such as
a hierarchical version often used for road navigation, and B* [B-star].
ANSWER: A* search algorithm [pronounced A-star, also accept A-splat]
The Wronskian of homogenous solutions of a second order differential equation are related to the
coefficients of the differential equation in his namesake identity. For one dimensional functions,
applying the Hankel transform is the same as applying this man's transform followed by a Fourier
transform. Projective algebraic varieties that are algebraic (*) groups are known as his varieties, and
categories with all pullbacks and pushouts, zero object, and all normal epimorphisms and monomorphisms
are named for him. The lack of general solutions for polynomials of degree five and higher is described in a
theorem named for Ruffini and this man. FTP, name this Norwegian mathematician, who also gives an
alternate name to commutative groups.
ANSWER: Niels Henrik Abel (take Abelian)
The category of these entities contains a faithful functor to the category of sets that has no right
adjoint, but whose left adjoint associates a "free" one of these entities to its basis set. If they contain
no non-identity elements that have finite order, they are called torsion-free, and the sum of two
homomorphisms between two of these entities is also a homomorphism. The fundamental theorem of
these structures states that finitely-generated ones can be decomposed into a direct sum of (*) cyclic
groups with prime-power order. The centralizers of these entities are equivalent to these entities in their
entirety, and the Cayley tables for these entities are symmetric. A ring whose nonzero elements form one of
these entities under multiplication is a field. For 10 points, name these groups in which the order of the
operation doesn-t matter.
ANSWER: abelian groups [prompt on commutative groups; prompt on partial answers until "groups" is read]
Like the identity function, the antiderivative of this function equals half its output times x plus the constant
of integration. This function is equivalent to multiplying by the signum [SIG-num] function, and its
application to sums gives a result very similar to the triangle inequality. Its complex analogue is the
modulus, giving the magnitude of a quantity. Name this function that when graphed produces a v shape,
which multiplies negative numbers by negative one and has no effect on positive numbers.
ANSWER: absolute value
This function can be generalized to vector spaces in the form of a norm, and for complex numbers is
called the modulus. The derivative of this function is the signum function, which is not defined at
zero. It may be interpreted as a number's (*) "distance from zero" and has a V-shaped graph. For 10
points, name this function that gives the "positive version" of a negative input.
ANSWER: absolute value function (accept complex modulus before "modulus")
Ling slightly simplified one form of this circuit by factoring out a propagate term from the group
generate signal despite it not being a common factor. That form of this circuit helps eliminate the gate delay
of the ripple-carry type of this circuit. A basic implementation of it feeds the two main bits into an XOR
gate and an AND gate, sends the output of that XOR gate, along with a C-sub-in bit, to another XOR
gate/AND gate pair and ORs the output of the AND gates together. A naive implementation of this circuit
eliminates all but the first XOR and AND gate from the aforementioned design; that is the "half" type,
which does not support a carry-in bit. For 10 points, identify these basic blocks used in arithmetic logic
units which sum binary inputs.
ANSWER: adder [accept summer before "sum" is read]
When performing this action on any two numbers a2 and nb2, the result is closed under multiplication by
Brahmagupta's identity. The "general coproducts" in category theory are one of the most abstract
generalizations of this and the "maximum operation" in set theory is a dequantized version of this.
Integration over a zero-dimensional manifold reduces to this, and this operation is applied to each term of
the Taylor polynomial for ex. To apply this operation on two vectors, the "tail to tip" method can be used,
and when this operation is applied to the terms of a sequence, it yields a series. Name this function,
commonly denoted with a capital sigma or with the plus sign.
ANSWER: addition or summation [accept word forms]
The ABC conjecture considers three numbers such that the largest is this function of the other two,
and this operation applied to the Mobius functions of all divisors of a given integer yields zero. The
degree of a multivariate polynomial is equal to the largest value of this operation applied to the
exponents of a single term, and the result of this operation on two vectors can be found with the (*)
"parallelogram rule." A capital sigma can denote repeated applications of it, and 0 is the identity of this
operation. For ten points, identify this operation which yields a sum, symbolized by a plus sign.
ANSWER: addition (or summation before mentioned)
In category theory, this concept is generalized by the coproduct, and its analogue in set theory is the disjoint
union. Performing this operation on several vector spaces gives the smallest vector space containing each of
the original vector spaces. For two vectors, it can be visualized using the parallelogram rule. Repeated
application of this operation is denoted by a capital sigma. It is commutative and associative, and
multiplication distributes over it. For 10 points, name this arithmetic operation, the inverse of subtraction.
ANSWER: addition or summation
Brahmagupta's identity states that performing this operation on two square numbers results in a closed set
under multiplication. This operation is repeatedly performed on terms in the Taylor polynomial for the
hyperbolic cosine function, and the tip-to-tail method or the parallelogram method is used when performing
this operation on two or more vectors. Performing this operation on a sequence of numbers turns it into a
series, which is represented with an uppercase sigma. For 10 points, name this mathematical operation that
is the inverse of subtraction.
ANSWER: Addition [accept Adding or Summing or Summation]
A logic circuit that conducts this operation consists of two inputs put into an XOR and AND gate. This
operation can be easily performed on vectors by using the parallelogram rule. When this operation is
performed on two rational numbers of the form a over b and c over d, it yields a d plus b c over b d. A
series is defined using a capital sigma, which represents repeated applications of this operation. The
identity element for this operation is zero. For 10 points, identify this mathematical operation represented
with a plus sign.
ANSWER: addition
One type of these generic objects used in CPU instructions comes in immediate, indexed, and direct
modes. TLBs cache mappings of the virtual type of these objects. A group of one networking type of these
general entities can be rolled up into a single multicast one. Ethernet uses the 48 bit Media Access Control
type of these entities to identify devices. The Internet uses versions four and six of the IP type. For 10
points, name these identifiers that allow computers to locate resources, such as the web one www.nist.gov.
ANSWER: address [or memory address before networking; or IP address before "IP"; prompt on IP before it is read]
A hypothesis about these numbers posits that the exponential of a singular strong limit one equals its
successor; that hypothesis is a consequence of a certain generalized hypothesis about these numbers
which with ZF implies the axiom of choice. In ZFC, if one sequence of these is termwise less than
another sequence of these, then the sum of the first sequence is strictly less than the product of the
second sequence, according to Konig's theorem. Multiplying one of these numbers by itself yields the
(*) same number. The Schroeder-Bernstein theorem demonstrates the existence of a total order on these
numbers, which are indexed by , an extension of a theorem which only defines a strict order; that theorem is
due to Cantor. For 10 points, name these numbers that are cardinals, used to represent the size of infinite
sets.
ANSWER: aleph numbers [accept cardinal numbers until it is read]
One person from this city proved that segments joining three pairs of collinear points intersect at
collinear points. A person from this city proved a concurrency condition for a transversal intersecting a
triangle. This home of Pappus and the mathematician Menelaus was also where a woman was stripped and
killed by a Christian mob for advising governor Orestes; that was Hypatia. One resident of this city
described the parallel postulates in his 13-book Elements. For ten points, name this city, the home of the
geometer Euclid and a large ancient library.
ANSWER: Alexandria
The Heyting type of this structure is studied in logic, while the universal enveloping one is described by the
Poincare-Birkhoff-Witt theorem. A Hopf one of these is a unital associative one together with an
antiautomorphism, and von Neumann ones arise in quantum mechanics. Sigma ones are used to define
measures, and one over a field is a vector space over the field together with a multiplication operation. To
every Lie group is associated a Lie one of, for 10 points, what type of mathematical structure, whose
Boolean type is important in logic?
ANSWER: algebra
One of these constructs defined on the reals is used to generate a probability distribution of a random
variable defined on a probability space. Two of these constructs are known as the "discrete" and "trivial"
varieties; those constructs refer to collections of sets over which measures are defined and are denoted by
the letter sigma. This word also refers to numbers that are roots of non-zero polynomials with rational
coefficients and are thus the counterpart to transcendental numbers. Every non-constant single-variable
polynomial with complex coefficients has at least one complex root according to the fundamental theorem
of this discipline. For 10 points, name this discipline, the manipulation and solving of variables.
ANSWER: algebra
A vector space employing a namesake bracket is called a Lie one. Integral domains, groups and rings are
structures central to one variety of this discipline. Logic circuits employ functions like "not" in the Boolean
variety. Matrices and vectors are important to the branch of mathematics known as the linear variety, related
to the abstract variety. The theorem relating the order of a polynomial to the number of its roots is
fundamental to this discipline. FTP, give this term that names two common courses in high school involving
variables like x and y.
ANSWER: Algebras [Accept Lie Algebras until "variety"]
As a mathematical object, this word may refer to an R-module equipped with a bilinear product, and
nonassociative types of those objects include the Jordan, Poisson, and Lie ones. The subset of geometry
related to it includes Hilbert's Nullstellenstatz. The fundamental theorem associated with it states that any
polynomial with complex coefficients has a root, and this branch of mathematics comes after linear in the
name of another branch. For ten points, name this branch of mathematics, which in more common use
consists of manipulating variables and solving simple equations.
ANSWER: algebra (Accept algebraic.)
Amortized analysis is used to analyze these things. A "greedy" one of these things always makes the
locally optimal choice. Big O notation is used to quantify the complexity of these things in terms of the
amount of data. Those that rely on recursively breaking down a problem and combining the solutions are
classified as divide-and-conquer and include quicksort. For 15 points, identify these step-by-step
procedures for solving a problem that are often used in computer science.
ANSWER: algorithms
An open question about these is whether those that exploit randomness such as those related to languages
in BPP are more powerful than deterministic ones. Models on which the behavior of these evaluated include
the cell probe, decision tree, and PRAM. If they exploit optimal substructure and memoization they can be
considered "dynamic" and if they recursively breakup a problem they are "divide and conquer". Examples
include the Bellman-Ford, Euclid's, and Dijkstra (DIKE stra)'s. For 10 points, name these methods of
solving a problem in a finite number of steps, some of which are "sort" and "search" ones.
ANSWER: algorithm [or computation; accept Turing machine before cell probe]
One of these named after Bruno Buchberger is used to find a Grobner basis, and there are several different
types of these things that find a minimum spanning tree, including ones named after Boruvka, Kruskal, and
Prim. The one commonly used to find shortest paths is named after Dijkstra, and several of these are
classified as greedy. The one commonly used to find greatest common divisors is named after Euclid. Give
this word referring to a specific set of instructions.
ANSWER: Algorithm (prompt, procedure, method, technique, and other synonyms)
One of these that finds the shortest path between nodes on a graph is, along with Kruskal's and Prim's, a
greedy one and is named for Dijkstra. In addition to a triply eponymous compression method called the
LZW one, a class of these is known as "divide-and-conquer" for their tactics. Analyzed by the order of their
runtime using Big-O notation, these perform tasks like searching and sorting. FTP, give this computer
science term for a finite set of procedures for solving a problem.
ANSWER: Algorithms
Functions of this type in several variables are governed by Hartog's lemma, and Szabo's theorem and the
Ostrowski-Hadamard gap theorem provide obstructions to extending the domain of such functions, while
techniques like the Schwartz reflection principle make such extension possible. Morera's theorem, a
criterion for showing that a function has this property, is a converse to Cauchy's theorem, which states that
states the line integral of one of these functions around a simply connected region is zero. For 10 points,
name this type of function that is equal to its Taylor series in some open disk and satisfies the CauchyRiemann equations, the main objects of study in complex analysis.
ANSWER: analytic functions [or holomorphic functions; do not accept or prompt on "meromorphic"]
A function with specified zeros and specified orders of those zeros that also has this property exists as a
consequence of the Weierstrass Product Theorem. According to a theorem of Liouville, a function that is
bounded and has this property everywhere must be constant. A function that has this property on a closed
region may be expanded in a Laurent series within that region, and that function has this property if it
satisfies the Cauchy-Riemann equations within that region. The real parts of functions with this property are
harmonic, and a function may fail to have this property in the complex plane due to the presence of poles or
branch cuts. For 10 points, identify this property of a complex-valued function, which is equivalent to being
complex differentiable.
ANSWER: analyticity [or holomorphicity; accept complex differentiable before mention]
In the active high input implementation of the enabled SR latch, the enable bit is fed into this type of
gate. In 3-CNF, this operation connects the groupings of no more than three variables. In a half adder, the
carry out bit is produced by this operation. Minterms, which can be obtained from Karnaugh maps, consist
of a set of variables to which this operation is applied. This operation holds over both P implies Q and NOT
Q implies NOT P according to modus tollens. This Boolean operation corresponds to multiplication and
yields true if all conditions are true and false if any condition is false. For 10 points, name this connective
operation in mathematical reasoning which is contrasted with OR.
ANSWER: AND [or conjuction; or product before "multiplication" is read]
The gate symbolizing this operation appears like an English capital D, with a straight left side. If the
first input to this operation is false, then the operator may short-circuit. A caret between two logical
statements symbolizes this operation. It returns the minimum of two bits. Truth tables using this operation
are false three-fourths of the time and only return true if both inputs are true. For 10 points, name this
operation also known as logical conjunction, often symbolized with an ampersand.
ANSWER: AND [or logical conjunction until it is read]
A conformal mapping preserves these entities across a given function. Cyclic quadrilaterals are
particularly susceptible to a problem solving technique in which these entities are "chased". Galois
theory has been used to shown that dividing up one instance of these entities into three equal parts is
impossible via (*) construction. For two vectors, this quantity can be given by the arccosine of the dot
product of the two vectors, divided by the length of each vector. Alternating interior ones generated by a
transversal are equal to each other. Like line segments, you can use a compass and straightedge to bisect
them. For 10 points, name these entities whose size can be measured with a protractor in degrees or radians.
ANSWER: angle [Accept solid angle; accept radians or degrees or any such measure of an angle]
Types of these called principal or canonical are used to represent the relationships between Euclidean [yoo-
KLIDee-un] spaces. Three of these named after Euler [OY-ler] are combined when handling certain
transformations in three dimensions, and one for a complex number is sometimes called the argument. The
adjective reflex is used for large ones, and these used to be measured in mils or grads. Vertical ones are
always congruent, as are the alternate interior ones formed by a transversal through parallel lines. Name
these figures formed by two rays with the same endpoint.
ANSWER: angles
In a circle, this distance equals the radius minus the sagitta of a chord, which equals the distance from the
center of the circle to the midpoint of that chord. For other shapes, this equals the side length divided by
twice the tangent of the quantity pi over n, where n is the number of sides, so, for example, it equals the side
length times root three over two for a regular hexagon. For any regular polygon, this distance is twice the
area divided by the perimeter. Contrasted with the radius of a polygon, name this distance, or segment, from
the center of a regular polygon to the midpoint of one of its edges.
ANSWER: apothem [accept inradius; do not accept or prompt on "radius"]
The core low level part of this company's API is the Foundation Framework. While it's not Mozilla,
many basic classes in its API are prefixed with NS. This company makes extensive use of the LLVM
compiler project, employing its head developer. Cocoa is this company's main API. It promotes the use of
Objective-C and puts out the Xcode IDE for development on its platform. For 10 points, name this
company that created the iOS operating system, which is used on its iPhone.
ANSWER: Apple Inc. [or Apple Computer Inc.; or AAPL]
This man calculated the number of grains of sand needed to fill the universe in the book The Sand
Reckoner. He proved that the area of a parabola is 4/3 times the inscribed triangle using an early form of
integration known as the method of exhaustion. He may be most famous, however, for anecdotally solving
king Hiero II's request to determine the purity of a gold crown without damaging it. For ten points, name this
Greek mathematician who discovered that an object displaces its own volume in water and then supposedly
ran naked through the streets shouting "Eureka!"
ANSWER: Archimedes of Syracuse
Even though he credited somebody else for it, the property named for this person states that, given any real
number, there is a larger number. A trammel named for this person is used to draw an ellipse, and the
equation r equals a plus b theta generates his namesake spiral. He wrote one book estimating the number of
grains of sand the universe could contain, and he used the method of exhaustion to approximate pi. Name
this Greek who found a way to measure volume using water displacement.
ANSWER: Archimedes
This man's namesake property is equivalent to the statement that the real numbers are conditionally
complete. There are thirteen of his namesake solids, including the icosidodecahedron, and his namesake
spiral has the equation r equals a theta. This man declared "Give me a place to stand, and I will move the
world" in his explanation of the lever. A screw named for this man was used in irrigation, and a principle
named for him states the buoyant force on an object is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by that
object. For 10 points, name this ancient Greek who legendarily shouted "Eureka" in his bathtub.
ANSWER: Archimedes
This person names a spiral represented by the polar equation r equals a plus b theta, where a and
b are real. This person invented a screw for transferring water from a low-lying question of water into
irrigation ditches. After discovering that the volume of water (*) displaced by an object must be equal
to the object's volume, he ran through the streets naked shouting "Eureka!" For 10 points, identify this
ancient Greek inventor who boasted he could move the world if given a lever and a place to stand.
ANSWER: Archimedes of Syracuse
In two dimensions, this quantity can be given by the Jordan measure or the Lebesgue (luh-bay) measure,
and for three dimensional figures expressed parametrically, this quantity can be calculated using the
magnitude of the cross product of the two partial derivatives. Given a set of ordered pairs, this quantity can
be calculated using the shoelace formula, and this quantity "under a curve" is found by integration. Name
this quantity that for a trapezoid equals its median times its height, and for a circle equals pi times the radius
squared.
ANSWER: area
The Mollweide [MALL-vy-duh] map projection preserves this quantity, which is given for solids of
revolution by Pappus's first theorem. Gabriel's horn has an infinite amount of this quantity. It can
be found (*) "under a curve" via integration, and for triangles using the semiperimeter in Hero's formula.
For a circle, pi r squared gives, for 10 points, what quantity that for a rectangle is expressed as width times
length?
ANSWER: area (accept signed area or surface area)
This quantity can be computed using Bretschneider's Formula. In a lattice, this quantity can be computed as
the number of interior points minus half the number of boundary points minus one according to Pick's
Theorem. Brahmagupta's Formula computes it in terms of side lengths and the semiperimeter and is a
generalization of Heron's Formula. This quantity can be approximated using a Riemann sum or computed
exactly using an integral. This quantity for a rhombus is half the product of the diagonal lengths and for a
triangle is one-half base times height. For ten points, give this measure of the two-dimensional size of an
object.
ANSWER: area
When these structures have three consecutive perfect squares, they use a multiple of twenty-four, and a
proof has been submitted that these structures cannot have four consecutive perfect squares. In 2004, Ben
Green and Terrence Tao proved that there exist arbitrarily long lists of prime numbers that are this type of
structure. These structures can be thought of as linear functions from the natural numbers to the real
numbers or complex numbers. By pairing up entries from these structures, Gauss famously found a fast
method to sum them when he was young. Examples include the numbers equal to two mod five, even
numbers, odd numbers, and the multiples of any integers, but not the Fibonacci numbers or the powers of
two. Give the name of this type of sequence whose general form is given by a sub n equals a sub one plus d
times the quantity n minus one.
ANSWER: arithmetic (aa-rith-MAA-tik, but be lenient) sequence [or arithmetic progression; prompt on sequence]
The older remaining examples of it may be recorded on the Ishango Bone and be well over 20,000
years old. In of his most famous theorems, Kurt Godel showed that it could not be proven consistent.
While its four basic functions are typically used on (*) real numbers, they can, in fact, be used on any
number ring. The field of number theory is often considered to be the "high" version of it. For 10 points,
name this area of mathematics typically focusing on addition, subtraction, multiplication, division.
ANSWER: Arithmetic
The existence of one of these of a particular size is guaranteed by van der Waerden's theorem when all of
the integers are put into a certain number of classifications, and that problem was originally known as
Baudet's [bau-days] conjecture. Dirichlet's [dir-ich-lays] Theorem gives a condition under which these
must contain an infinite number of primes, and Szemeredi's [she-meh-REH-dees] theorem was used by Ben
Green and Terence Tao to show that these can be made of prime numbers of arbitrary length. The sum of
these can be found by adding the first and last numbers and then multiplying the sum by half the number
of numbers. Name these structures in which each number is a common difference more than the preceding
number.
ANSWER: arithmetic sequence (accept arithmetic progression, prompt on "arithmetic", do not accept "sequence" or "arithmetic series")
When this existed, some of its pioneers were Ron Stoughton at UCSB, Leonard Kleinrock at UCLA, Elmer
Shapiro at the Stanford Research Institute, and Lawrence Roberts in Utah. They used Kleinrock's research
on packet switching to improve on the circuit switching found in earlier efforts. Its nodes used Interface
Message Processors, which are similar to modern-day routers. This technology also used Network Control
Programs, which are analogous to communication protocols, and its applications increased with the
development of file transfer protocol, though the majority of its early usage was for e-mail. Name this
predecessor of the internet, developed by a part of the Defense Department.
ANSWER: (D)ARPANET [prompt on the internet before it is mentioned]
This data type is the output of PHP's "explode" and Perl's "split" command. To simulate stacks, this data
type can be input into Perl's "push" and "pop" methods. Segments can be cut out of this data structure via
splicing. Hash tables can be used to implement an associative version, and in C++, this structure is iterated
to simulate a multidimensional version. An "out of bound" exception can be thrown in Java when working
with these structures, whose length minus one is its largest index. For ten points, name this linear data
structure in which variables are indexed starting at zero.
ANSWER: array
Special types of these include ones that are indexed by non-integer values or begin at index 1 and
stores children at 2n and 2n+1, and are known as hash tables and heaps, respectively. Addressing in
this structure uses (*) pointers to refer to a specific memory address. A one-dimensional one of these can
also be known as a vector. For 10 points, name this data structure, analogous to the matrix in mathematics,
which stores multiple elements of the same type in contiguous memory locations.
ANSWER: array
In php, this kind of variable is the output of the explode function. This kind of data structure is
being probed during quadratic probing and linear probing, which are used to resolve collisions when
using hash functions. Doubling the capacity of these items during resizing can be used to show that
insertion and deletion from them is performed in amortized constant time. The associative type of
this data structure is actually a map of key and value pairs. C style (*) strings are basically these data
structures filled with chars. Like pointers, they are allocated in many languages using the asterisk operator.
For 10 points, name these linear data structures which are accessed using square brackets, and which can be
thought of as one-dimensional matrices.
ANSWER: arrays
In hash map implementations, quadratic and linear probing techniques move along one of these
data structures until free space is found. Dynamic forms of this data structure often double their size
when they reach a certain threshold value and are implemented with namesake lists in Java. Jagged
forms of these objects have a rank greater than 1. Dictionaries that store a key and a value are
sometimes called (*) associative forms of these data structures. These data structures provide constant time
lookup and insertion operations. In Java, square brackets are used to find a value in these data structures at
a given index. For 10 points, name these data structures that contain an ordered list of objects in contigous
memory.
ANSWER: Arrays
A dope vector often contains information about the extents and stride properties of these data structures,
while the packed variety store multiple data elements in one memory word. In practice, random access in
these data structures can be slowed down because of poor locality of reference when caches are used,
although elements can be asymptotically accessed in Big O of 1 time. Row-major order is often used to
implement multi-dimensional ones, and Edsger Dijikstra argued for starting their indeces at 0. FTP, name
this simple data structure often implemented by declaring a variable with brackets.
ANSWER: Arrays
The off-by-one error is commonly encountered when writing to these entities. Character strings can be
represented as these entities with a trailing null byte, and the lack of bound checking on these structures can
result in the overwriting of memory addresses. In C and C++, these entities are defined using square
brackets, and in most languages, their indices start at zero. For 10 points, name these data structures that
contain elements of the same data type, which can be two-dimensional and are thus analogous to matrices.
ANSWER: arrays
The Judy algorithm can be used to define a very fast version of these data structures by combining them
with features of a hash, and a Vlist combines them with linked lists. Indexing in these structures occurs in
big omega of 1 time and have zero wasted space, while resizable ones are referred to as dynamic. Slicing is
a method for removing a part of these data structures and putting them into a smaller one, and these
structures can be declared by declaring a series of dimensions after the name of a variable. Usually used
with for loops and to implement tables, for 10 points, identify these matrix-like data structures, a group of
variables with the same name but different indices.
ANSWER: array
Elements can be extracted from this data structure in a process called slicing. When most of the values
are zero, this data structure is said to be sparse. A hash table is the most common way to implement the
associative type of this data structure, which associates an arbitrary key with a value. These data structures
are indexed according to pointer arithmetic. When one-dimensional, these data structures are called vectors,
and they usually contain elements of only one data type. Identify these data structures analogous to
matrices that store data in a contiguous address space.
ANSWER: arrays
Unlike a linked list, this data structure does not require memory for references; elements are addressed
adding a base memory address to the product of a fixed increment and the index. A one-dimensional one is
considered to be linear. One of these stores multiple elements of the same type in continguous memory
locations. For 10 points, name this data structure, analogous to the mathematical matrix.
ANSWER: array
Control tables are a type of this object used to avoid explicit branch statements. Bounds-checking
can spot common compile time exceptions using these objects, and implementation of "sparse"
varieties avoid allocating memory for default values. These objects can be dynamically resized so
that insertions at the end require amortized constant time, and a description of this object is often
held in a dope vector. These objects are used when locality of reference is important, so that (*)
pointer arithmetic is often used to access these data structures, which are numbered starting with zero.
Unlike a similar data type this structure supports random access. For 10 points, name this data structure
which, like a linked list, contains a number of elements in order.
ANSWER: Array
This data structure implements hash tables, stacks, and queues (KYOOZ). "Packed" ones store multiple
contiguous elements in one word. Associative ones can have strings for indices. These structures may be
replaced by linked lists so that they can grow and shrink, and a naive search method on this structure
succeeds in linear time. For 10 points, name this linear data structure in which each element can be accessed
by its index.
ANSWER: arrays
In low-level languages, these data structures are often described by dopes, which can be used to
create new data structures of this type in a process called slicing. Examples of these objects that have
low cache misses are named for Douglas Haskins' sister Judy. The stride of these data structures
gives the distance in memory between successive entries. A map or dictionary is sometimes referred
to as an (*) associative form of this data structure, as elements are indexed by keys rather than a zero-based
integer. These objects have big-O of 1 lookup and storage time. Two-dimensional ones can be represented
by a matrix. A for loop often iterates through them. For 10 points, name these simple data structures often
declared using square brackets.
ANSWER: array
When these data structures have a low stride they are stored contiguously in memory, which
increases throughput. One of these objects is created after determining the min and max of the items
to be sorted when implementing counting sort. A form of these objects are implemented using either
row-major or column-major order, and full heaps can efficiently be stored using one of these data
structures. Dynamic forms of these data structures allow for their size to be increased while still
maintaining close to the (*) constant time needed to read and write from them. Multi-dimensional forms of
this data structure can be used to represent matrices, and they are often iterated through using for loops. For
10 points, name this simple data structure declared using square brackets in languages with C syntax.
ANSWER: multi-dimensional arrays
These structures are called sparse if they are mostly filled with zeros. When each element of these
structures contains another of these structures, they are called jagged. In Java, these data structures may
exist as hybrid "Lists", in which case they can be heterogeneous. When two-dimensional, these objects are
often called matrices, while one-dimensional ones are called vectors. For 15 points, name these ordered,
linear collections of data often represented with square brackets.
ANSWER: arrays [or matrices or matrix before mention; or vectors before mention]
One argument against the primary test of this concept is Searle's (SER-ul) Chinese room argument.
Distributed versions of this concept are implemented using multi-agent systems. This term was first coined
by John McCarthy. A popular technique in this field can use backpropagation (back-prop-uh-gay-shun).
Programmers in this field often use LISP. One of the more popular techniques in this branch of computer
science is neural networks. For 10 points, name this branch of computer science that attempts to create
"thinking" machines.
ANSWER: AI [or artificial intelligence; accept neural networks due to ambiguities]
Philosopher John Searle first delineated the strong and weak types of this concept. Edward Feigenbaum
developed expert systems, which can be used to simulate this. This field, whose name was coined by John
McCarthy, often makes use of the Lisp programming language and concepts like fuzzy logic. Perceptrons
are among the different types of neural networks used to simulate this concept. For 10 points, identify this
field of computer science involving problems like machine learning, knowledge representation, and
simulating human brains.
ANSWER: artificial intelligence [or AI]
One application of this field is the creation of expert systems. The "strong" form of this was attacked by
Searle in the Chinese Room Argument. Techniques used to create it include neural networks. Applications
of it include natural language processing and computer vision. The ultimate benchmark in this field is the
Turing test, in which a person attempts, by conversation, to tell a person apart from a computer. For 10
points, identify this area of research in computer science, which attempts to create software and robots that
emulate human mental function.
ANSWER: artificial intelligence [or AI]
One of this phenomenon's namesake "winters" is thought to have been caused by Marvin Minsky's
work on perceptrons. Expert systems using fuzzy logic can imitate this phenomenon described by
Prolog and Lisp. John Searle attacked the "strong" form of this phenomenon in a thought
experiment involving a man who uses a dictionary to manipulate information slid under a door,
called the [*] Chinese Room experiment. ELIZA does not pass the Turing test, which is used to study this
phenomenon. Machine learning and knowledge representation are key parts of, for 10 points, what field of
computer science that seeks to emulate the function of the human brain?
ANSWER: artificial intelligence
The Moufang identities closely resemble this property, but they do not imply it. If the subalgebra
generated by any element of an algebra has this property, the algebra has the "power" form of this
property. A magma with this property is a semigroup. The octonions lack this property, but the
quaternions and the complex numbers possess it. An algebraic structure that possesses an (*) identity
element, an inverse element, closure, and this property is a group. Along with distributivity, matrix
multiplication possesses this property. For 10 points, name this property of a binary operation which for
multiplication means quantity ab times c equals a times quantity bc.
ANSWER: associativity [or associative, do not under any circumstances accept or prompt on "associated with"]
The operation in a semigroup must follow this property, and a weak form of this is its power type. In Lie
[lee] algebras, the Jacobi [jah-KOBE-ee] identity is used instead of this property. While this property does
hold for matrix multiplication, it does not hold for subtraction. This is used in problems involving the same
operation at least twice. This changes the order of the application of the operations in contrast with
demonstrating commutativity [kuh-MYOOT-uh-ti-vi-tee]. Name this operation that says a+b+c has the same
value even when you change the placement of parentheses.
ANSWER: associativity (accept associative property)
Though not a bar, this symbol can denote the complex conjugate of a matrix. In C and C++, this
symbol is used to declare a pointer variable, while in Ruby and Python, two of these symbols are used
to express (*) exponents. It denotes a wildcard character in Unix, and this symbol can be used after a
forward slash to begin block comments in most programming languages. On a normal keyboard, shift-8
yields, for ten points, which symbol that looks like a star and is often used as a multiplication sign?
ANSWER: asterisks (prompt on star or similar)
One form of this term can be found by taking the limit of f(x) divided by x as x goes to a, then using
that limit to take the limit of f(x) minus the limit times x. They can also be found by taking the
quotient when the numerator of a rational function is divided by its denominator. One of these not
parallel to the x or y axes is known as the oblique type; the function y equals x plus one over x has
one at y equals x. There are also vertical and horizontal forms of them; the vertical form exists if the
limit of a function as it approaches a point a from either direction is equal to positive or negative infinity.
For 10 points, name this term that describes a line a function will get infinitely close to.
ANSWER: asymptote
The adjectival form of this word is applied to curves or lines on ruled surfaces where there is no curvature.
That form can also be used for big O [oh] notation, since it classifies algorithms by the type of this created
by its limiting behavior. Though graphs of rational functions are limited to only one horizontal example of
this structure, there are two of them for some functions such as arctangent. The vertical type exists for
rational functions with non-removable discontinuities, and the only non-degenerate conic section to be
associated with these is the hyperbola. Name these lines that graphs approach as they go towards infinity.
ANSWER: asymptotes or asymptotic
On a phase portrait, the eigenvectors serve as these, and spiral points may be stable with respect to them.
These act as essential discontinuities, in contrast with "removable" and "jump" discontinuities. Their slope
equals plus or minus b over a for a hyperbola in standard form. The graph of the arctangent x or of a logistic
curve will have two of these. "Oblique" or "slant" ones occur when the degree of the numerator of a rational
function is greater than the degree of the denominator. The limit of a function as x goes to infinity or
negative infinity is the "horizontal" one. For 10 points, name these imaginary lines which functions
approach but do not cross.
ANSWER: asymptotes [or vertical asymptotes; or horizontal asymptotes; or slant asymptotes; or oblique asymptotes]
An early proof for this problem involved the use of a Taylor series employing the sin function and the
length of an arc on the unit circle. It can be solved using the s equals 2 case of the Riemann (*) zeta
function. It was first proposed by Mengoli and popularized by Jakob Bernoulli. It solution was determined
to be pi squared over six. For 10 points, name this mathematical problem solved by Euler and named after a
Swiss city, which asks for the sum of the reciprocals of the perfect squares.
ANSWER: Basel problem
In functional analysis, two types of this concept differ in whether they allow for infinite sums or not;
those are the Schauder and Hamel types. Given a set of this type in a function's target space, the
function is continuous if and only if the preimage of every element of this set is open. A free module is
a module equipped with a set of this type. Taking unions of elements from this set yields all (*)
elements of a topology. An algorithm for modifying a set of this type forms an element "u sub n" by taking
"v sub n" and subtracting the projections of each previous "u sub i" onto "v sub n;" that orthonormalization
is called the Gram-Schmidt process. The "standard" one for Rn ("R-n") is the set of unit vectors, and the
number of elements in this set equals the dimension of a vector space. For 10 points, give this term for a set
of linearly independent vectors that span a vector space.
ANSWER: basis
The Hamel type and Schauder type of this mathematical obejct differ in the cardinality of allowed
combinations. SVD algorithms relate one of these to a diagonal matrix, while the spectral theorem
allows the decomposition into one of these constructed from eigenvectors. The Fourier transform is
equivalent to changing between the (*) position type and the momentum type of these objects. Zorn's
lemma can show every vector space is entitled to one of these, and any linearly independent set can be
extended into one. For 10 points, name this class of mathematical objects, a linearly independent set of
vectors spanning some space.
ANSWER: basis
A double exponential time algorithm for making these structures creates them from generators for a
polynomial ideal and was developed by Buchberger. A theorem named for these objects states that
every ideal in a polynomial ring defined over a Noetherian ring is finitely generated. In abstract
algebra, one type of this structure is named for Wolfgang Grobner. Transition matrices of a (*)
vector space are used to transform between these objects. When given a maximum set of inputs, the GramSchmidt process will output an orthogonal type of this mathematical structure. An example of one of these
functions for the space of cubic polynomials consists of 1,x, x squared, and x cubed. For 10 points, name
these spanning sets whose elements are linearly independent.
ANSWER: basis [Accept Grobner basis. prompt on spanning sets.]
This mathematician is the namesake of both a directed acyclic graphical model that can be used in medical
diagnosis and a method of inference used to determine how well a variety of hypotheses align with
experimental results leading to a posterior probability distribution. His namesake theorem shows why a
small number of false positives can cast a strong doubt on all positive results and can be derived using
either a Venn diagram showing the four possible regions created by two dependent events or by a tree
diagram with four terminal nodes. Name this mathematician who in a posthumously published paper
designed a theorem expressing the probability of A given B in terms of the probabilities of A, B, and B
given A.
ANSWER: Thomas Bayes
Maximum entropy techniques are an alternative to a methodology named after him, which suggests that
probability parameters themselves have probability distributions. When a maximum likelihood estimator is
used in conjugation with a certain type of information, the estimator converges to a type named for this
man. In a paradigm named for him the true moment of the population is altered as new experiments are
performed, in contrast with the frequentist approach which assumes constant moments for a population. He
developed a theorem which relates the posterior probability of an event to the prior probability of the
individual events. A technique named for him is used to filter spam messages. For 10 points, identify this
early English statistician who wrote "An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances."
ANSWER: Thomas Bayes
This man's namesake estimator is identical to the maximum likelihood estimator if the
parameters to both are uniform. A mathematical structure named for this scientist can be
interpreted using Gibbs sampling and is a directed acyclic graph that represents conditional
dependencies of variables. A statement named for this man is often proved by invoking the
commutative property of set intersection. In addition to naming a kind of network, this man names a
paradigm that stands in contrast to the (*) frequentist approach, in which the prior probability is
completely rejected. His namesake theorem relates the conditional probabilities of various events and is
often used in detecting spam. For 10 points, name this 18th century English statistician.
ANSWER: Thomas Bayes
A variational application of this statement relies on minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence. The
Jeffries distribution, which is based on the Fischer information, is often used in conjunction with this
statement, and a method named after this statement is a hypothesis testing method that is an alternative to
the Fischer and Neyman-Pearson methods. In conjunction with a Dirichlet distribution, this statement can be
used to model allele frequencies, and Markov chain Monte Carlo methods are based on this theorem, while
another popular application of it is spam filtering. For 10 points, name this theorem of probability which
says that the posterior is proportional to the likelihood times the prior.
ANSWER: Bayes' Theorem [accept reasonable equivalents that include "Bayes"]
Pierre-Simon Laplace began his 1774 memoirs with a version of this statement. Fisher praised this
idea's original formulator for not making it public, leaving it to Richard Price to publish. Harold Jeffreys
revived interest in it, and offered it as an alternative to confidence intervals and other frequentist
approaches. For ten points, name this statement of probability that relates a posterior probability to a prior
and likelihood function, named for an English mathematician.
ANSWER: Bayes' theorem [or Bayes' law]
Dempsey and Shafer developed a generalization of this theorem, which provides the basis for
hierarchical modeling of transcription factors. In a Hidden Markov Model, the forward-backward
algorithm uses this theorem to combine the forward and backward observations. Belief networks are
based on this theorem, which is often used to find the credible interval and is avoided by (*)
frequentists. Applying this theorem yields the interesting result that it's always beneficial to switch doors in
the Monty Hall Problem. It states that the prior probability times the likelihood divided by a normalizer is
equal to the conditional probability of an event. For 10 points, name this fundamental theorem of
probability named for a British minister.
ANSWER: Bayes- Theorem
Cromwell's rule limits the cases where this theorem can be applied. This theorem is used to find
the credibility interval. This theorem is used by the Expectation-Maximization algorithm, and can
also be used to solve the Monty Hall Problem. The CRM114 program uses a Markov Field to
improve upon results obtained with this theorem in spam filtering. This theorem is used to calculate
the posterior (*) probability, and relates the actual probability of an event to the measured probability in a
test. For 10 points, name this theorem which allows probability to change upon the acquisition of new
evidence and is written as the probability of A given B equals probability of B given A times probability of
A over probability of B.
ANSWER: Bayes- theorem [or Bayes- law]
In March 2011, Joy Christian claimed to have disproved this theorem by applying it to a system on a
hypersphere. The original paper deriving this theorem uses an epsilon-delta proof to show that 2
forms of the expected value of the product of 2 quantities are not equal. A switch determines which
electro-acoustical transducer activates and disturbs a pool of water in an experiment testing this
theorem. The CHSH inequality uses the fact that the quantum correlation of 2 variables must be
between 2 and -2 to test this theorem that was originally proposed in terms of two particles being measured
using Stern-Gerlach Magnets. Based off of the EPR paradox, this is, for 10 points, what inequality which
states that no local hidden variables theory is physically accurate.
ANSWER: Bell's Inequality or theorem
This man presently collaborates with Nigel Shadbotl (SHAD-bot-ul) on a British government project to
open government-acquired data to public perusal. Both of this man's parents helped operate the Ferranti
Mark 1, the first privately built computer. This scientist created the ENQUIRE system to demonstrate
possible uses for hypertext, and on his later stint with CERN, he made the first client-server connection
over HTTP in November 1989. For 15 points, name this British computer scientist who invented the World
Wide Web.
ANSWER: Tim Berners-Lee
One person with this last name is the namesake of the coefficients of the Taylor series for x over the
quantity e to the x minus 1 centered at x = 0. Another person with this last name lends his name to a theory
along with Euler that gives an equation governing the transverse deflection of a beam as a function of its
flexural rigidity and the applied load. The former lends his name to a process in which the outcomes of
independent experiments can only be "successes" and "failures" with fixed probability, exemplified by a
coin toss. The latter lends his name to an analog of the conservation of energy that describes inviscid flow.
For 10 points, identify this family of Swiss scientists, one of whom names a principle from fluid mechanics.
ANSWER: Bernoulli [Accept Jakob Bernoulli and Daniel Bernoulli]
The Dixon-Ferrar formula can be used to relate their variations. When they are singular at the origin
they are of the second kind and named after Neumann (*) or Weber; others are named for Hankel. Their
zeros can be used to calculate the Rayleigh function and they are related to the motion of heat in a cylinder
and the oscillations of a chain. For 10 points, name these cylindrical harmonic functions that solve their
namesake German astronomer's second-order ordinary differential equation.
ANSWER: Bessel functions (accept cylindrical harmonic functions before mentioned)
The generating function for this function is the exponential of x over 2, times t minus 1 over t.
Kummer's confluent hypergeometric function reduces to these functions in the case that b equals 2a.
The amplitudes of the sidebands of a frequency-modulated signal are given by these functions. This
function of order n can be defined as the sum of this function of order n minus 1 and n plus 1, times
two x divided by n. The second kind of this function has a singularity at the origin, and is named for
(*) Neumann. This function of order at least one-half has at least one zero of the sine function between each
of its zeros, and this function of exactly order one-half is a damped sine function. For 10 points, name these
mutually-orthogonal functions that solve Laplace's equation in cylindrical coordinates.
ANSWER: Bessel functions (of the first kind) [accept cylindrical harmonics; prompt on "cylinder functions"]
In thermodynamics, this letter symbolizes the reciprocal of Boltzmann's constant times temperature. The
probability of not rejecting the null hypothesis when it is false is symbolized by this letter. Plaques of an
amyloid named for this letter are common in Alzheimer's disease patients. Cells that produce insulin are
named for this Greek letter. This letter names a radioactive decay that occurs when either a positron or an
electron is emitted from a nucleus. For 10 points, name this letter that symbolizes type II error, as it is the
second letter of the Greek alphabet.
ANSWER: beta [do not accept or prompt on "B"]
In probability theory, this concept describes the convergence of a set of random variables to a
corresponding set of constants. It was first introduced by the number theorist Paul Bachmann and
popularized by Edmund Landau, after whom it is sometimes named. It is sometimes contrasted with related
Omega and Theta systems, which have different rules for how functions are bounded asymptotically.
Constant terms are eliminated because as N approaches infinity, they become negligibly small. For 10
points, name this system of notation, which in computer science describes the complexity of an algorithm,
examples of which include log N for binary search and N squared for bubble sort.
ANSWER: Big-O notation [or Big-Omicron notation]
The map between a finite group acting on a set big S over the stabilizer of small s, in big S, to
the orbit of small s has this property. If a function of this kind is also homomorphic, it is called
an isomorphism. If a function of this kind exists between two sets, they have the same
cardinality, which is often used to prove they have the same number of elements. When a
function of this type is applied to its own set, the permutation results. For any map from a set X
to Y with this property, there must exist an inverse that additionally has this property. For 10
points, name this kind of function where every value in the domain has a unique, corresponding
value in the range and vice versa, making it both injective and surjective.
ANSWER: bijective function [or bijection; or one-to-one correspondent; or word forms of the preceding; or one-to-one and onto; do not accept "one-to-one" or "onto" or "injective" or "surjective"]
One's complement is a method of representation in this system. This type of coded decimal can be used
to display digits on a digital clock. This system has the second-highest radix economy after the ternary
system. This system names a tree in which each parent node has at most two child nodes. This system is
easily converted to the octal and hexadecimal systems. The most basic unit of information in this system is
a bit. For 10 points, identify this numeral system used by computers.
ANSWER: binary numeral system [or base-2 number system]
One method of assigning values in this system involves making one digit represent whether the number is
positive or negative. That method is known as the sign-and-magnitude representation. Another method of
assigning negative values in this system takes a positive number, inverts that number's digits, and then adds
one. That method is called the two's complement representation. Numbers in this system are made up of
values called bits. For 10 points, name this numbering system that differs from the decimal system by only
using zeros and ones.
ANSWER: binary number system [or base-two number system]
This concept was first developed by Thomas Harriot, though Leibniz wrote to the Jesuit
missionary Claudio Grimaldi in an attempt to convince the Chinese emperor to institute it. Boolean
algebra is done entirely in this system, in which multiplication is effectively reduced to addition.
Digits in this number system are known as (*) bits, and this system is the basis for modern computing.
For 10 points, name this number system in which the only digits are 0 and 1.
ANSWER: binary number system
The double dabble algorithm converts values from this system into another system. In this system,
signed numbers can be represented using two's complement notation. Every grouping of four digits
in this system corresponds to one digit in (*) hexadecimal, which uses symbols from 0 to F. This system
can represent two to the n distinct numbers, where n is the number of bits used. For 10 points, name this
number system used by computers that only has zeroes and ones.
ANSWER: binary number system [or base-two number system]
The Garsia-Wachs algorithm is used to construct an optimal one given the probabilities of queries that are
not found in this data structure. In the more general case, K-W-I-C, as described by Luhn, is used.
Lookups are proportional to root N in expectation over the internal structure, 2 ln N in expectation over
insertions, linear in the worst case, and log N optimally. AVL and red-black are verities that balance
themselves, while "splay" ones are those that move frequent nodes near the root. In-order, post-order, and
pre-order are different methods for traversing, for 10 points, what data structure where each node has at
most two children, left children are less than the parents, and right children are greater than the parents?
ANSWER: binary search tree or BST (prompt on "tree")
The q-analogue of this object counts the number of K-dimensional vector subspaces of an N-dimensional
vector space. A sum involving products of these objects can be evaluated using Vandermonde's
Convolution, while the Hockey-Stick formula also involves their sums. For a fixed N, they have zero
alternating sum, while they sum to 2 to the N. Their namesake theorem states that they appear when
expanding powers of two-term polynomial expressions, while Pascal's triangle is a result of the best-known
recursion for them. FTP, name this object in combinatorics that expresses the number of ways to choose K
objects from N possibilities.
ANSWER: binomial coefficient [accept N choose K before "choose" is read]
For a q-ary code, the terms in denominator of the sphere packing bound are these numbers time
a function of q. The nth Catalan number is calculated by multiplying one over n plus one times one of
these numbers. The number of trials times the success rate time the failure rate is the variance for a
(*) distribution that uses and shares a name with these numbers. The sum of all of these numbers when the
row index is held constant is 2 to the n. These numbers make up the entries in Pascal's triangle and can be
derived from a different function by dividing by k factorial. For 10 points, name these numbers that give n
choose k and are used in their namesake expansion of the powers of a size two polynomial.
ANSWER: binomial coefficients [accept combination numbers before "choose"; accept choose numbers before "choose"; prompt on entries in "Pascal's" triangle]
Erdos- squarefree conjecture asks whether the central one of these numbers is always squarefree,
and they are the subject of Vandermonde's convolution formula. The Catalan numbers can be
defined using these numbers of indices 2n and n times one over n plus one. The hockey stick identity
can be used to add them, and summing over their lower index from 0 to n gives two to the nth power.
The entries of (*) Pascal's triangle are these, which arise when multiplying a two-term polynomial with
itself. These numbers are symbolized by a column matrix with two entries, and they are equal to n factorial
divided by r factorial times n minus r factorial. For 10 points, name these objects, which give the number of
ways to select r objects from a group of n.
ANSWER: binomial coefficients [or n choose r or combinations or entries in Pascal's Triangle or equivalents before mention; do NOT accept "permutations"]
The distribution denoted by this term is not obtained if an experiment is conducted without replacement;
instead, one gets the hypergeometric distribution. That distribution given this name is written n choose k
times p to the k times the quantity 1 minus p raised to the n minus k. When n equals 1, one gets the
Bernoulli distribution from this one. Although not binary, this term refers to a system of nomenclature in
which organisms are identified by genus and species. For 10 points, identify this term that also refers to a
polynomial with two terms.
ANSWER: binomial
Ronald Fisher used the distribution of this name to test the predictive accuracy of Mendel's law of
inheritance. That distribution models the outcomes of Bernoulli trials, while the rows of Pascal's triangle
may be used in place of the theorem of this name. The coefficient of this name is read "n choose k" and is
found in the expansion of this type of expression according to that theorem. FTP, name this type of
polynomial expression consisting of the sum of two monomials.
ANSWER: Binomial
The incomplete beta function can compute the cumulative density function for this object's namesake
probability distribution. That discrete distribution, defined by the number of successes from a number of
Bernoulli trials, approximates a Poisson distribution as the number of trials increases. Raising one of these
to the nth power yields an expansion with n+1 terms, whose coefficients can be found on the rows of
Pascal's Triangle using this algebraic expression's namesake theorem. A squared plus B squared is an
example of, for 10 points, this type of polynomial, which contains two terms.
ANSWER: binomial [or binomial distribution; do not accept or prompt on "polynomial"]
This is a hypergeometric distribution with two options. The "negative" equivalent of this distribution
is sometimes named for Pascal. The variance of this distribution is equal to the mean times 1 minus
the probability of an event occurring. The Bernoulli distribution is a simple case of this one, which
describes iterated Bernoulli trials. The Poisson distribution can be treated as the limit of this discrete
distribution. For 10 points, name this distribution that gives the probability of m successes in n trials when
the probability of success is p, which is calculated in part with its namesake coefficients involving n choose
m.
ANSWER: binomial distribution
When divided by "n plus 1," the nth central number derived from this statement gives the nth Catalan
number. This statement was first proven for complex numbers by Abel, though that generalization had been
stated by Newton. This theorem gives rise to numbers that can count the ways of choosing k elements from
a
set of n elements, and those coefficients are equal to the values in a row of Pascal's Triangle. For 10 points,
name this theorem which gives the expansion of "the quantity x plus y, to the nth power."
ANSWER: Binomial Theorem [or reasonable equivalents of Theorem like Binomial Identity; or Binomia Coefficient]
One of the results of performing this action on a dihedral angle is handled by Gergonne's Theorem, which is
analogous to the proportion formed by the adjacent sides and parts of the opposite side of a triangle formed
when this action is done to an angle in a triangle. Three rays that perform this role in a triangle meet at the
incenter, while the segments that perform this role on sides rather than angles meet at the centroid and are
known as medians. Give this term which refers to dividing an object into equal halves.
ANSWER: bisection
One of these units is roughly equal to three decibans, and BLIT operations copy these into a
rectangular area. A raster operator combines two arrays of these units to form a this-map image. A
caret is used in most programming languages to toggle one of these, while a single vertical bar
represents a this "wise" OR operation. The (*) quantum type of this unit allows it to be a superposition
of its two classical values, and bandwidth measures the rate of the transfer of them. Four of these units make
up a nibble, while eight of them constitute a byte. For ten points, name this unit of digital information
commonly interpreted as a binary digit.
ANSWER: bits (accept binary digit before mention)
An infinite number of these objects comprise the Baum-Sweet sequence. A rudimentary form of
error checking involves utilizing a parity one of these objects. Although it doesn't involve cin and
cout, in languages with C syntax, operations named for these objects can be performed by using two
less than or greater than signs, which are left and right shifts. The most significant one is often used
to store (*) signedness, and they can be toggled using a namesake mask. One of these objects can be used
to store a boolean value. In most systems, a collection of eight of them is known as a byte. For 10 points,
name these most basic units of data in a computer, which can be 0 or 1.
ANSWER: bits [prompt on numbers]
The Shannon capacity has units of this per second. Twiddling refers to manipulation of them and flags
are composed of them. Historically ASCII contained a parity one of these for error detection. Operations
such as logical shift and boolean OR are known as this "wise" operations. Raster images are usually
referred to as a pix or this map. For 10 points, name this signal binary digit, eight of which make up a byte.
ANSWER: bits
An inequality named for this mathematician states that the probability that at least one event happens is less
than or equal to the sum of the individual probabilities, which is also known as the union bound. This 19th
century thinker attempted to update Aristotle's system of syllogisms [SILoe-jis-ums] to better handle
algebra, and he wrote The Laws of Thought. The algebra named after him uses De Morgan's laws and
operations such as the Exclusive Or. Identify this mathematician whose namesake algebra deals with truth
and falsehood.
ANSWER: George Boole (prompt on "Boolean")
He chose 1 as a logical symbol for everything in the universe, so if a set of items is x, then everything
outside of x can be expressed as 1-x. The results of one of his "functions" can be transformed into a
logic function or logic gates, or expressed in a truth table. One of his expressions can be used to form
a function with a value of true or false. These expressions contain operators like XOR, OR, and AND,
along with set theory, to represent logical operations in mathematical form. For ten points, name this
British mathematician, whose operators are critical to computer science.
ANSWER: George Boole
A function F taking in this type of data as inputs equals x times F plus x prime times F prime, according
to Shannon's expansion theorem. An expression outputting this type of data appears in the first line of a
while loop. Conjunction and disjunction are operations applied to this type of data, which Ludwig
Wittgenstein first manipulated in "tables". For 15 points, name this type of data which can only take on two
values, true and false, named for a British logician.
ANSWER: Boolean data [or logical data; or true and false before mention; prompt on "truths"]
One algorithm that reduces the complexities of these functions begins by finding the essential
prime implicants and ignores "don-t care terms." The Quine-McCluskey algorithm minimizes these
statements, which helps in producing smaller circuits. For these types of statements with less than
four variables, it is typically easier to minimize them with Karnaugh Maps. These expressions may
be written in (*) conjunctive normal form or disjunctive normal form and typically evaluate to either true
or false. For 10 points, name these expressions that are named after a 19th century mathematician, which
are used in a namesake field of logic.
ANSWER: Boolean expressions or Boolean statements or Boolean function [prompt on partial answer; prompt on "logical functions" or "logical statements"]
One of the basic operations of this system is also called the Webb operation or the Pierce arrow. This
system's algebraic structure with respect to set logic leads one operation to be represented as a product sign
and the other as an addition sign in some contexts. Employed in SQL queries, this formalism also is used in
digital circuits, any one of which can be constructed from enough NAND and NOR gates. For 10 points,
identify this kind of logic employing true and false values as well as conjunctions like AND and OR,
essential to constructing search queries.
ANSWER: Boolean logic
Donald Benson provided an elementary solution to it in a horizontal frame using Cauchy's inequality, and
the absence of an explicit x term results in a simplified version that can be solved by the Beltrami identity.
An approach analogous to optics invokes Fermat's Principle and Snell's Law, which was employed by
Johann Bernoulli, while Leibniz, Newton, and L'Hopital solved it using the calculus of variations. For 10
points, identify this problem which seeks the path connecting two points on which an object can slide under
the influence of gravity in "least time."
ANSWER: Brachistochrone problem
A "bidirectional" variation of this algorithm passes through the list twice per iteration and is also called
"shuttle" or "cocktail," and "odd-even" sort is a parallel-processing optimized alteration; the first method
eliminates the problem of small elements at the big-element end, which are called "turtles" since they
uniquely must travel the full length of the list. For 10 points, name this naive big-oh-of-n-squared sorting
algorithm, in which repeated passes are made swapping adjacent out-of-order elements, such that the small
elements float to the top.
ANSWER: bubble sort
The more efficient bidirectional variant of this algorithm, which reverses the direction after each pass, is
referred to by the term "cocktail shaker". Another optimization is to terminate if no swaps occur during a
pass. It's not insertion sort, but for n items it approaches a time complexity of Big O of n for mostly sorted
data. However, it has a quadratic runtime in the worst case and is less efficient than insertion and selection
sort in practice. This algorithm works by comparing adjacent items and swapping them if they are in the
wrong order. For 10 points name this sorting algorithm which is named for the way that elements move up
the list.
ANSWER: bubble sort [accept: sinking sort]
This kind of sort belongs to the order of n squared, making it inefficient for large data sets, although it is
both stable and adaptive. The list elements subject to it only go through a comparison algorithm obeying
transitivity and trichotomy. For presorted lists, it is better than many sorts like quicksort, but still not as
good as insertion sort. For 10 points, name the sorting algorithm that stops after a complete run through a
set causes no elements to float to one end or the other.
ANSWER: bubble sort [or sinking sort]
These entities are reduced or eliminated by increasing the size of the community according to
Linus- Law. Hard-to-find examples of these entities are given a pun on Werner Heisenberg's name.
It's not style, but one approach to reducing the frequency of these entities is to use static analysis
tools. These entities are typically checked for after the implementation stage in the waterfall model.
GDB is a type of program named for discovering these entities that supports operations like step-in
and setting (*) breakpoints. These occurrences frequently arise from race conditions and being off-by-one.
They're checked for through unit testing, and famous examples include the Y2K one. For 10 points, name
these defects in a computer program.
ANSWER: software bugs [or faults or errors or failures or glitches; accept defects before mentioned; do not accept or prompt on "exceptions"]
The tcsh shell is named after this language due to its similar syntax. Dynamic memory allocation is done
in this language with the use of malloc. This language's "string" is commonly used to denote a string that is
null-terminated. The authoritative book on this language, often abbreviated K&R, was written by Brian
Kernighan and this language's developer, Dennis Ritchie, who created it while at Bell Labs. For 10 points,
identify this most widely-used and influential programming language.
ANSWER: C
This is often said to be a language that "makes it easy to shoot yourself in the foot." There are many
versions of it, but the most recent is the 99 implementation. It stemmed from a stripped-down version of
BCPL and was developed for a PDP-11 machine. Known as a weakly-typed language, it lacks support for
generic programming and exception handling. Thus, object-oriented practices are very difficult to
implement in this language. However, people still consider it to be fast, efficient, and versatile due to its
low-level capabilities, though it still has many security vulnerabilities, most notably its lack of boundchecking for arrays. FTP, name this programming language that was developed for UNIX and has
influenced the development of most modern programming languages.
ANSWER: C (Do NOT accept C++, C#, etc.)
This language has recently been updated to allow for move semantics, although the syntax for it is so
complex that no compiler has successfully implemented it. Software engineers probably have read Scott
Meyer's book on this language, in which you can specify abstract classes by setting their virtual functions
equal to 0. Like Perl and Python, you can use multiple inheritance in this language. The rule of 3 applies to
this language, stating that if any one of a destructor, copy constructor, or assignment operator must be
explicitly defined, then they all must be. To print and input something in this language, you may use "c out"
and "c in." This language was developed by Bjarne Stroustrup and incorporates a unary operator into its
name that indicates it improves upon a certain procedural language. For 10 points, name this object-oriented
extension to C.
ANSWER: C++ or "C plus plus" [do not accept or prompt on "C"]
Critics often argue that this multi-paradigm language allows programmers to mix object-oriented
programming with procedural functions, though its successor only follows the former paradigm. Its
successor has automatic garbage collection, but this language requires explicit cleanup of memory. This
language has notoriously finicky pointers, since it uses value semantics by default and has no safeguards in
place as Java does. For 10 points, name this general-purpose programming language developed by Bell
Labs, a successor to C with a similar name.
ANSWER: C++ ("C plus plus") [do not accept "C"]
The next version of this language has the designation 0x (zero x). One important part of this language is
templates and it supports references. One can manage memory in it by using the delete and new operators.
In it, one can print to the standard output using cout. Unlike its ancestor, this language supports classes. For
10 points, name this programming language whose name reflects that it is a step up from its predecessor, C.
ANSWER: C++
Linus Torvalds once criticized this language on the grounds that some of its features promoted bad practice.
One extension he mentioned, Boost, adds capabilities in mathematics, image processing, and operating
system interaction, and provides a way to do template metaprogramming. Name mangling is used by this
language to implement polymorphism, and printing to StdOut in this language is done with "c-out" followed
by two angle brackets. For 10 points, name this programming language designed by Bjarne Stroustrup, once
known as C with Classes.
ANSWER: C++ [accept C with Classes before end; do not accept "C"]
To make this language easier to parse with LALR(1), the "Significantly Prettier and Easier Syntax" for it
was developed. Created by Bell Labs employee Bjarne Stoustrup, Borland offers a popular "Builder"
program for compiling this language. Unlike a rival developed by Sun, this unmanaged language allows for
multiple inheritance, and it builds on its predecessor by supporting operator overloading in its newly
introduced classes. FTP name this popular Object Oriented programming language, a rival of Java which
built upon C.
ANSWER: C++ [prompt on "New C" or "C with Classes"]
Many of the features in the most recent version of this programming language's standard were
incorporated from Boost, a set of libraries for this language. The most recent version of this
programming language's standard added support for range-based for loops and lambda functions.
The object-oriented aspects of this language were inspired by () Simula. I/O is supported in this language
through streams, with the "c-out" object representing the standard output stream. For 10 points, name this
programming language, which was created by Bjarne Stroustrup in 1979 and was originally called "C with
Classes".
ANSWER: C++ [do NOT accept or prompt on "C"]
Its template metaprogramming features allow programmers to write programs that solve problems at
compile-time, if extremely inefficiently. Most notably, it supports multiplate inheritance and operator
overloading, and has a powerful Standard Template Library. For ten points, name this primarily objectoriented programming language, invented by Bjarne Stroustrup, with a name that implies that it is one better
than its predecessor.
ANSWER: C++
This device is first used in Model 85 of the IBM System/360 product line. It is often used hierarchically,
with architectures ranging from strictly inclusive to exclusive. They can range from fully associative over
N-way associative to direct mapped, with the fully associative versions often smaller in size and direct
mapped versions larger because of production cost issues. A benchmark of it is its miss rate, which is
roughly inversely proportional with its size. Replacement of data can be least recently used for the direct
mapped versions, but is often random for fully associative versions. Modern CPUs have several levels of it,
ranging from L1, L2 to sometimes even L3, and it can be several MB in size. FTP, name this device used to
store temporary data for faster write and retrieval.
ANSWER: Cache
One type of this component uses tag blocks to do line matching, while a writing scheme in them
directly bypasses them and is known as no-write-allocate. The unified type of this component
contains both program data and instructions and is often located off-chip, and code can be optimized
for them by exploiting (*) temporal and spatial locality. Replacement schemes for them can involve an
LRU which evicts a victim block that was least recently used, and they can also be Direct-Mapped, FullyAssociative or N-Way Set Associative. For 10 points, name this component of memory that acts as a faster
and smaller duplicate of larger and slower memory.
ANSWER: Caches
A translation lookaside buffer is one of these things used to improve the translation of virtual
addresses. The consistency of data stored in these thing is their namesake "coherence." Those located
on a CPU die are known as (*) L1, L2 or L3. Requesting data from these things can result in a namesake
"hit" or "miss." For 10 points, identify this term which can also refer to the temporary storage used for
HTML pages and images when browsing the web.
ANSWER: cache
Some of these make use of the Illinois Protocol, which is one of many algorithms that make use of the
four words "modified," "shared," "exclusive" and "invalid" in order to prevent the "false sharing" problem
inherent in these devices when trying to maintain their coherency. When implementing the write-back ones
of these, an extra dirty bit is needed to maintain them. They can be direct mapped or set-associative at
times, which allows them to hold more types of data. These devices exploit both temporal locality and
spatial locality. For 10 points, identify these devices that store recently used bits of memory in order to
speed up future access.
ANSWER: caches
The coherence of these entities is maintained in many systems by the MESI protocol, as well as by such
processes as snooping and snarfing. An example of these entities used to map virtual and physical address
spaces is known the translation lookaside buffer. Those used by the CPU are generally divided into the
levels L1 and L2, and they use write-back or write-through allocation. For 10 points, identify these
structures that use the principle of locality to optimize memory efficiency.
ANSWER: caches
These devices displaced slide rules. One company developed the RPL programming language to
work with these devices, which they normally designed to use reverse Polish notation, as in their 12c,
35 and 48 models. That company was Hewlett-Packard. The first of these devices that was able to (*)
plot a function was introduced by Casio. For 10 points, identify these devices manufactured and designed
by Texas Instruments that come in "graphing" types.
ANSWER: electronic calculators [or Computer Algebra System graphing calculators]
The work of Cavalieri and Barrow provided the groundwork for this field of study. George Berkley
attacked the central idea behind this subject saying "may we not call them the Ghosts of departed
Quantities?" One pioneer of this field called it "the method of fluxions." One developer of this was
Gottfried Leibniz. The other person who discovered this mathematical subject was Sir Isaac Newton. For
10 points, name this branch of mathematics involving the taking of integrals and derivatives.
ANSWER: infinitesimal calculus [prompt on math]
A version of this field originated from the "circle method", or yenri, of Seki Kowa. A satirical work
addressed to Edmund Halley was sharply critical of this field; that work is The Analyst by George
Berkeley. One creator of this field referred to it as the method of fluents and fluxions, and another thinker
developed this field as the study of infinitesimals. For ten points, name this branch of mathematics,
independently discovered by Gottfried Leibniz and Isaac Newton, whose operations include differentiation
and integration.
ANSWER: infinitesimal calculus [accept more specific answers, prompt on mathematics]
This concept was criticized in The Analyst by Bishop Berkeley (BARK-lee), who mocked its "ghosts of
departed quantities." One discoverer of this concept notated it through fluxions, while another used
differential notation. For 10 points, name this branch of mathematics that both Gottfried Leibniz and Isaac
Newton claimed to have discovered.
ANSWER: the infinitesimal calculus
Abraham Robinson created a "non-standard" basis for this field as an alternative to Cauchy's
delta-epsilon version. The book The Analyst attacks the foundations of this field, calling its main theoretical
components "velocities of evanescent increments" and "ghosts of departed quantities." That work by
George Berkeley attacked the Method of Fluxions, whose author feuded with Leibniz over credit for
discovery. For ten points, name this branch of mathematics that uses derivatives and integrals.
ANSWER: calculus [or analysis]
One branch of mathematics with this name uses alpha conversion, beta reduction, and nu conversion. That
system, developed by Stephen Kleene and Alonzo Church, is also named for the abstraction operator
lambda. Another branch of mathematics with this name, also called vector analysis, uses the del operator to
represent the curl and divergence operators. That branch also uses the Frenet-Serret [freh-nay sair-ay]
formulas to relate the binormal, normal, and tangent vectors. The best known branch of mathematics with
this name uses limits to define its central concepts. Name this branch of mathematics that uses integrals and
derivatives.
ANSWER: calculus [accept lambda calculus or vector calculus or multivariable calculus or differential calculus or integral calculus]
One type of this field, arising from a problem proposed by Johann Bernoulli (ber-NOO-lee), is the one
"of variations." This field solves Zeno's dichotomy paradox by showing that the distances traveled are
equivalent to a convergent series, as an infinite number of those distances can be summed to equal a
non-infinite number by use of the integral. That function, along with the derivative, is in the realm of, for
10 points, what branch of mathematics invented independently by Newton and Leibniz (LIBE-nitz)?
ANSWER: calculus
The Knaster-Kuratowski fan is constructed from points of one construct named for this man, which
was generalized by Smith and Volterra in a form that has a positive Lebesgue measure. With Heine,
this man names a result that states that every continuous function between a compact metric space
and a metric space is uniformly continuous. This man's theorem says that the power set of A has a
greater cardinality than A, and Paul Cohen worked on one conjecture of this man. This man's
namesake dust is a three-dimensional version of another construct in which the middle third of a line
segment is repeatedly removed. For 10 points, name this originator of the continuum hypothesis, whose
namesake diagnolization argument showed that the real numbers are uncountable.
ANSWER: Georg Cantor
This mathematician proposed a problem which became the first of Hilbert's problems and is known as the
continuum hypothesis. This mathematician developed the concept of numbers that are larger than all finite
numbers but not necessarily infinite, which he called transfinite numbers; and his eponymous fractal is
created by taking the closed interval zero, one and repeatedly deleting open middle thirds. This
mathematician attempted to write every number in its binary representation but derived a contradiction to
show that the set of reals is uncountable-his namesake diagonal argument. Name this German founder of
set theory.
ANSWER: Georg Ferdinand Ludwig Philipp Cantor
The theorem named for this mathematician states that the cardinality of a power set is greater than the
cardinality of the original set. The function named after him, known as the Devil's staircase and commonly
used as an example of a function that is continuous but not absolutely continuous, is based on the base-3
representation of a number. That function is closely related to the set named for him, also known as his
"dust", which is generated by repeatedly removing open middle thirds starting with the closed unit interval.
He is credited with developing the continuum hypothesis and transfinite numbers. Name this mathematician
who used a diagonalization argument to show that there are more real numbers than integers.
ANSWER: Georg [GAY-awrk] (Ferdinand Ludwig Philipp) Cantor
This man proved the uniqueness of a function's representation as a trigonometric series, and he's the
second namesake of a theorem that states that any continuous function from a compact space to
another metric space is uniformly continuous. The first of Hilbert's twenty-three problems was
proposed by this man and states that there is no set whose cardinality is strictly between that of the
integers and reals. This man's namesake theorem states that for any set A, the cardinality of its power set is
larger. This man used his namesake diagonal argument to show that there are an infinite number of sets for
which a bijection cannot be created with the set of natural numbers. For 10 points, name this mathematician
who came up with the Continuum Hypothesis and created Naive Set theory.
ANSWER: Georg Cantor
This mathematician demonstrated that selecting a number from every diagonal decimal place on a list of
the rational numbers and altering it by one digit produces a real number, proving that the rational numbers
are not on a one-to-one correspondence with the real numbers. He selected the symbol aleph-null to
represent the cardinality of the integers, and proved that infinite sets could be different sizes. For 10 points,
name this nineteenth century German mathematician who founded set theory.
ANSWER: Georg Cantor
This man proved that a function can be represented as a unique series of trigonometric functions. Along
with Bernstein, this man names a theorem stating that two sets are equinumerous if each is equinumerous to
a subset of the other. This man showed that there is a bijection between the points of the unit segment and
all the points of an n-dimensional space. His namesake theorem states that the cardinality of a set is less
than that of its power set. He introduced the idea that there are no sets with cardinalities between those of
the naturals and the reals, the continuum hypothesis. For 10 points, name this German-born mathematician
who used a diagonal argument to prove the uncountability of the reals.
ANSWER: Georg Ferdinand Ludwig Phillip Cantor
Russell's paradox was developed to discredit one of this mathematician's theorems. The function named for
this person has a derivative that is Lebesgue [lah-BEG] integrable, but that integral does not equal the
change of the function. That function, which is not absolutely continuous, can be called the Devil's
staircase, and it is based on repeatedly removing middle thirds to form this mathematician's namesake set.
Name this person who showed real numbers are not countable by diagonalization and who discovered
transfinite numbers.
ANSWER: Georg Cantor
In dynamical systems, the invariant tori named for Kolmogorov, Arnold, and Moser which not
destroyed by perturbation become this invariant construct. The paths in an infinite complete binary
tree correspond to an order-preserving bijection to this construct. Smith, Volterra, and its namesake
formulated a "fat" version of this construct which has positive measure, while the original has zero
measure. This construct is a totally disconnected space, and is a fractal with dimension log base three
of two. The (*) Sierpinski carpet and Menger sponge are the two- and three-dimensional generalizations of
this construct, while a finite Cartesian product generates its namesake multi-dimensional "dust." It is
constructed by deleting the open middle thirds of a set of line segments ad infinitum. For 10 points, what is
this set discovered by the man with a namesake "diagonal argument?"
ANSWER: Cantor set
If this property's value cannot be expressed in terms of smaller values for it, as in the case of irregular
Mose-Kelly sets or non-well-ordered sets, it is called "inaccessible." For the set containing only itself and
the empty set, it is one; its value for the power set of any set with value A is given by 2A. It is usually
notated by enclosing a set in flat brackets. Its first use was Cantor's "Diagonal Argument" for the
Continuum Hypothesis, which states that the value of this property must be a nonnegative integer. For 10
points identify this property, which for the integers has the value aleph-null and is used to designate the
relative sizes of infinite sets.
ANSWER: Cardinality
This curve is the envelope formed by starting with a fixed circle and drawing all circles whose centers are
on the fixed circle and which go through a fixed point on the fixed circle. If the value k is used to generate
one of these, then its circumference is 8k. One of these gives the largest border for the Mandelbrot set, and,
similar to a cycloid, one can be generated by following a point on a circle as that circle rolls around another
circle with the same radius. This is generated by the polar equation r equals k times the quantity one minus
cosine theta. Name this type of limacon [limuh-sawn] named for its resemblance to a heart.
ANSWER: cardioid [prompt on limacon]
This shape can be generated by taking a circle and a point on its circumference, then drawing all circles that
both pass through that point and are centered on the circumference of the original circle. A large version of
this shape appears at the center of a picture of the Mandelbrot Set, and this shape is generated by following
a point on the rim of one circle as it rotates around another circle of the same size. This limacon (LIM-uhsohn) with a cusp is generated by the equation r equals one plus the cosine of theta. Identify this shape
named for its resemblance to a heart.
ANSWER: cardioid (KAR-dee-oyd) [prompt on limacon before it is mentioned]
Alford, Grandville, and Pomerance proved the conjecture there exists infinitely many of them. They
must be capable of dividing the denominator of their associated Bernoulli number. Erdos developed a
technique for constructing large ones and they must be (*) squarefree according to Korselt's criteria.
The Miller-Rabin probabilistic primality test fails for these numbers and they must possess at least three
prime factors. For 10 points-name these odd composite numbers, which are known as absolute
psuedoprimes and satisfy Fermat's little theorem for relatively prime values.
ANSWER: Carmichael numbers
The German mathematician Jungius made necessary the existence of this curve by disproving a common
assumption. A road that contains "bumps" in the shape of this curve will allow a square wheel to roll
smoothly. Though it's not a line, the ratio of the area underneath this curve to its length is constant over any
horizontal interval. Besides the plane, the surface of revolution of this curve is the only such surface with
zero mean curvature. Robert Hooke was the first to advocate the use of these curves in the construction of
arches because of their self-supporting nature. This curve can by drawn by the focus of a parabola rolling
along a straight line. For 10 points, name this curve given by the hyperbolic cosine function, the shape of a
hanging chain.
ANSWER: catenary [accept hyperbolic cosine before mentioned, I guess]
This is a roulette traced out by the focus of a parabola rolled along a straight line. The surface formed by
rotating this curve around the x-axis is a minimal surface, and can be formed by dipping two circles into a
bubble solution and drawing them apart slowly. Its equation is given by a hyperbolic cosine function and
when inverted, this curve is the ideal shape of an arch, as there is almost no shear stress between the
individual stones of the arch. The Gateway Arch is built in the shape of an inverted one of these with both
ends hung at the same height. For 10 points, name this curve formed when a piece of rope is hung freely
from two points, pulled down by nothing but its own weight.
ANSWER: catenary curve (prompt on "catenoid")
In 1697, David Gregory wrote a comprehensive treatise on this shape, and a challenge in Acta Eruditorum
to find its equation prompted solutions from Huygens (HOY-gunz), Leibniz, and Johann Bernoulli. Euler
(OY-lur) proved that this shape produces the surface of revolution with minimum area, while a road pitted
with a continuous series of these curves will allow a square wheel to roll smoothly. This curve is traced by
the focus of a parabola as it rolls along a straight line, and it is asymptotic to graphs of both exponential
growth and exponential decay. Because it eliminates shear forces at joints and causes weight to be directed
down into the ground rather than at an angle, Robert Hooke determined that this is the optimal shape of an
arch. Having general equation y equals a times the hyperbolic cosine of the quantity x over a, name this
curve that results when a cable or chain hangs under its own weight.
ANSWER: catenary [prompt on hyperbolic cosine function or cosh]
A probability distribution named after this man and sometimes Lorentz is shaped similarly to the normal
distribution, except its tails decline much less rapidly. The idea that if f of z is analytic on a simply
connected region, then the line integral along a closed curve in that region equals zero, is known as his
theorem. Equating the partial derivatives of the real and complex parts of a function yields equations named
for Riemann and him. FTP, name this French mathematician who lends his name to an inequality stating
that the dot product of two vectors is less than or equal to the product of their norms with Hermann
Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
This mathematician gives his name to a type of surface which is intersected exactly once by every
non-spacelike curve. One theory named for him states that three-dimensional convex polytopes with
congruent corresponding faces must be congruent to each other. Like Lagrange, he gives his name to
a form of the remainder in the statement of (*) Taylor's theorem. He names a weaker condition
equivalent to convergence for a real sequence but weaker for the complex numbers. He showed that the path
integral of a holomorphic function over a closed path is zero, his namesake integral theorem. For 10 points,
name this prolific French mathematician who names the statement that the absolute value of x dot y is less
than or equal to the product of the norms of x and y along with Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
The general case of Fermat's conjecture that all positive integers are the sum of at most three triangular
numbers, four square numbers, and so on was proved by this man. He found the first general proof that the
Euler characteristic of vertices - edges + faces for a convex polyhedron is 2. The first to rigorously prove
Taylor's theorem, his namesake remainder applies to Taylor series, and a more general form of the NavierStokes equations is his momentum equation. He found that if a function is holomorphic along two different
paths between points, the path integrals will be the same in his namesake integral theorem. He also found a
special case of the Holder inequality, which parallels the triangle inequality but uses products rather than
sums. For 10 points, name this French mathematician who gives his name to that inequality along with
Hermann Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
This person's integral theorem, integral formula, and argument principle, all of which use closed paths,
helped form the basis of complex analysis. This mathematician designed a distribution usually named for
him, though Hendrik Lorentz's name is sometimes included, that has no mean. His name is also used for
sequences in which the difference between terms approaches zero. Peano [PEE-ahno], Lagrange [lahGRAHNJ], and this person developed formulas for the remainder of Taylor's theorem. Name this
Frenchman who attempted to prove the theorems of calculus, sometimes credited for developing deltaepsilon proofs and limits.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
The distribution of ratios of numbers selected from a normal distribution is named after this
mathematician. If a prime p divides the order of a group, then according to a theorem due to him,
that group has an element of order p. A formula due to this mathematician gives the value of a
holomorphic function at each point inside a circle in terms of the values of the function on the
circle. If two paths have the same initial and terminal paths, then the integral over them for a
holomorphic function in that region is equal for the two paths according to an "integral theorem"
due to him. This man was the first to discover an inequality stating that two vectors's dot product
is less than the product of their magnitudes. For 10 points, identify this French mathematician
who names a notable inequality with Hermann Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
An equation that relates the product of the mass density and the velocity of a fluid to the divergence of the
stress tensor is called this man's "momentum equation." A theorem named for him states that the integral of
a holomorphic function over a closed loop is equal to zero, and he also co-names a pair of equations that
must be satisfied by the real and imaginary parts of a holomorphic function. In addition, he co-names a
relation which states that the inner product of two vectors is less than or equal to the product of their norms,
of which the triangle inequality is a special case. For 10 points, identify this mathematician who lends his
name to an inequality along with Hermann Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin Louis Cauchy
With Edouard Goursat, he names a theorem which states that the integral of a complex-valued function on a
closed contour in a simply-connected domain is zero. A generalization of his eponymous integral formula is
used to define the coefficients of the terms in a Laurent series. With Bernhard Riemann, he is the namesake
of two partial differential equations that are necessary and sufficient conditions to prove that a function is
analytic. He developed a theory of elasticity that related stress to strain by a 6 by 6 tensor known as the
stiffness matrix, effectively generalizing Hooke's law to three dimensions. FTP, name this French
mathematician who, along with Hermann Schwarz, lends his name to a central inequality of linear algebra.
ANSWER: Augustin Louis Cauchy
This mathematician gives his name to a type of surface which is intersected exactly once by every
non-spacelike curve. One theory named for him states that three-dimensional convex polytopes with
congruent corresponding faces must be congruent to each other. Like Lagrange, he gives his name to
a form of the remainder in the statement of (*) Taylor's theorem. He names a weaker condition
equivalent to convergence for a real sequence but weaker for the complex numbers. He showed that the path
integral of a holomorphic function over a closed path is zero, his namesake integral theorem. For 10 points,
name this prolific French mathematician who names the statement that the absolute value of x dot y is less
than or equal to the product of the norms of x and y along with Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
For initial value problems, he names a boundary condition that is a weighted mean of the Dirichlet
and Neumann conditions, and he names the existence and uniqueness theorem for analytical PDEs
with Kowalevski. He lends his name to some equations that provide a necessary and sufficient
condition for a differentiable function to be (*) holomorphic in an open set with Riemann. On an inner
product space, the absolute value of the inner product of x and y is less than or equal to the norm of x times
the norm of y in a statement attributed to him and a German. For 10 points, identify this French
mathematician, who names that inequality with Schwarz.
ANSWER: Agustin Louis Cauchy
Sophie Kowalevski completed a theorem involving local existence and uniqueness of analytical partial
differential equations initially proven in a special case by this man, whose name, along with that of Binet, is
also appended to a formula generalizing the multiplicativity of the determinants of two matrices. If the
partial sums of an infinite series become arbitrarily close to each other, said infinite series converges under
a test named after this man, who is also the namesake of a set of differential equations for finding
holomorphic functions in the complex plane with Riemann, as well as a theorem stating that the closed line
integral of holomorphic functions in simply connected subsets of the complex plane is equal to zero. A
theorem stating that the product of the length of two vectors is greater than their inner product is named
after, FTP, which German mathematician, along with Hermann Schwarz?
ANSWER: Augustin Louis Cauchy
A principle sometimes named for this mathematician deals with the difference between the number of
zeros and the number of poles of a meromorphic function, and is used to derive the Nyquist stability
criterion. He names a theorem generalized by Sylow's first theorem which states that, given a finite
group G and a prime p, G has an element of order p if p divides the order of G. His namesake type of
(*) surface is one which is intersected by a causal curve exactly once. He co-names the integral test for
convergence with Maclaurin. A sequence whose elements become arbitrarily close to each other is known
as his namesake type of sequence. He is the first namesake of a relation which states that absolute value of
the inner product of two vectors is less than or equal to the product of their norms. For 10 points, name this
mathematician who names an inequality with Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
For an integral with bounds of negative and positive infinity, this mathematician names the quantity
that is the limit of the integral for bounds negative and positive A, where A goes to infinity, which is
his principal value. A theorem named for this mathematician states that, in a simply connected
domain, the integral of an analytic function over a contour is zero. A metric space is termed complete
if every sequence named for this person converges in its set; those sequences have terms that become
arbitrarily close to each other as it progresses. His Cours d'Analyse introduced the delta-epsilon definition
of a limit. He is the first namesake of a statement which states that the inner product of two vectors is less
than or equal to the norm of each vector, multiplied together. For 10 points, name this French
mathematician who names an inequality with Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
This mathematician names a surface in spacetime which intersects every non-spacelike curve in that
spacetime exactly once, and a value named for him appears in the Kramers-Kronig relations. A weaker
form of Sylow's first theorem is his theorem which states that if a prime number p divides the order of G,
then G has a subgroup of order p. He names a theorem stating that the integral of a function on a simply
connected region is equal to the sum of the function's a sub negative one Laurent coefficients at each pole
in the region. Any complex differentiable function will satisfy the pair of differential equations named for
him and Riemann, and he is the first namesake of an inequality on vector spaces. For 10 points, name this
French mathematician whose namesake sequence converges in a complete space.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
Along with Euler, this man names an equation equal to the sum of i equals one to n of a-i times x to the i
times the i-the derivative of y. Completeness of a metric space depends upon whether this man's namesake
sequences converge to an element of that space. In order to be complex differentiable, a function must
satisfy equations named for this man and Riemann. Bunyakovsky, a German and this man discovered that
the inner product of two vectors is less than or equal to the product of their norms, which is a general case
of the triangle inequality. For 10 points, name this mathematician who co-names that inequality with
Hermann Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
Terms with indices that are powers of two are used in this mathematician's namesake condensation test to
check for convergence of a series. With Hadamard, this mathematician names a formula that calculates the
radius of convergence of a power series. He's not Lagrange, but he names a theorem stating that if a prime p
divides the order of a group, then the group contains an element with order p. Partial differential equations
that give a necessary and sufficient condition for a complex function to be holomorphic are named for him
and Riemann. Sequences named for this man, by definition, converge inside complete metric spaces. For 10
points, name this French mathematician who names an inequality relating the dot product of two vectors and
their magnitudes along with Hermann Schwarz.
ANSWER: Augustin-Louis Cauchy
Its first published proof used the calculus of variations, and evidence has been accumulated to show that
Gauss was aware of the implications of it much earlier. A later mathematician showed that removed the
hypothesis that a function's derivative must be continuous for its applications. This theorem can be used to
prove another of its namesake's contributions to mathematics important to complex analysis. For ten
points, give this theorem that states that the integral of a holomorphic function about a closed loop is equal
to zero.
ANSWER: Cauchy's integral theorem [or Cauchy-Goursat theorem do not accept Cauchy's integral formula]
For a Lie algebra, this term defines the set of all elements a such that, for all elements in the algebra, the
commutation operation between a and any of those elements yields zero. On a graph, this point is
sometimes named for Jordan and is the set of all vertices with minimal eccentricity. Euler lines by definition
pass through this point of the nine-point circle. In group theory, this term applies to the members of a group
that commute with every other member and is often denoted Z, while the altitudes of a triangle meet at the
point called the ortho- this. For 10 points, give this name, which, in geometry defines a position whose
distance from the edge of a circle is the radius, since it is exactly in the middle.
ANSWER: center
The rate at which the operation implied by this statement occurs is given by the Berry-Esseen theorem. Paul
Levy proved a version of this statement using the technique of characteristic functions borrowed from
Poincare, while various local proofs of it were given by Richard von Mises. A version of this statement is
named after Lyapunov and requires the satisfaction of his namesake conditions, while a weaker condition
than Lyapunov's is due to Lindeberg. The Edgeworth expansion was developed as an improvement of this
statement, the proof of which is similar to the proof of the law of large numbers. For ten points, identify this
theorem which holds that the distribution of the average of a set of arbitrarily distributed variables
converges to the normal distribution.
ANSWER: central limit theorem
This can be proven using Levy's continuity theorem. It holds under Lindeberg's condition, which does not
require different variables to be identically distributed, and it also holds under the Lyapunov [LYAH-poonof] condition. The de Moivre-Laplace [de-MOV lah-PLAHS] theorem specifically addresses the case of a
binomial distribution with fixed probability. Name this theorem that predicts a normal distribution.
ANSWER: central limit theorem
The amount of error created by applying this theorem to intermediate values is the subject of the
Berry-Esseen theorem. The Cramer-Wold theorem can be used to generalize this in a multivariate manner.
The de Moivre-Laplace theorem is a special case of this. One statement of this is named for Feller and
Lindeberg and this is true when Lyapunov's condition holds. A rule of thumb resulting from this is that one
should have a minimum of 30 in a sample when the population is non-Gaussian. When sampling, this
theorem implies a distribution with standard deviation sigma over square root n. For 10 points, name this
theorem that implies as sample sizes get larger, the distribution of sample means approaches a normal
distribution.
ANSWER: central limit theorem
Pappus- theorem is sometimes named for this point because it uses the distance traveled by this point to find
a volume or surface area. The location of this point can be found by averaging the coordinates of the
vertices of the shape it is associated with. This point is always twice as far from the orthocenter as it is from
the circumcenter. For a shape of uniform density, this point is equivalent to the barycenter or the center of
mass. Name this intersection of the three medians of a triangle.
ANSWER: .centroid (prompt on "center of mass", "center of gravity", or "barycenter")
This point is collinear with the Nagel Point, incenter, and Spieker center. It is always twice as far from the
orthocenter as from the circumcenter, and it is collinear with those points together with the nine-point circle
center. Its barycentric coordinates never change, and it always is located in the interior of the triangle. This
point is a point of concurrency of three cevians (CHAY-vee-uns), and the ratio of each of the smaller
segments of those cevians to point of concurrency is 2 to 1. If a triangle is made of uniform density, this
point is located at the center of mass. Name this point of intersection of the medians of a triangle.
ANSWER: centroids [prompt on center of mass; prompt on center of gravity]
One form of this is used to find derivatives of functions that depend on dependent variables, and this is
generalized by Faa di Bruno's formula. This is also used to justify the standard method of implicit
differentiation, which involves multiplying terms by y prime when they are generated by taking a derivative
with respect to y. Like the power rule, this can be combined with the product rule to prove the quotient rule,
and it is used to find derivatives of composite functions. Name this rule which instructs mathematicians to
multiply by the derivative of the inside function when taking a derivative.
ANSWER: chain rule (accept implicit differentiation or implicit derivative before it is mentioned, prompt "derivative")
This phenomenon is not possible in planar, finite, continuous dynamics due to the Poincare-Bendixson
theorem. Given mixing and density properties, it corresponds to a Lyapunov exponent with positive real
part because it is typified by exponential divergence in time of initially close trajectories. The long-time
behavior of all trajectories in systems exhibiting this behavior is typified by fractals to which all points in
state space converge, termed strange attractors. Partially arising due to the butterfly effect, for 10 points,
name this type of behavior which is deterministic but difficult to predict, in contrast with stochastic
behavior.
ANSWER: deterministic chaos [prompt on butterfly effect or clear-knowledge equivalents before it's mentioned]
Systems are generally tested for this property by calculating the largest Lyapunov exponent and
seeing if it is positive. One model exhibits this property as its parameter passes 3.57; the ratio of its
period-doubling intervals approaches the (*) Feigenbaum constant. Systems exhibiting this phenomenon
include the nonlinear damping present in the van der Pol oscillator, as well as the double pendulum and the
logistic map. This theory was largely inspired by weather simulations performed by Edward Lorenz. For 10
points, name this theory that studies systems that are highly sensitive to initial conditions.
ANSWER: chaos theory
An example of a system that exhibits this behavior is created by mapping a square onto itself by
squishing it, stretching it, and folding it back on itself; that is the Smale Horseshoe. Systems of this
type have dense periodic orbits and undergo topological mixing. The Henon map and Lorenz map
exhibit this behavior, and it commonly arises when the maximal Lyapunov exponent is positive. A
simple physical example of a system exhibiting it is the (*) double pendulum. Systems with this behavior
often have strange attractors, and they are by definition deterministic and highly sensitive to initial
conditions. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which a dynamical system exhibits unpredictable
behaviors, which is exemplified by the butterfly effect.
ANSWER: chaos [or word forms like chaotic or chaotic behavior; accept chaos theory]
This phenomenon can be found in a system governed by a set of three differential equations that is
topologically defined as the Cartesian product of a ribbon with the Cantor set. This phenomenon is found in
the Rossler System, and it arises when a fixed point of a dynamical system loses stability, sometimes known
as the Hopf Bifurcation. These systems are characterized by period doubling and often occur when values
take on the Feigenbaum constants. Examples of this type of system include the Lorenz water wheel, as well
as pendulum attached to another pendulum. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which systems are
deterministic but appear to behave randomly over time, exemplified by the butterfly effect.
ANSWER: deterministic chaos
A well-known Axiom A diffeomorphism in this field of study is the Smale horseshoe. It studies systems
with a positive value for the Lyapunov exponent, and those exhibiting period-doubling bifurcations
characterized by the Feigenbaum constants. This theory features fractal entities called strange attractors,
such as one named after Edward Lorenz, who pioneered this field of math by concluding that the weather is
nearly impossible to predict accurately due to its sensitivity to initial conditions. For 10 points, name this
theory studying deterministic but seemingly random systems exhibiting the "butterfly effect."
ANSWER: chaos theory or nonlinear dynamical systems
One example of the escape type of these things is octal 033 and prefixes escape sequences; the
backslash is another example often used in programming languages. These things are the smallest possible
match for a regular expression. Their control examples include carriage return and line feed. Types of
encodings for them include UTF-8 and ASCII. An array of these things constitutes a string in C. For 10
points, name these things declared with the keyword char in C.
ANSWER: characters
For a ring, this value is the number of times you have to add the multiplicative identity to get the
additive identity. It's not "minimal," but this adjective describes an object that is the product of all invariant
factors of a Jordan normal form. This term also denotes a type of curve along which a partial differential
equation becomes an ordinary differential equation and is solvable. The Cayley-Hamilton theorem concerns
solutions to a polynomial described by this adjective, which has zeroes at the eigenvalues of an associated
matrix. This word also denotes a quantity computed by the formula vertices minus edges plus faces. For 10
points, give this mathematical term that denotes a quantity that is two for any convex polyhedron and is
named for Euler.
ANSWER: characteristic [or characteristic polynomial; or Euler characteristic; or characteristic curve]
This function can be defined as the product of elementary divisors of its associated map. The Jordan
canonical form exists if this function splits completely over the base field. This function annihilates its
associated map, by the (*) Cayley-Hamilton theorem. This function's zeroes lie on the unit circle for a
unitary map. If the geometric multiplicity is less than the algebraic multiplicity of one of this function's
zeroes, then the associated map is not diagonalizable. This function's constant term is the determinant. This
function can be computed by taking the determinant of its associated map minus Lambda*I. For 10 points, name this
polynomial whose roots are the eigenvalues of its associated linear map.
ANSWER: characteristic polynomial [or characteristic equation]
Restricting that the subject of this statement be unimodal yields a similar one named for Vysochanski
and Petunin, which introduces an additional 4/9 factor. This statement can be proven by defining Y
to be x minus mu quantity squared and a to be sigma-k quantity squared and then applying (*)
Markov's inequality. When this statement is applied to a sample mean, it can be used to prove the law of
large numbers. For 10 points, name this statement which, in one phrasing states that posits that all values in
a probability distribution are a limited distance from its mean.
ANSWER: Chebyshev's inequality [or equation or theorem]
A specific case of this theorem adds a factor of four-ninths and called the Vysochanski-Petunin
theorem. One result of this name states that n times the sum over all k of a sub k times b sub k is
equal to or greater than the product of the sum of a_k times the sum of b sub k A simple way to
prove this theorem involves applying Markov's inequality to the expected value of sigma-sub-k. This
theorem is used to prove the law of large numbers when applied to a sample mean, and it is usually stated in
terms of the value one minus one over k squared. For 10 points, name this theorem which gives the
maximum number of values that are a certain number of standard deviations away from the mean.
ANSWER: Chebyshev's inequality
This statement can be proven using Markov's inequality, and it can be used to prove the weak law of large
numbers and Kolmogorov's inequality. Markov's inequality states that the probability of a positive random
variable exceeding a given value is less than or equal to the expected value of the random variable divided
by the given value, and Kolmogorov's inequality limits the sum of random variables. One consequence of
this theorem is that the difference between the mean and median of a set of numbers is less than the standard
deviation. Name this statement that the probability that the distance from a number in a distribution to the
expected value is greater than k standard deviations is always less than or equal to one over k squared.
ANSWER: Chebyshev's inequality [or Chebyshev's theorem]
Its cumulative distribution function is the ratio of two gamma distributions, the upper of which is an
integral from zero to x over 2. An extra factor of one-half is multiplied before squaring in its
namesake statistic, a method named for Yates. The quotient of two of these lead to the F distribution
used in ANOVA, and the product of (*) row and column totals over the grand total for a contingency
table is used in a test using it invented by Pearson. Defined as the sum of the squares of k normal random
variables with unit variance, FTP, name this distribution whose statistic is used for a goodness-of-fit test, a
certain exponentiation of a Greek letter.
ANSWER: chi-square
Cryptographic applications of this theorem include the Mignotte and Asmuth-Bloom secret sharing
schemes. Godel derived his Beta function using this theorem. Along with Euler's Theorem, the
Pohlig-Hellman algorithm primarily uses this statement in order to compute discrete logarithms. It
can be used to prove that the (*) totient function preserves products. An isomorphism between a quotient
ring and a product of quotient rings can be shown to exist using an extension of this theorem. Supposedly
used by ancient generals to count the number of soldiers in an army, this theorem states that there exists a
solution to a set congruence relations if the moduli are all positive integers and are pairwise coprime. For 10
points, name this theorem which was supposedly first proposed in the third century C.E. by Sun Tzu.
ANSWER: Chinese Remainder Theorem [prompt on CRT]
This result can be applied to solve the Hermite interpolation problem by extending it to a P-I-D.
Mignotte and Asmuth-Bloom both name secret sharing schemes that rely on this result, and one
extension of this result is used to show that the direct product of a series of quotient rings is
isomorphic to R over the intersection of the ideals used to generate the quotient rings. All solutions
found via this result, which is often used alongside the Extended (*) Euclidean algorithm, are congruent
modulo the least common multiple of the pairwise coprime dividends. This theorem is often used to solve
systems of simultaneous congruences. For 10 points, name this theorem from number theory which can find
a number n given a series of remainders when n is divided by different integers.
ANSWER: Chinese Remainder Theorem
A mapping that is amusingly called the Ruritanian exists when re-indexed data generated from this
result is used in the Good-Thomas version of the Fast Fourier Transform. A corollary to this result
states that for a collection of positive integers, and an integer k, a ring isomorphism exists over the
ring of integers defined by k. This theorem forms the basis of quickly computing a public key in
multiword cryptography. (*) Diophantine equations that can be solved using Euclid's algorithm may be
equivalently solved by use of this result. One of the requirements for this theorem is that all of the moduli
be pairwise coprime. This theorem guarantees the existence of a solution to a system of linear congruences.
For 10 points, name this theorem first proved by Sun Tzu.
ANSWER: Chinese Remainder Theorem
A consequence of it is the Boolean Prime Ideal Theorem, and Skolem used it to correct Lowenheim's
Theorem on first-order models. It can be equated to one formulation of Konig's theorem, which relates the
cardinality of certain sums to products, and it is used to decompose a hollow unit sphere into two identical
spheres in the proof of the Banach-Tarski paradox. Equivalent to saying a partially ordered set in which
every chain is bounded has a maximal element, it is independent of Zermelo-Frankel set theory. For 10
points, identify this equivalent to the well-ordering principle and Zorn's Lemma, which states that one can
pick an element from each of an infinite collection of sets.
ANSWER: The Axiom of Choice [accept Zorn's Lemma or the well-ordering principle before each is read]
The Goodman-Myhill theorem shows that this result is enough to prove the law of the
excluded middle. The proof of the Cantor-Bernstein-Schroeder theorem notably does not rely on
this result. It is used to prove a theorem stating that no first-order theory can control the
cardinality of their infinite models, which is the Lowenstein-Skolem theorem. Equivalent to the
statement that every vector space has a basis, this result plus ZF was shown by Paul Cohen to be
independent of the continuum hypothesis. Often stated as the idea that the Cartesian product of a
collection of non-empty sets is non-empty, this statement is equivalent to the idea that every nonempty
set of positive integers has a least element, which is called the well-ordering principle. For
10 points, name this statement from mathematics, which allows any set to have some function to
pick elements of the set.
ANSWER: axiom of choice [or Zorn's lemma; or well-ordering principle until it is read]
Elliot Mendelson proved the independence of a weak form of this statement and a consequence of it is
Vitali's theorem. A proof using this statement involves showing that the intersection of all towers is a chain.
This statement is used in proving the Lowenheim-Skolem theorem by implying the existence of a function
that maps M to the n to M. Zermelo first used it to prove a theorem that for every set there is some relation
such that every subset of that set has a least element. The continuum hypothesis was shown to be
independent of ZFC plus this statement by Paul Cohen, and it is equivalent to Zorn's Lemma and the wellordering principle. For 10 points, name this set-theoretic axiom that informally states that we can come up
with a function that will pick things for us.
ANSWER: axiom of choice [accept Zorn's lemma or well ordering principle before mention]
Holditch's Theorem generates a second shape by sliding around one of these, and Bertrand's [bair-trawn-z]
problem is about the distribution of the lengths of one of these compared to a triangle's sides. When an
angle is bisected to create three of these, the sum of the lengths of the outside two equals twice the cosine of
the half angle times the length of the middle one in the lemma named for three of these. When one of these
splits another segment, part of the other segment is called a sagitta. One of these splits a sector into an
isosceles triangle and a circular segment. The length of one of them can be calculated using the Pythagorean
theorem given the lengths of an apothem [uh-PAH-thum] and a radius. Name these segments that connect
two points on a shape, particularly one that has two endpoints on a circle.
ANSWER: chords [prompt on segment]
If one of these segments is the angle bisector between two others, then the sum of the lengths of the original
two is equal to twice the middle one times the cosine of the angle between the middle segment and either of
the two originals. The Butterfly Theorem involves one of these segments that is bisected by two others. The
perpendicular distance from a shape to this segment is called a
sagitta, and this segment divides a sector into an isosceles triangle and a circular segment. One of these
segments is split in two pieces when using the power theorem inside a circle. Give the name for a
segment connecting two points on a circle.
ANSWER: chord
A Reuleaux triangle is formed when three of these intersect. This object is formed by the parametric
equations x equals a-cosine-t and y equals a-sine-t. This object is essentially a subtype of a certain conic
section with an eccentricity of zero and two foci in the same location. A line linking two points on this
shape is a chord, while a section of its only side is called an arc. For 10 points, name this shape, which has a
radius, circumference, and center.
ANSWER: circle [prompt on ellipse or oval]
The theorem for these shapes named after Descartes is used to generate the inner and outer Soddy ones. A
family of these shapes forms the solution to the differential equation y prime equals negative x over y, and
Apollonius demonstrated that this shape is formed by the locus of points k times as distant from one fixed
point as they are from another. The osculating type is used to find the curvature of paths at a point, and in
Ancient Greece many attempted the impossible problem of drawing a square with the same area as one. In
polar coordinates, this is the graph of r equals one, whose coordinates are cosine of theta comma sine of
theta and which is called the "unit" example of these figures. This is also generated by the equation x
squared plus y squared equals r squared. Name these two-dimensional shapes with a fixed radius.
ANSWER: circles
Carl Gauss studied how many lattice points are inside of these shapes. An annulus is the region
between two of these shapes. For any triangle, the foot of each altitude, the midpoint from each
vertex to the orthocenter, and the midpoint of each side always lie on one of these figures, which is
known as the "nine-point" example. The trigonometric functions are defined on the "unit" example
of this shape, which is generated by the equation x2 + y2 = 1 ["x squared plus y squared equals one"].
Segments connecting points on this shape are called chords. Name this shape with a constant radius.
ANSWER: circle(s)
The solution to the brachistochrone (BRAH-kih-stoh-crone) problem is a curve formed by rotation of
this shape. The area between two of these shapes forms an annulus (AH-nuh-luhs). A triangle's midpoints,
altitudes and orthocenter can be used to construct the "nine point" variant of this shape. Rotating this shape
around an axis forms a torus. This shape is a conic section with an eccentricity of zero. For 10 points, name
this shape that is the set of all points equidistant from the center.
ANSWER: circle
The two Villarceau ones are formed by cutting a torus diagonally through the center at an angle, and
Reuleaux polygons are formed from the intersections of these entities. This shape is the equality case
of the isoperimetric inequality, and points on the perimeter of these objects trace out cycloids. This
shape has constant (*) curvature and an eccentricity of zero, and can be described parametrically using
sines and cosines. Given a specified length of fencing, this shape encloses the maximum area. When they
are centered at the origin, they are described by the equation x squared plus y squared equals r squared. For
10 points, name this two-dimensional geometric shape with constant radius.
ANSWER: circles
A theorem of Koebe states that all finite simple planar graphs can be represented by tangencies of these
objects. An Apollonian gasket is a fractal made up of these objects. The midpoints of the sides of a triangle
and the feet of its altitudes all lie on one of these objects named for Feuerbach. A cycloid is traced by a
point on this shape as it moves along a line. For shapes with a (*) fixed perimeter, this shape maximizes
area. These shapes are described by the polar equation r equals cosine theta and by r equals a constant. For
ten points, name this shape consisting of all points at a given distance from its center.
ANSWER: circle
The type of this shape that is tangent to a curve at a point has the same curvature as that curve at that point
and lies on the inner side of that curve is referred to as an "osculating" one of these shapes. A curve that is
both a brachistochrone and a tautochrone is generated using this shape. A torus is be generated by revolving
this shape about an axis in three-dimensional space, a cycloid is generated by rolling this shape, and a
sphere is generated by rotating this shape. For 10 points, name this shape, the area of which is equal to pi
times its radius squared.
ANSWER: a circle
In the Steinhaus-Moser notation, the number two with a pentagon or this shape around it is equal to two
hundred fifty-six. Gershgorin's theorem uses this shape to estimate matrix eigenvalues, and the Cesaro
equation for this shape is kappa equals one over alpha. Four of these shapes, including two named for
Villarceau [vee-LAR-so], can be drawn through a torus. This shape has an eccentricity of zero, and
Ferdinand Lindemann proved that squaring this shape was impossible. For 10 points, name this shape
whose area is pi times the radius squared.
ANSWER: circles
Families of these geometric figures that are orthogonal to one another are named for Apollonius
of Perga. These figures can be defined as the locus of points whose distance from a pair of points
holds to a fixed ratio. Ptolemy's theorem relates the length of the sides of a quadrilateral inscribed in
one of these figures. One of these that passes through the midpoints and feet of the altitudes of a
triangle is known as the (*) nine-point one. The Law of Sines can be proven by showing that every
triangle can be circumscribed by one of these figures. These figures arise when cutting a cone with a plane
parallel to the base, and they have zero eccentricity. For 10 points, name this shape whose circumference is
pi times its diameter.
ANSWER: circles
Two similar triangles are drawn inside one of these shapes in the Butterfly Theorem. An angle whose rays
both intersect this shape twice is subject to the Secant-Secant Theorem, and the power of a point depends
on its location relative to the center of one of these shapes. This shape is generated in polar coordinates by
setting the value of r equal to a constant. Name this locus [LOE-kus] of all points in a plane a fixed distance
from a fixed point, a shape whose area can be found by multiplying pi times radius squared.
ANSWER: circle
Clifford's theorem is be used to show that an infinite set of these with common intersection points can be
constructed given four of these which intersect at one point. Villarceau showed that given an arbitrary point
on a torus, four of these can be drawn passing through that point. Apollonius defined these objects as the set
of points which have a constant ratio for distances to two fixed points, while Feuerbach's theorem describes
one which passes through nine important points on a triangle. Represented by the parametric equations x = a
cos t and y = a sin t in Cartesian space, for 10 points, identify these geometric structures whose
circumference is given by the formula 2 pi R.
ANSWER: circles [do not accept or prompt on ellipses]
Casey's Theorems deals with the tangents of five of these. Feuerbach's theorem involves the
nine-point one. A great one is a straight line in (*) gnomonic projection. This shape results from the
intersection of a cone and a plane perpendicular to the symmetry of the cone. A more common equation for
it is x squared plus y squared equals r squared, where r is the radius. For 10 points, name this shape
consisting of points that are equidistant from the center, whose circumference is given by 2 pi r.
ANSWER: circle
The osculating type of this figure for a curve at point P has the same tangent and kappa as that curve
at that point. The curve that is the solution to the brachistochrone problem is created using this
figure. This figure has parametric equations x equal to a times cosine of t and y equal to a sine of t.
Rotation of it around a central axis forms a torus. This figure is a (*) conic section with eccentricity
zero and is a specific case of an ellipse that has equal major and minor axes. For 10 points, name this figure
that consists of all the points on a plane equidistant from a center point.
ANSWER: circle
This curve can be considered the limit of an apeirogon in Euclidian geometry. A Reuleaux triangle is
formed by the mutual intersection of three of these objects, and Apollonius's problem concerns their
mutual tangency. In hyperbolic geometry, its length is equal to two pi times sinh ["cinch"] r. The
Cesaro equation for this curve is k equals one over a, meaning it is the only curve with constant finite
(*) curvature at all points. It is the conic section with zero eccentricity formed by a plane perpendicular to
the cone's axis of symmetry. Its equation can be given parametrically by x equals A cosine t and y equals A
sine t. For 10 points, name this figure which is the locus of all points the same distance from the center,
whose "unit" variety has radius 1.
ANSWER: circle
The Reuleaux triangle is formed from the intersection of three of these objects. It is given by the
parametric functions x equals a cosine t and y equals a sine t, and in polar coordinates it is given by the
equation r equals a. It can be formed by the intersection of a cone and a plane parallel to the base of the
cone. For 10 points, give this two-dimensional geometric object with area proportional to the square of its
radius.
ANSWER: circle
These objects are the fibers in the Hopf fibration of a four-dimensional sphere. The fundamental group
of these objects is isomorphic to the integers under addition. Descartes- theorem gives a quadratic
relation between the sizes of four of these objects. A torus is the Cartesian product of two of these
entities. Calculus of variations can prove that these shapes enclose the maximal area for a given
perimeter. An ellipse is one of these figures if its eccentricity is zero, which implies that these figures
have equal major and minor axes. For 10 points, identify these two-dimensional figures which are the set
of all points located exactly a certain distance from another one, whose area equals pi-r-squared.
ANSWER: circles
The movement of one of these shapes along a line generates the solution to the brachistochrone problem.
These shapes have an eccentricity of 0, and rotating one of these about an outside axis yields a torus.
Chords are line segments within, and secants are lines through, two points on this shape, whose "unit" type
is graphed by "x squared plus y squared equals 1". For 10 points, name this shape whose points are all
equidistant from the center, which have a radius and a circumference.
ANSWER: circles
This figure is homeomorphic to the one-point compactification of the real numbers. One of these figures
that intersects the midpoints of all the sides and the feet of all the altitudes of a triangle is called the "ninepoint" one. Because the roots of unity fall on this figure, it can be parametrized by the sine and cosine
functions. This figure maximizes the ratio of area to perimeter. In polar coordinates, it can be defined by the
equation r equals a constant. The ability to draw one of these with any center and any size was one of
Euclid's postulates. For 10 points, name this conic section with zero eccentricity, in which all points on it
are equidistant from its center.
ANSWER: circle [accept nine-point circle]
The equation for this shape in polar coordinates is R of theta equals A. A cycloid is the curve created by
the path of a point on one of these shapes moving in a straight line. Venn diagrams portray intersections of
these shapes, whose area equals pi times R squared. For 10 points, name this shape created by finding all
points of an equal distance from the center.
ANSWER: circles
The symmetry group of this figure is O(2,R) ("oh two R"). It has constant finite curvature, and the powerof-a-point theorem relates the lengths of certain line segments constructed relative to a point and one of
these figures. The shortest path between two points on a sphere is along a "great" one of these. These conic
sections with eccentricity 0 can be graphed parametrically as "x equals r cosine theta" and "y equals r sine
theta," or in polar coordinates as "r equals a constant." The equation "x squared plus y squared equals 1"
describes the "unit" one of these. For 10 points, name this figure consisting of points equidistant from the
center.
ANSWER: circles
The relationship between these entities can be described as an aggregation, association, or composition.
Those relationships can be seen in a UML diagram. In Java, anonymous ones don't have names. Abstract
ones cannot be instantiated and these can implement an interface. "Sub" ones are declared using the Java
keyword "extends." The keywords "protected," "private," and "public" are used to declare their methods
and variables. For 10 points, name these constructs that when instantiated are objects.
ANSWER: classes [or objects before "anonymous"]
A subset of a Polish space with this property has countably many isolated points by the Cantor-Bendixson
theorem. A set with this property each of whose points is an accumulation point is called perfect; in general,
sets with this property contain all of their accumulation points. Subsets of Euclidian space that are bounded
and compact necessarily have this property by the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem. A Set with this property
contains all points with neighborhoods partly in the set, and so also contains points with neighborhoods
partly inside and partly outside; such points are on the boundaries of the set. For 10 points, name this
property exemplified by a range of real numbers including end values and possessed by sets whose
complements are open.
ANSWER: closed (accept word forms like closure)
This property with respect to concatenation results from the Kleene operator. In topology, intersections of
sets of this type are always of this type, but only finite unions of these sets are of this type. A set has this
property if every convergent sequence from the set has its limit in the set. The complex numbers have the
algebraic variety of this property since every complex polynomial has a complex root. The Extreme Value
Theorem states that continuous functions have maxima if their domains are bounded intervals with this
property, and intervals with this property are represented using square brackets. For ten points, identify this
type of set whose complement is open.
ANSWER: closedness (accept word forms like closure)
In the Borel hierarchy, sets with this property correspond to the class denoted by a pi with superscript zero
and subscript 1. The diagonal set, defined as a subset of the product space of X with itself, has this property
if and only if X is Hausdorff. A sequence of real valued continuous functions defined on a finite bounded
interval with this property has a uniformly convergent subsequence, according to the Arzela-Ascoli
theorem. Cantor's intersection theorem begins by considering a decreasing sequence of nonempty, bounded
sets with this property. A subspace is compact if and only if it is bounded and has this property according to
the Heine-Borel theorem. The Cantor set has this property because it contains only boundary points. For 10
points, name this property of sets that have an open complement.
ANSWER: closure [or closed]
With the usual metric, a set is compact if and only if the set is bounded and has this property, according to
the Heine-Borel theorem. If a set has this property, then its complement consists entirely of interior points,
and sets of this type contain all of their accumulation points. If a set has this property under a particular
operation, then the result of that operation on two elements of the set produces an element of the set.
Intervals with this property contain their boundary points. Name this property of sets that, for intervals, is
denoted with square brackets.
ANSWER: closure [or closed, etc.]
Proving that a space is a vector subspace requires proving that it has this property. The transitive type of
this property determines whether any path exists between graph vertices. An interval with this property
contains its limit points, which means that it includes both of its endpoints. This property refers to an
operation on a set if every result of the operation is in the set. Name this property that does not hold for
subtraction of positive numbers because the difference of two positive numbers can be negative.
ANSWER: closed or closure
In the Euclidean metric, compactness is equivalent to being bounded and having this property, which is
known as the Heine-Borel theorem. Sets with this property retain it under intersection with other such sets
even if the number of sets intersected is uncountable. There exists a neighborhood around every point
outside a set of this type that is disjoint from this set, and sets with this property can be defined as
containing all of their limit points. An interval with this property contains a maximum and minimum and in
interval notation is denoted with square brackets. Name this property possessed by sets that contain their
own boundary and whose complements are open.
ANSWER: topological closure [or closed set, etc.; do not accept "algebraic closure"]
Operators that follow this property are known as hull operators and must be extensive, non-decreasing, and
idempotent. Sets with this property must contain all of their limit points, or boundary points. The operation
subtraction follows this property for real numbers but not for positive real numbers. The square root
function does not have this property for rational numbers because some of its outputs are irrational or
imaginary. Name this property requiring an operation to give a result taken from the same set as its inputs.
ANSWER: (topological or algebraic) closure [accept closed]
A 4 by 4 Cayley-Menger determinant is equal to zero when points have this property. Pascal's Theorem
guarantees that the intersections of opposite sides of a hexagon inscribed in a conic section have this
property. Paul Erdos showed that, if n is prime, then 2n points can be placed on an n by n grid with no three
having this property. Perfectly correlated data have this property, in which case their R squared value is
equal to one. The two sides of the triangle inequality are equal when its three input points have this
property, in which cases that triangle has area zero. For ten points, name this property, possessed by every
pair of points, of lying on a common line.
ANSWER: collinearity
Two of these characters test whether one object in Haskell has the type of another. In XML, it
separates a namespace from an element name, while it acts as a separator between keys and their
values in JSON ["Jason"]. In C-like languages, this character follows block labels as well as each case
of a switch statement; it also separates the second and third arguments to the ternary operator used
for compact if-then-else statements. In CSS, it separates property names from their values, such as
font-size, then this character, then 12pt ["twelve P T"]. Name this character that, in URLs, often
goes between the protocol and two slashes.
ANSWER: colon [do not accept or prompt on "semicolon"]
One transformation between two related encodings of this type of data multiplies the cube root of a
ratio of inputs by 116 and then subtracts 16. They are contained in McAdam ellipses. Values of this
are interpolated by means of I values in the Gouraud algorithm. One way to encode these is CIE
XYZ, Ways of expressing them are often visualized through cubes, cones, and (*) circles. When
reproducing these, one of their components is changed through gamma correction. They are encoded
through three bytes written as a six digit hexadecimal representation in applications like web-pages.
Encodings of this can be additive or subtractive and the two most common encodings are HSV and RGB.
For 10 points, name this type of data, examples of which include celadon, cyan, and purple.
ANSWER: colors
The sum from i equals zero to j of this operation for an input of i applied to n plus i elements is
equal to this operation for an input of j applied to n plus j plus one elements, according to the hockey
stick, or Christmas stocking, theorem. Three instances of this operation are used to define the
probability mass function for the hypergeometric distribution. A symmetrical triangular array of
numbers computed using this operation is (*) Pascal's triangle, whose rows are the binomial coefficients.
This operation is normally written with parentheses around an n and a k, written on two rows, and is called
"n choose k". For 10 points, name this operation for computing the number of ways to choose elements
from a set where order does not matter, not to be confused with permutations.
ANSWER: k-combinations [or n choose k until it is read; or other variables in place of "k", such as "r"]
This operation is used three times in the hypergeometric distribution's mass function, which is a discrete
probability distribution without replacement. When all of the possible outputs of this function whose inputs
are identical sums are added, the result is a number from the Fibonacci sequence, and when all of the
possible outputs of this operation are added together using the same first input, the sum is equal to two
raised to the power of that input. All of the outputs from this function are easily arranged to form Pascal's
Triangle. This operation determines how many ways a number of items can be selected from a group if
order does not matter. Name this operation often contrasted with permutation.
ANSWER: binomial combinations [accept binomial choose function or word forms thereof]
In HTML, a tag using an exclamation point, followed by several hyphens, serves this purpose. Docstrings
serve the same purpose as this type of text. In C++, text serving this purpose is set off by a slash and an
asterisk. A common debugging technique is doing this "out" to an line of code to determine what is
causing the error, as compilers do not attempt to run this code. For 15 points, name these fragments of code
often used as notes by programmers.
ANSWER: comments [or commenting]
Cohen-Macaulay rings are noetherian local rings with this property with Krull dimension equal to
their depth, and only rings with this property have a single nilradical. Diagrams named for this
property are studied in (*) category theory. Groups whose product has this property are called abelian.
This property does not hold for matrix multiplication or for subtraction. For 10 points, name this property of
an operation such that the order of the operands does not change the result, which holds for addition
because x plus y equals y plus x.
ANSWER: commutativity
One operator named for this property is used in the general definition of Heisenberg Uncertainty
Principle, which relies on the fact that this property does not apply to position and momentum operators.
Hilbert names rings that have this property, while groups that exhibit this property are called Abelian. This
property notably does not hold for multiplication of matrices, or division. For 10 points, name this
mathematical property that states that the order an operation is performed on two numbers is irrelevant.
ANSWER: commutative or commutativity
This property is the defining characteristic of an Abelian [uh-BEE-lee-un] group. Composition of
functions and matrix multiplication do not generally have this property. Subtraction also does (*) not
have this property because 8 minus 5 is 3, but 5 minus 8 is negative 3. For 10 points, name this property that
states a+b=b+a ["a plus b equals b plus a"], that is, that swapping the order of the numbers does not change
the result.
ANSWER: commutative property or commutativity
A monoid with the cancellation property and this property can be embedded into a group via the
Grothendieck construction. If two linear transformations are diagonalizable and have this property,
then they share an eigenspace. Every finite division ring has this property, and a ring without this
property may have unequal left and right (*) ideals. Every simple group with this property has prime
order, and the smallest group without this property is the symmetric group S3. Every subgroup is normal for
groups with this property, which are known as abelian. For 10 points, identify this property that requires A
plus B equal B plus A for addition.
ANSWER: commutativity [or commutative; prompt on abelian until it is read]
In quantum mechanics, certain pairs of linear operators that lack this property, such as position and
momentum, are said to be complementary. Groups which have an operation for which this property holds
are called abelian. It generally does not hold for matrix (*) multiplication, division, or subtraction, while it
does hold for the dot product, and holds along with the associative property for addition and multiplication.
For 10 points, name this mathematical property which states that changing the order of operands does not
change the result of a binary operation, or that a times b equals b times a.
ANSWER: commutative property [or commutativity, commute, or other word forms]
An integral domain is a ring with no zero divisors that has this property. Division algebras where this holds
are fields. The symmetric group S3 is the smallest group where this doesn't hold, and all cyclic groups have
this property. Unlike addition and multiplication in fields, groups do not necessarily have this property, and
when this holds for a group it is called abelian. Matrix multiplication does not have this property nor does
subtraction of real numbers which has the anti-form of this property, but it holds for a related operation. For
10 points, name this property that when applied to addition means that A + B = B + A.
ANSWER: commutative [accept word forms; accept abelian before mentioned]
Though this property does not hold for all groups, when it does hold all subgroups are normal. Though this
property does not always hold for multiplication in a ring, it does always hold for addition. Groups with this
property are called abelian (uh-BEEL-yun). The opposite, or anti, of this property holds for cross products,
and this property does not hold for matrix multiplication. When this property holds, reversing the order of
the inputs into a binary operation has no impact on the
output. Name this property, one version of which states that x plus y equals y plus x.
ANSWER: commutative (accept abelian before mentioned)
A technique named for Wallman is used to impart this property to T1 spaces, and that method is the
same as one named for Stone and Cech for normal spaces. The Arzela-Ascoli theorem gives
conditions for whether continuous functions from a metric space with this property preserve it and
the product of spaces with this property retains this property under (*) Tychonoff's theorem. A subset
of n-space retains it if any infinite subset has at least one accumulation point in the set, and it is equivalent
to being closed and bounded under the Heine-Borel theorem. For 10 points, name this property of
topological spaces, defined as each open cover having a finite subcover.
ANSWER: Compactness or any equivalent word forms
Lindstrom's theorem states that first-order logic is the strongest logic having both this property and
satisfying the Lowenheim-Skolem property. A method for finding a Hausdorff space with this property
containing a given space is named for Stone and Cech. Equicontinuity is the main condition for determining
whether a family of functions has this property by the Arzela-Ascoli theorem. Using the axiom of choice, it
can be shown that an arbitrary product of spaces with this property has this property, a result known as
Tychonoff's theorem. In Euclidean space, being closed and bounded is sufficient to show, according to the
Heine-Borel theorem, that a set has this property. For 10 points, identify this property which holds of a set
on which every open cover has a finite subcover.
ANSWER: compactness
Three different types of this property are equivalent on a Banach space according to the Eberlein-
Smulian theorem. A method of imparting this property to a space by adjoining a single point to it is
called the Alexandroff extension. Specific varieties of this property include the "limit point" variety
and the "sequential" variety. A family of functions will not have this property without being (*)
equicontinuous. The extreme value theorem follows from the fact that this property is preserved by
continuous functions. This property, which is the subject of the Arzela-Ascoli theorem, is preserved under
products according to Tychonoff's theorem. A set on which every open cover has a finite subcover
possesses this property. For 10 points, name this property possessed by a set which is closed and bounded,
by the Heine-Borel theorem.
ANSWER: compactness [accept weak compactness before "Alexandroff"]
One optional part of this process combines known operands into static forms; that process, known as
constant folding, is often combined with constant propagation to replace known variables. For
unchanging expressions with no side effects, this process can utilize loop invariant code motion and
strength reduction and it can also reduce branching through another technique. (*) Bootstrapping is a
term for writing certain types of programs that do this. Later stages of this process include register
allocation and instruction selection, and a common optimization for it is loop unrolling. Examples of
programs that do this process are clang, gcc, and javac. For 10 points, name this process that usually
converts high-level source code to low-level machine code.
ANSWER: compilation [or compiling; accept compilers; prompt on "assembling" or "assemblers"; prompt on "optimization" until "Bootstrapping" is read]
This process may invoke the Sethi-Ullman algorithm. Code security and machine-specific optimizations are
made possible by the just-in-time form of this process. That aforementioned algorithm processes a syntax
tree using the fewest possible registers. Open-source examples of programs that do this include gcc, and
essential steps taken by those programs include lexical analysis and optimization. For 10 points, name this
act of transforming source code into another, usually lower-level, language en route to creating an
executable program.
ANSWER: compiling [accept word forms]
These engineered objects often utilize constant folding and register allocation to improve their output, and
these analyze their input for control and data dependencies. One of these is called self-hosting if it can
process itself as input. These programs can be classified as just-in-time, and its front-end tasks include
lexing and parsing. Examples of this type of software include PathScale and Clang, the latter of which uses
the LLVM infrastructure. Identify this type of software that typically converts code from a high-level
language's source code to a lower-level executable program.
ANSWER: compilers
In some circumstances, these programs perform modulo scheduling. These programs sometimes
perform operations like re-materialization and loop unrolling. Forward declarations help these
programs run in a single pass. The front end of these programs generates an intermediate
representation and execute after type checking takes place. Java relies on the (*) just-in-time variety
of these programs. These programs create bytecode and usually work in tandem with an interpreter or
virtual machine. In C, these programs often rely on a makefile. These entities fail to complete their task
when a program has syntax errors. For 10 points, identify these programs that transform source code into
machine-readable code.
ANSWER: compiler
The ability to re-target these systems is aided by the use of intermediate representation. A popular book
on these programs is affectionately known as the Dragon Book. Backtracking during one phase of these
programs can be mostly eliminated by eliminating left recursion and performing left factoring. The first
step of these programs creates atoms of information called tokens. The result of their "cross-" type can be
used on different architectures than the one used. These programs have five major phases: lexical analysis,
parsing, semantic analysis, optimization and code generation. For 10 points, identify these programs that
generate machine code from a source program and are contrasted with interpreters.
ANSWER: compilers
The Dragon Book is a classic tome describing the design of these programs. Yacc is a tool for converting
Backus-Naur specifications into a component of these programs. Constant folding and loop unrolling are
optimizations that these programs may perform. HipHop is one that is described as "source-to-source".
Their front-end features include tokenization and syntax- and type-checking. Writing one of these in its own
source language is called bootstrapping. javac ("java-see") is one of these that produces bytecode to run on
a virtual machine. For 10 points, name these computer programs that convert a source language into a
lower-level language to create executable code.
ANSWER: compilers [generously prompt on "translator" or "transformer"]
Tombstone diagrams were originally created to describe these programs, which are the subject of a classic
textbook by Aho, Sethi, and Ullman. Static type checking is often employed by these programs, and several
methods for optimizing these programs rely on use-define chains and include jump threading, strength
reduction, and loop optimization. A call graph is created during the execution of these programs, and a
common instance of Byzantine faulting occurs when syntatic information gets out of phase with one
component of these programs. The just-in-time variety operates during runtime, and these programs perform
lexical analysis and parsing, followed by code generation. For 10 points, name these programs that
transform source code from a high-level language into a lower-level language, used to create executables.
ANSWER: compiler
The first self-hosting type of these programs was written in Lisp and created through bootstrapping. One
type of these takes in bytecode at runtime; that type is used by Java and .NET (dot net) and is
"just-in-time." Because these programs are used before a program is executed, languages that use them
often run faster than those using an interpreter. For 10 points, name this programs which translate higher
order languages into assembly code.
ANSWER: compilers [or word forms]
SSA form may be used to simplify the optimization process in one of these objects, which may include
speedups such as constant-folding and loop-invariant reduction. In one of these, the input is first lexed and
parsed, after which code generation translates the original input into optimized assembly. On Unix systems,
examples of these programs for C and C++ are gcc and g++, respectively, and languages which use these
are often contrasted with 'interpreted- languages. For ten points, name these programs, which translate
source code into machine code.
ANSWER: compilers
The WAM is an type of the "stage" version of them, which operate on theoretical systems. Briggs,
Cooper, and Torczon made a type of optimization for them known as "rematerialization," while
other methods of optimizing them include peepholing, which reduces the total number of
instructions. Adding forward declarations makes "single-pass" ones less error-prone. Those that aren't
used until runtime are known as "Just-In-Time" ones, and ones written in the language they're used for are
called bootstrappers. Usually consisting of a lexical analyzer, a parser, and a code generator, for 10 points,
name these objects that convert source code into machine code.
ANSWER: compilers
Ones that operate on purely theoretical systems are the "stage" type, and in general they can be
created by devices that accept a Backus-Naur Form file as input. "Wide" ones iterate on their
intermediate output and are more complex than the (*) "single pass" type. One type can be improved
by doing a "pre-JIT" to reduce start-up delay, and a common stage in their operation uses a parse tree to for
syntactical analysis. Ones written in the same language they are being used on are called bootstrappers, and
on the fly ones are called Just In Time. Sometimes outputting to data that can be read by a virtual machine,
for 10 points, name these objects that convert source code into target machine code.
ANSWER: Compiler (prompt on "Just in Time Compiler" during the pre-JIT sentence)
Constant propagation, constant folding, and static analysis are all techniques used in the
intermediate stages of one of these tools. They typically operate on an intermediate representation
which consists of single static assignments grouped into basic blocks. These tools use live variable
analysis to control register pressure. Advanced ones are capable of instruction scheduling and interprocedural analysis. Their front end typically consists of a (*) scanner, which performs lexical analysis
to produce tokens, and a parser, which does semantic and syntactic analysis. Their back-end consists of an
architecture-specific code-generator. Fortran had the first operational one of these tools, which are not
needed by interpreted programming languages. Name, for ten points, this kind of program that turns source
code into binary code.
ANSWER: Compiler
The method of these things accomplishes subtraction using addition. This term refers to a set that contains
all of the elements not in a given set, or to the event that a given event does not happen. If two angles have
this relationship, then their tangents are reciprocals. The sine of an angle equals the cosine of the angle with
this relationship to the first angle. Name this term that also refers to angles that add to ninety degrees.
ANSWER: complementary
An elliptic curve is a smooth, genus one curve that has this property, and a smooth curve is projective
if and only if it has this property. A lattice has this property if all subsets have both a join and a meet.
Every metric space with this property is a Baire space. In graph theory, the subgraph induced by a
clique has this property, and a graph on n vertices with this property has chromatic number n. A
problem p has this property for a (*) complexity class C if it belongs to C and if there exists a reduction
from any problem in C to the problem p. For a metric space, this property says that every Cauchy sequence
has a limit in the space. For a graph, this property holds if there exists an edge between any two vertices.
For 10 points, identify this property that describes a complexity class that is both NP and NP-hard.
ANSWER: completeness [or word forms]
A novel proof of a theorem named for this property was the subject of Leon Henkin's doctoral dissertation.
In first-order logic, the converse of this property is soundness. That previous theorem named for this
property has been used to prove the compactness theorem, and states that every logically valid formula of
first-order logic has a finite deduction. A measure is said to have this property if every subset of a null set
has measure zero. Normed vector spaces with this property are Banach spaces. A metric space in which
every Cauchy sequence converges has this property. Graphs of this type have every vertex adjacent to every
other vertex. For 10 points, name this property of the real numbers which intuitively says that there are no
missing points.
ANSWER: completeness [or word forms]
For an object possessing this property on a metric space, evaluating the object at two different points
and forming a sum of pairwise products of each evaluation is equal to the delta function applicable in
the metric space; such an equation is usually known as the this relation for the object. In general, this
property is defined with respect to a norm such that the norm of any object minus a linear
combination of objects from a set with this property can be made arbitrarily small. That's because,
for sets with this property, these exist some weights such that the weighted sum of the set is a faithful
representation of any function almost (*) everywhere on corresponding space. FTP, name this property
that is possessed by even non-orthogonal, non-normal bases, which can be achieved by adding the limit
points to a metric space, so that the space no longer has any holes.
ANSWER: completeness [accept word forms, but not synonyms; prompt on spanning or basis]
The absolute square, also known as the squared norm, is defined as the namesake modulus of one of these,
squared. Gerolamo Cardano conceived of these numbers due to a conundrum in the solution in radicals of
cubic equations. These are represented by exponents in phasor form, and quaternions are an extension of
these. Their namesake plane is also called the Argand plane, and their polar form may utilize the cis
function. De Moivre's theorem deals with the exponentiation of this type of number. If one of these
numbers is a solution to a polynomial, its namesake conjugate is a solution as well. Name this set of
numbers which can be denoted a + bi.
ANSWER: complex numbers
Positive integer powers of these numbers can be found using DeMoivre's theorem. The distance from
the origin on the Argand plane is equal to the modulus of a number of this type. The product of a number of
this type and its conjugate is a real number. A quadratic equation with a negative discriminant has two
distinct solutions of this type. For 10 points, the real numbers and the imaginary numbers are subsets of
which class of numbers which can be written in the form a + bi?
ANSWER: complex numbers [prompt on imaginary numbers before it is read]
This set of numbers is commonly expressed using exponents as a phasor, and their magnitude can be used to
represent impedance in circuit design. These numbers are commonly represented on an Argand diagram,
where multiplication can be represented by both magnitude changes and rotations and addition can be
represented by translation in two dimensions. The conjugate of this type of number can be found by
multiplying negative one times their imaginary components. Name these numbers with real and imaginary
components.
ANSWER: complex numbers (accept C, do not accept i or imaginary numbers)
The set of these entities has a two-dimensional normed division algebra, and forms an unordered field,
extensions of which include Cayley numbers and quaternions. They can be represented in phasor form as
powers of e. They are multiplied more easily in polar form using de Moivre's identity. A quadratic equation
with a negative discriminant has these numbers as its solutions. A number of this type plus its conjugate
equals two times its first term. For 10 points, name these numbers that can take the form a + bi, consisting
of a real number plus an imaginary number.
ANSWER: complex numbers [prompt on C, prompt on imaginary numbers]
A residue is a special type of contour integral of a function of this type, and a formula for integrating this
type of function is named for Cauchy. William Hamilton extended this type of value to a system called
quaternions. De Moivre's formula deals with exponentiation of these values, and Euler's equation expresses
the exponential of one of these in terms of sine and cosine. For 10 points, identify this type of number which
has a part that can be expressed as the square root of negative one.
ANSWER: complex [or imaginary]
The Cayley-Dickson construction extends the set of these entities to the quaternions and octonions, and the
Gaussian integers are a subset of them. Their algebraic closure is a consequence of the fundamental theorem
of algebra. Uniquely determined by their absolute value and argument, they can be plotted on an Argand
diagram. When expressed in polar form as "r cis theta," they can be multiplied using de Moivre's identity.
Each of these numbers has a conjugate, found by reversing the sign of its imaginary part. For 10 points,
name these numbers of the form a+bi.
ANSWER: complex numbers [prompt on C; do not accept "imaginary numbers"]
These numbers can be represented with phasors. De Moivre's identity is used to exponentiate these
numbers. They can be graphed on a plane where the distance from the origins represents the magnitude of
the number, which can be obtained by multiplying one of these numbers by its conjugate. If the quadratic
formula is used when the discriminant is less than zero, they are the output, and they always occur in pairs
as roots of polynomials. For 10 points, name these numbers which consist of a real and an imaginary part.
ANSWER: complex numbers [prompt on imaginary numbers until it is read]
These numbers are the input to a Mobius transformation, and Gaussian integers are this sort of number.
They can be represented by a two by two matrix with top row x negative y and bottom row y x.
Holomorphic functions take these numbers as inputs. Phasors are another way to represent them, and they
are extended by quaternions. For a given one of these numbers, flipping the sign of the second component
in their standard representation yields its conjugate. If a quadratic polynomial has a negative discriminant,
then its roots are of this type. For 10 points, name these numbers that have real and imaginary components.
ANSWER: complex number
The algebraic closure of these numbers follows from the fundamental theorem of algebra. Argand
diagrams can be used to plot these numbers. De Moivre's formula concerns expanding powers of
sines and cosines of these numbers, and the Cauchy residue theorem helps define integration when
considering them. Polynomials have this type of roots when the (*) discriminant is negative, and one of
these numbers times its conjugate gives a real number. For 10 points, name these numbers which include the
reals and the imaginary numbers.
ANSWER: complex numbers or C (prompt on "i" or "imaginary numbers")
The Hermitian inner product maps vectors over this field onto this field. The field of analysis named for it
often studies holomorphic functions. Those with modulus one can be generated by the function "cis x",
which appears in de Moivre's formula, and can also be expressed as a rotation matrix. The fundamental
theorem of algebra states that any polynomial has at least one root in this set. These numbers are solutions
to quadratics with negative discriminant. The quaternions are a generalization of them, and multiplying one
by its namesake conjugate yields a real number. For 10 points, name this set of numbers expressed in the
form "a plus b i", where i squared is negative one.
ANSWER: (the field of) complex numbers [prompt on "C"; do not prompt on or accept "imaginary numbers"]
They are often represented exponentially in phasor form, and every point in the Argand plane is one of
these. One can raise them to the nth power using Demoivre's theorem, and like vectors, they are sometimes
represented using polar coordinates, in the form cis theta. Often represented as A plus B I, for ten points,
name this set of numbers with real and imaginary components.
ANSWER: complex numbers
DeMoivre's [duh-MWAHV's] theorem can be used when raising this type of number to a power.
Euler's [OY-lur-z] formula relates the exponential and polar descriptions of these numbers, and they
can also be plotted as points on the Cartesian plane, a format called the (*) Argand diagram. The
absolute value on these numbers is called the modulus, and taking the conjugate means negating the
imaginary part of these numbers. For 10 points, name this type of number often written in the form a + b i.
ANSWER: complex numbers (prompt on imaginary numbers before "imaginary")
The Klein quartic, which is a projective algebraic curve over these numbers, forms a Riemannian surface
when located in CP2. A type of function that uses these numbers as inputs is infinitely differentiable and is
called a holomorphic function. Numbers that are an extension of these numbers are in four dimensional real
vector space and are called quaternions. These numbers include Gaussian integers and can be plotted on an
Argand diagram. A quadratic equation with a negative discriminant has these numbers as solutions. For 10
points, name these numbers that are in the form "a" plus "b" "i".
ANSWER: Complex Numbers
A number is highly this if it has more divisors than any smaller positive integer. Although not even, this
type of number is the only kind that can be perfect. Beams denoted by this term consist of two or more
materials. This type of number can be written as the unique product of a finite number of primes according
to the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. For 10 points, identify this term that is applied to a number with
factors other than one and itself.
ANSWER: composite
Carmichael numbers are numbers of this type that satisfy Fermat's Little Theorem, and the
difference between them and their totient is at least two. Arbitrarily long sequences of these numbers
can be found by starting at n-factorial plus two up through n-factorial plus n, and there is no jump in
the function pi of x at each of them. These numbers are crossed out in the (*) Sieve of Eratosthenes,
because they are divisible by a lower, circled number. For ten points, identify these numbers which have a
factor besides one and themselves, and are thus not prime.
ANSWER: composite numbers
If for a number n, the Legendre symbol a over n does not equal the Jacobi symbol a over n, then n must
have this property. The ring Z mod nZ of integer congruence classes modulo n has zero divisors if and only
if n has this distinction. With one exception, if n has this property then zero is congruent to n minus one
factorial mod n by Wilson's theorem. All Fermat numbers with index between five and 32 have this
property. Euler's Theorem works with these numbers and not just their complementary set as in Fermat's
Little Theorem. These are the numbers that are crossed out in the Sieve of Eratosthenes. All even numbers
have this property. For 10 points, name these integers that are greater than one and not prime.
ANSWER: composite
If n is "highly" this, then there is another number between n and 2n that is also "highly" this type of number.
Phi of n is bounded by n minus the square root of n if n is one of these numbers and phi is the totient
function. If n is one of these, then n minus one factorial is not congruent to negative one, mod n, by
Wilson's theorem. If there is a number n between 1 and x such that n to the x is not congruent to n mod x,
then x is one of these numbers. Since Carmichael numbers are this type of number, the converse of Fermat's
Little Theorem does not hold. For 10 points, name this type of number that has positive divisors other than
one and itself and is thus not prime.
ANSWER: highly composite numbers
The nth derivative of functions using this operation can be found using Faa di Bruno's formula, and the
reverse of this process sometimes involves writing a given matrix as the product of an orthogonal matrix
times an upper triangular matrix. For linear functions without shifts, this operation is equivalent to
multiplication. To find the first derivative of functions expressed with this operation, the Chain Rule is used,
and this operation can be used to express a function which performs one operation after another as a
combination of simpler functions. Often represented with an open circle, name this operation of inputting
one function into another.
ANSWER: composition [accept word forms]
A dynamic example of these algorithms developed by Ziv and Lempel optimizes based on the sample
being examined. These algorithms can be performed if the Shannon entropy is less than the average
encoding length. The discrete cosine transform and run-length encoding are "lossy" examples of these
algorithms. Those are often performed with images or sound, where missing information may go unnoticed.
A lossless example for images is the GIF format, and JPEG employs both lossy and lossless types of this.
For 10 points, name these algorithms that reduce the memory necessary to store information.
ANSWER: data compression algorithms [or word forms]
One method for doing this is co-named for the inventor of the pentomino. That method is
Rice-Golomb and is based on RLE algorithms. One algorithm for this that is gaining support is
LZMA. One of the earliest techniques is named for Huffman. For some media like pictures, (*) lossy
types as opposed to lossless schemes are used. The DEFLATE algorithm is used to create a common end
product of this process, a zip file. For 10 points, name this process of making files smaller.
ANSWER: information compression [accept word forms; or file compression; or data compression; prompt on encoding]
This procedure is carried out by the DEFLATE algorithm, which combines Lempel-Ziv and Huffman
coding. The .gz and .bz2 formats can be used when performing this procedure on .tar files. This procedure
comes in lossy and lossless varieties, exemplified for images by the JPG and PNG standards. For 15 points,
identify this procedure in computer science where input data is encoded to make it smaller, which is done
when storing files in a zip archive.
ANSWER: data compression [or source coding; or bit-rate reduction; or word forms]
The basis of many of algorithms that perform this process are the 1977 and 1978 Lempel and Ziv
papers. One method used in this process is to express data as a finite sum of cosines, which is the
discrete cosine transform. Entropy encoding algorithms, such as arithmetic coding and Huffman
coding, can be used to losslessly perform this process. One of the most popular types of this process
uses the DEFLATE algorithm, which is used in the (*) PNG format and by zip files. For 10 points,
identify this method of reducing the size of files.
ANSWER: data compression [or image compression; or audio compression; source coding; or bit-rate reduction]
The LZW method for this procedure improved upon one which creates prefix codes based on the
frequency of symbols being used. Huffman coding is one method of this process, while a more facile
approach represents "runs" of (*) data with a single character and number. When this procedure retains
all the original data, it is called lossless. For 10 points, name this process which shrinks the number of bits
required to encode information.
ANSWER: data compression
This mathematician wrote Essay on the Application of Analysis to the Probability of Majority Decisions in
1785, which included a formula determining the probability of a jury reaching a correct verdict assuming
majority rule and based on the probability of an individual juror being correct and the number of jurors. He
is best known for devising a method to handle intransitive ranking methods, thus making it impossible to
meet his namesake criterion. Name this mathematician who believed that candidates should be ranked and
each possible pair should be considered when voting.
ANSWER: Marquis de Condorcet
The mapping type of this shape is sometimes called a homotopy (hoh-MAH-toh-pee) co-fiber and is similar
to a quotient space. This is the shape of a degenerate hyperboloid, and it can be represented in spherical
coordinates by setting the azimuth equal to a constant. The rectangular formula for this shape is z squared
equals x squared plus y squared, and slices of this shape were famously studied by Apollonius (ap-uh-LOHnee-us) of Perga (PUR-guh). As with pyramids, this shape has a volume equal to one-third base times
height. Identify this shape that has a circular base and a vertex.
ANSWER: right circular cone [or nappe]
One way to parameterize this solid is to set x equal to z times the cosine of theta, and set y equal
to z times the sine of theta. This solid is generated in spherical coordinates by setting the polar
angle equal to a constant, and this solid is generated in cylindrical coordinates by the equation z = r.
Rotations of slices of this solid form quadric surfaces such as ellipsoids and paraboloids; examples
of such slices include hyperbolas and parabolas, which are called its "sections". The volume of this
shape is calculated by multiplying one-third pi times height times radius squared. Name this shape
with an apex at the top and a circle at the bottom.
ANSWER: cone [accept nappe; prompt on conic]
This shape consists of all the points in spherical coordinates for which rho goes from zero to a constant
times cosine phi, and phi goes from zero to a constant less than pi over two. Spheres tangent to one of these
and a plane are called Dandelin spheres. In cylindrical coordinates, the equation z equals r gives one of
these shapes. Name this shape whose slices are used to generate ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas, and
which has a volume equal to one-third pi times r squared times h.
ANSWER: cones (accept double cone or conic)
A correction to find the size of these constructs using an extra term of z2
2n
is named for Edwin Bidwell
Wilson. This concept was introduced by a mathematician who helped develop null hypothesis testing,
Jerzy Neyman [YEH-zhee NYE-mun]. The size of one of these constructs depends on the inverse error
function. One way to find their size is the percentile bootstrap method, and these constructs are
labeled with a percentage equivalent to one minus alpha, the significance level. Some graphs shows
these constructs using error bars, which are vertical segments, of an appropriate length. It is common
to size these quantities to correspond to 95% certainty. Name these "intervals" that, with a certain
probability, contain a measurement.
ANSWER: (percentile) confidence intervals [or score intervals; prompt on confidence levels]
The control of this occurrence is based on an optimization model developed by Frank Kelly. The
RED algorithm is used to deal with this and one way to indicate the occurrence of this is with ECN
bits. Nagle's algorithm attempts to prevent this from causing collapse due to overhead. In most
stacks, upon a timeout, the window for this is set to one MSS. To deal with this in most TCP
implementations, a slow start phase is used followed by a phase for the avoidance of this. The most
common way that this is discovered is when packets are (*) dropped by routers because their packet
queues are exceeded. When this occurs, users may notice increase in lag and a drop in effective bandwidth.
For 10 points, name this occurrence in a network where there is a lot of traffic leading to decreased
performance which also can occur on a highway during rush hour.
ANSWER: congestion [prompt on traffic before mentioned]
When one of these constructs is traced out pictorially, there will exist one or two Dandelin Spheres tangent
to the plane that traced it out. Studied in antiquity by Apollonius of Perga, in the two question problem, if the
center of mass is assumed to be at rest, the paths of the bodies will follow one of these paths. In polar
coordinates, they take the form of l over the quantity one plus e times cosine of theta, where l is the semilatus rectum and e is the eccentricity. For 10 points, name these mathematical curves that include the
ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola.
ANSWER: Conic Sections
Pairs of variables with this property are related by Pontryagin duality; that is, they are each other's
Fourier transforms. Those pairs of variables with this property are generally a variable and the
derivative of the action with respect to that variable; therefore, they have a lower limit on their (*)
commutators. In group theory, elements a and b in a group have this relationship if there is an element g
such that g times a times the inverse of g equals b. If a polynomial with real coefficients has roots that are
not real, the roots in question are two of these. For 10 points, give the word that also refers to the
relationship between a + bi and a - bi.
ANSWER: conjugates [accept word forms]
This operation often is combined with transposition for matrices, and matrices which do not change under
the combined operations are called Hermitian (hur-MI-shun). Performing this operation on a number,
multiplying the result by the number itself, and then taking the square root finds the complex modulus of the
number, which is also that number's absolute value or norm. When complex numbers are represented as
vectors, this operation reflects over the real axis. Simplifying fractions with complex numbers is often
accomplished by multiplying by the denominator after this operation has been done. Name this operation
which transforms a plus b i to a minus b i.
ANSWER: conjugate [accept word forms, e.g. conjugation]
An iterative method for numerically solving linear equations is known as the gradient method named for this
word. In algebra, this adjective describes two elements x and y such that xg equals gy for some element g,
while in physics, it describes variables to which the Heisenberg uncertainty principle applies. The adjoint of
a matrix is computed by transposing and performing an operation with this as its second word. That
operation is denoted by a bar over a number and leaves real numbers unchanged. For 10 points, name this
term which, describes the relation of the complex numbers a+bi and a-bi.
ANSWER: conjugate [or conjugation]
The L2 ["L two"] inner product requires this operation to be applied to the second function. For Fourier
series in terms of complex exponentials, this operation relates the nth Fourier coefficient to the negative nth
one. A Hermitian matrix is equal to the result of this operation applied to its transpose. For numbers in polar
form, this operation negates the argument. The square magnitude of a number results from multiplying it by
itself under this operation. If a polynomial with real coefficients has a complex root, then that root under
this operation is also a root. This operation, denoted by an asterisk or an over-bar, turns 3 plus i into 3
minus i. Identify this operation that negates the imaginary part of a complex number.
ANSWER: complex conjugate [or complex conjugation]
The dot product of x and y multiplies component-wise x and this of y. When in polar form it is produced by
negating the exponent. For any real number taking it is the same as the identity function. The addition of a
number to this for that number produces a real number which is equal to double the real component of the
previous number. It is distributive over multiplication and addition and it is represented with a bar above
the number, FTP, name this type of number formed by taking the negative of the imaginary part of a
complex number.
ANSWER: Complex Conjugate
One of these numbers equal to the geometric mean of the coefficients of the continued fraction expansion of
x is named for Alexander Khinchin. The Loschmidt one of these is used in the definition of a unit of number
density named after Emile Amagat. The Hartree energy is one used in computational chemistry and physics,
and one of these created by Einstein was considered his "great blunder;" that was his cosmological one.
Pressure times volume equals number of moles times temperature times the ideal gas type of this. Name
these unchanging numbers in science, exemplified by the extremely large one named for Avogadro.
ANSWER: constants
Two of these entities, represented by the Greek letters delta and alpha, are used to find ratios of
bifurcation intervals in chaos theory and are named for Feigenbaum. Another one of these entities is
found by taking the integral of the difference between the reciprocal of the floor function of x and the
reciprocal of x. That entity, used to evaluate the derivative of the gamma function, is represented by
a gamma and named for Euler and Mascheroni [mas-kair-OH-nee]. The example named for Boltzmann
is represented by a lower case k. This term is used to relate the square root of 2 to Pythagoras, and
pi to Archimedes. Give this term for numerical values that never change.
ANSWER: mathematical constant [accept transcendental number before "the square root of 2"; prompt on number or value or irrational number]
In the context of robot motion planning, the Pfaffian ones of these are linearly independent values
that uniquely model rolling without slipping. The Rosen method of gradient projection is a method of
solving for these using a steepest descent method. Parallel parking is one example of a system
characterized by the differential types of these values, which are dependent upon the path taken,
ones that don-t are said to be holonomic. While using the (*) simplex method, inequalities that represent
these are used to define the feasible region. These statements define the boundaries of the candidate
solution. Lagrange multipliers are introduced to find extrema of functions subject to these. For 10 points,
name these values that must be satisfied to solve an optimization problem.
ANSWER: constraints
This process is the subject of the Poncelet-Steiner and Mohr-Mascheroni theorems, and it can be applied to
a polygon with n sides if and only if n can be expressed as the product of a power of two
and a Fermat prime. Because it cannot generate numbers whose minimal polynomial is greater than two, it
cannot be used to double a cube, and for other reasons it also cannot be used to trisect an angle or square a
circle. This process uses two unmarked tools, one of which allows the production of segments, and the other
of which allows the production of arcs and circles. Name this process which traditionally involves a
compass and straightedge.
ANSWER: construction (accept different word forms and answers mentioning compasses and/or straightedges, but do not accept answers mentioning rulers)
A theorem on this property that connects pointwise convergence of characteristic functions and convergence
in distribution is named for Levy. The Radon-Nikodym derivative exists when one measure is "absolutely"
this with respect to another measureThe sequential form is strictly weaker in non-first-countable spaces than
the topological form of this property, which requires that the preimage of open sets be open. The Lipschitz
form of this property bounds the rate of change, and for a function, this property exists when the left and
right limits at every point are equal to the value at that point. FTP, name this property that describes
functions without "jumps."
ANSWER: continuity (accept equivalent forms)
For a non-compact subset of the reals, one can show that a function exists which has this property and is
bounded, but has no maximum. For a monotonic function on some real open interval, this property does not
hold on a set of points that is at most countable. The Weierstrass function is nowhere differentiable despite
having this property at every point, and a mapping between metric spaces has this property if and only if the
inverse mapping takes open sets to open sets. If for epsilon, there exists a delta such that the distance
between the image of two points of a function is less than epsilon when the distance between the points is
less than delta, the "uniform" version of this property holds. For 10 points, name this property of a function
which can be drawn without lifting pencil from paper.
ANSWER: continuity [or continuous; accept other word forms if there are any]
Any function from a set with the discrete topology will have this property, as the discrete topology
includes all elements and thus all subsets are open. A function has this property if the preimage of all
open sets in the range are also open. Any function with this property on a closed interval will also
meet the criterion for the stronger (*) "uniform" type of it. On a closed interval, a function of this type
will assume all intermediate values. Real functions have this property if for all x in the domain, the limit of
the function as it approaches x equals the function's value at that point. For 10 points, name this property of
functions that can be drawn without lifting the pencil.
ANSWER: continuity
A function with this property that maps a compact convex set onto itself has a fixed point according
to the Brouwer fixed point theorem. A mapping of this type from space X to space Y has this
property if for any open subset V of Y, the inverse image of V is an open subset of X. A bijective
mapping between topological spaces is a homeomorphism if the mapping and the inverse mapping
are open and have this property. If for any epsilon there exists a delta such that the distance between
f(x) and f(y) is less than epsilon when the distance between x and y is less than delta, the function is
(*) "uniformly" this. A function has this property if for any point c on an interval [a, b], the limit as x
approaches c of f(x) equals f(c). For 10 points, all differentiable functions must have what property in which
a function can be drawn without lifting pen from paper?
ANSWER: continuity [or word forms like "continuous"]
A homotopy equivalence between two functions from spaces X to Y is the existence of an invertible
mapping of this type between the two functions. The Lipschitz form of this quantity is not possessed
by the square root and exponential functions because the slope becomes arbitrarily steep. One
definition of this property is that each (*) epsilon has a delta such that if x minus c is within delta, then f
of x minus f of c is within epsilon. This property may also be defined as the statement that the limit of f as x
goes to c is equal to f of c. For 10 points, name this property of a function which means that there are no
discrete jumps or breaks in the line.
ANSWER: continuous (accept word forms like continuity)
Functions with a special type of this property make up Holder spaces. The fundamental theorem of
Lebesgue integral calculus relates the existence of a derivative-like function with one type of this
property. Preimages of open sets on functions with this property are open. This property is not
fulfilled by the (*) Cantor function. The uniform type of this property is held by any function with this
property on a compact set. A function has this property at a point if its limit at that point is equal to its value
at that point. For 10 points, name this mathematical property that implies that sufficiently small changes in a
function's input can create arbitrarily small changes in its output.
ANSWER: Continuity [accept word forms; accept Lipschitz continuity, sequential continuity, absolute continuity, or uniform continuity]
On a closed interval, functions with this property will also possess the uniform type of it. This is a
necessary condition for use of the intermediate and extreme value theorems. The first fundamental theorem
of calculus says all functions of this type will have antiderivatives. It is a necessary condition for being
differentiable, and does not occur at singularities and jumps. For 10 points, name this property, possessed
by functions that can be drawn without lifting the pencil.
ANSWER: continuity [or continuous]
A function f has this property at x for some x in the domain if for any neighborhood U of f(x), there is a
neighborhood V of x such that f(V) = U. The Weierstrass function is differentiable nowhere but has this
property everywhere. Cauchy gives this condition for a function f at a point c as the assurance that, for all
epsilon greater than zero, there exists delta such that x being closer to c than delta implies that f(x) is closer
to f(c) than epsilon. For 10 points, name this property that suggests a small change in a function's input
results in a small change in its value, rather than a break or a jump or a hole.
ANSWER: continuous [accept word forms]
One type of this property used in measure theory is denoted by a double-less-than sign, and means that
whenever the mu of a set is zero, the nu of that set must also be zero. If a function with this property has
compact domain, then it has the uniform variety of this property as well. Probability distributions with this
property have a zero chance of producing any specific result. Despite having this property everywhere, the
Weierstrass function is differentiable nowhere. A function f has this property if the limit of f-of-x as x
approaches the point c is f-of-c. For 10 points, name this mathematical property possessed by functions
whose graphs have no holes or breaks.
ANSWER: continuity [accept word forms, accept absolute or uniform continuity]
These functions are the morphisms in the category Top. A surjective function of this kind that evenly
covers a neighborhood of every image point is called a covering map. There exists a sequence of
polynomials converging uniformly to any of these functions by the Stone-Weierstrass theorem. By an
epsilon-over-3 argument, if a sequence of them converges uniformly, then the limit is one of these
functions as well. These functions preserve (*) compactness and connectedness. These functions are
defined as ones for which the preimage of open sets are open and the function must be one on a closed
interval in the extreme, mean, and intermediate value theorems. For 10 points, name these functions where f
of cequals the limit of f of x as x approaches c.
ANSWER: continuous function
A strong version of this property is required for the method of Picard iteration and the Banach fixed
point theorem. Homeomorphisms are bijections with this property whose inverses also have this
property. Maps with this property preserve connectedness and compactness. One definition states
that a map has this property if the pre-image of an open set is an open set; whereas the
aforementioned strong definition of this property states that a function has it if the distance between
the images of two points over the distance between the two points themselves is less than a constant.
That second definition of this concept is named for (*) Lipschitz. The Weierstrauss function is nowhere
differential but has this property everywhere. For 10 points, name this property that for real-valued
functions means that value of the function at a point must be arbitrarily close to that at neighboring points, a
term which also describes a function whose graph can be drawn without picking up a pencil?
ANSWER: continuity [accept continuous]
The Heine-Cantor theorem states that if there is compactness, this property is equivalent to its uniform
variety. The Dirichlet function does not have this property anywhere. In Lesbegue integration, its absolute
version holds for a function f on an interval if and only if there exists a function g such that the integral of g
from the start of the interval to any point in the interval equals f. Its topological definition requires that the
inverse of every open set be open. A function f of x has this property at a point b if the limit of f of x as x
approaches b is f of b. For 10 points, name this property of some functions, sometimes described as the
ability to be drawn without raising a pencil.
ANSWER: continuous [accept word forms]
Freiling's axiom of symmetry is equivalent to the negation of this statement, and an axiom that would imply
that negation has been proposed by Woodin. Martin's axiom is a weaker form of it, suggesting that a
countable chain condition compact Hausdorff space cannot be the union of nowhere dense sets, while its
generalized form invokes the aleph numbers. Godel showed that it could only be affirmed, but it was found
by Paul Cohen to be independent of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. For 10 points, name this assertion that
there exists no set with cardinality between that of the integers and that of the reals.
ANSWER: continuum hypothesis
Euclid's proof that there are an infinite number of primes is an example of this type of proof, which uses the
law of bivalence. That proof involves the construction of the product of all primes plus 1, which Euclid
shows to be a prime number as well. Name this method of indirect proof, which begins by assuming the
opposite of the statement to be proved to deduce a logical impossibility.
ANSWER: proof by contradiction (or reductio ad absurdum or reductio ad impossibile or apagogical argument; accept indirect proof before mentioned)
In addition to being considered an indirect proof method, modus tollens is also known as a proof by this
type of statement. The relationship between this type of statement and an original statement is the same as
the relationship between an inverse and a converse, and that relationship can be used to solve logic
problems such as the ones in Lewis Carroll's book Symbolic Logic. If the original statement is that p implies
q, then this statement is that not q implies not p. Name this statement that has the same truth value as the
statement it is derived from.
ANSWER: contrapositive [accept contraposition]
For finite difference methods applied to PDEs, this property is equivalent to stability according to
the Lax equivalence theorem. The Weierstrass M-test can be used to test for this property. A
sequence of real numbers has this property if and only if it is a Cauchy sequence. For a series with
both positive and negative terms, the (*) "absolute" form of this property is stronger than the usual form,
only requiring that the terms go to zero. This property is possessed everywhere by the Taylor series for the
exponential function, while other power series may have some finite "radius of" this property. Common
tests to determine this property include the ratio test and the root test. For 10 points, give this mathematical
term for approaching a limit.
ANSWER: convergence [or other word forms of "converge"]
Every entire function can be written as a power series with this property on the complex plane. A
complete metric space is one where Cauchy sequences have this property. The Weierstrass M-test
can show whether something has the uniform type of this property. Geometric series will (*) always
have this property if the common ratio has absolute value between zero and one, and the harmonic series
does not possess it. For 10 points, name this opposite of divergence.
ANSWER: convergence [or has a limit]
In the real numbers, all Cauchy sequences possess this property. The harmonic series does not possess it,
though the alternating harmonic does. Generally, any alternating series satisfying Leibniz criterion will
possess it. The root test and ratio test can be used to see whether a given series possesses this property. For
10 points, name this property of sequences whose limits are finite, the opposite of divergence.
ANSWER: convergence [or word forms]
Compactness for a topological space implies that every ultrafilter has this property. The Wisjman
variety of this applies to closed subsets of metric spaces, the Gromov-Hausdorff metric helps define it
for sequences of compact metric spaces, a property which is named for those men. In a complete
metric space, a sequence being Cauchy (*) implies this property, and a test for it in series involves the
ratio of a-sub-n over a-sub-n minus one being less than one. For 10 points, name this property which is
possessed by a sequence that has a limit, indicating that its elements are approaching some finite value.
ANSWER: convergence [accept equivalents like "it converges" or "it has a limit"]
To determine if a Fourier series has this property, the Dini-Lipschitz criterion is used. The BolzanoWeierstrass theorem states that every bounded sequence in Rn has a subsequence that has this property. A
Cauchy sequence has this property if its metric space is complete. A geometric series has this property if the
absolute value of the common ratio is less than one. The harmonic series does not have this property. For 10
points, name this property of a sequence or series that approaches a finite limit, contrasted with divergence.
ANSWER: convergence [accept word forms]
The uniform and pointwise types of this property may be contrasted for sequences, and Cauchy sequences
in a complete space always have this property. A limit approaching zero is necessary but not sufficient for
this property, which exists when the root test gives a value less than one or the integral test gives a finite
number. The harmonic series lacks this property, but the alternating version thereof as well as p-series for p
greater than one do have this property. This term also applies to geometric series with ratio between
negative one and one. Give this term that describes series whose sum approaches a finite number, contrasted
with divergence.
ANSWER: convergence [accept word forms]
Egorov's theorem relates two types of this property for measurable functions. A theorem named for
Vitali applies when a dominating function cannot be found; when one can, Lebesgue's dominated this
theorem applies. This property also makes Fatou's lemma reduce to that theorem. The pointwise type
of this property is weaker than the uniform type. On the complex plane, this condition's equivalent is named
for Cauchy, since there, it's possible for each element past some point to be arbitrarily close, without
approaching a unique value. For 10 points, name this property lacked by the partial sums of the harmonic
series, which requires that a sequence has a limit.
ANSWER: convergence
A nested radical of some power p has this property if and only if the ith term in the radical raised to the p to
the i power is bounded according to a theorem named for Herschfeld. Any sequence of real numbers which
is Cauchy has this property and all sequences with this property are Cauchy. A bounded monotone
sequence must have this property, and every bounded sequence must have a subsequence of this type
according to the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem. A power series has the absolute type of this property if the
series is within this namesake radius. For 10 points name this term which names series whose partial sums
have a limit.
ANSWER: convergence [accept word forms]
A Cauchy sequence in a complete metric space is automatically of this type. The root test is one method
designed to test for this property. This property does not hold for arithmetic sequences or the harmonic
series. All geometric series for which r is less than one exhibit this property. A sequence has this property if
and only if it has a limit. For 10 points, name this property that a sequence has if its values gradually
approach a certain number, the opposite of divergent.
ANSWER: convergent [or word forms]
For closed sets of this type in the plane, also known as ovals, Helly's Theorem shows that, if any three have
non-empty intersection, they all have non-empty intersection. The supporting hyperplane theorem shows
that any set of this type can be realized as the intersection of closed hyperplanes. Karamata's inequality and
Jensen's inequality apply to functions of this type, and any local minimum of such a function must also be a
global minimum. FTP, name this mathematical property that for sets means that any line connecting two
points in such a set is also contained in the set, a word that often describes a sphere.
ANSWER: convex
For a set of points, the Gram scan finds the minimal set of this type containing them. When g(x) is one
of these functions, g of the integral from 0 to 1 of f(x) is less than or equal to the integral of g of f according
to Jensen's inequality. A function is this on I, if for all x,y in I and all a between zero and one, f of quantity
ax plus y times 1 minus a is less than a times f of x plus f of y times one minus a. A function posses this
property on an interval only if the chord between any points along the function in that interval is at or
above the function. Another test for this if its second derivative is positive. For 10 points, name this
property that is the opposite of concave.
ANSWER: convex [prompt on concave up before concave]
A linear combination of vectors is said to be this type of combination if the coefficients add to one and are
all nonnegative. If a function with a continuous second derivative has this property, then it is concave up. If
a polygon with n vertices has this property, then its number of interior diagonals equals one-half times n
times the quantity n minus three. If a set of points has this property, then it contains the entirety of all
segments connecting two of its points. Name this property belonging to polygons whose interior angles are
all less than 180 degrees.
ANSWER: convex
A function has this property on an interval if its second derivative is positive on that interval. A
polygon with this property contains all line segments between any pair of its points. A polygon of this
type does not contain an (*) internal reflex angle, meaning that every internal angle measures less than or
equal to 180 degrees. For 10 points, name this property that is contrasted with concave.
ANSWER: convex (accept convexity; accept concave upward)
Every cell generated by a Voronoi diagram is a polytope of this type. If the input to the Art
Gallery Problem has this property, then the solution only requires a single guard that may simply
adjust his field of view. For a Euclidean space, a set has this property if the line segment between
every pair of points stays within the set. A function has this property if its value at the midpoint of
every interval does not exceed the (*) arithmetic mean of its value at the endpoints. "Every internal angle
is less than or equal to 180 degrees" and "every line segment between two vertices remains within the
shape" are two necessary and sufficient conditions for this kind of polygon. For 10 points, name this
property that is distinguished from concavity.
ANSWER: convex [accept word form equivalents; accept concave up, but do NOT accept "concave" or "concave down"]
Jensen's inequality can be used on functions of this type, and this adjective describes the minimal
"hull" which entirely contains a set of points. All continuous functions f(x) ("f of x") have this
property if and only if f((a+b)/2) ("f of a plus b over two") is less than or equal to one-half f(a)+f(b)
("f of a plus f of b"). This adjective is used to describe functions all of whose secants lie above their
graph, and thus have a positive (*) second derivative. In geometry, this adjective describes shapes whose
diagonals lie entirely within them and polygons that have interior angles less than 180 degrees. For ten
points, give this mathematical adjective, the opposite of concave.
ANSWER: convexity (accept word forms)
In this activity, patterns that move across the grid indefinitely are known as spaceships. Bill Gosper won a
prize for showing that there are patterns in it that can grow infinitely by creating his glider gun. In this
simulation, black cells with two or three black neighbors remain black, while white cells with exactly three
black neighbors become black. Name this cellular automaton, a "game" created by John Conway.
ANSWER: Conway's game of life
The Chinese remainder theorem concerns a system of linear congruences in which all moduli are pairwise
this. For integers a and b with this property, the largest integer not obtainable from a positive linear
combination of a and b is equal to the product of a and b minus a minus b. The Euler totient function
returns the number of integers that share this property with and are less than or equal to the argument. The
Euclidean algorithm returns one for numbers with this property, held by the numerator and denominator of a
fraction in lowest terms. For 10 points, name this property of positive integers that do not share any
common divisors.
ANSWER: coprime [or relatively prime; do not accept or prompt on "prime"]
The hyperbolic arctangent of this value is used to test hypotheses about it, and is known as the
Fisher transformation. For given sets A and B, this value is equal to the covariance of A and B
divided by the product of the standard deviations of A and B. The sampling distribution of this value
follows an n minus 2 degrees of freedom t-distribution. An alternative to it is Spearman's rho, which
is based on ranks. The square of this value is the amount of variation in the (*) dependent variable that
can be explained by the independent variable in a least-squares regression. For a perfectly dependent pair of
variables, it is equal to 1. For 10 points, identify this value developed by Pearson which measures how well
a particular line fits a series of points.
ANSWER: R [or correlation; accept R-squared; accept Pearson's coefficient before mention]
One measure of this is Kendall's tau, and one form of this can be used to estimate the periodicity of a signal.
A rank-order version coefficient for this is named for Spearman, though a statistic introduced by Francis
Galton, Pearson's r coefficient, is the most widely used. When r equals negative one, this is said to be
completely negative; this is completely positive when r equals one. For 10 points, name this measure of
association between two variables, which often implies but does not equal causation.
ANSWER: correlation coefficient
One way of stating this number geometrically is the cosine of the angle formed between the vectors of both
samples involved. One of the most common mistakes involving it is using it to imply causality. The most
common method of obtaining it is dividing the covariance of the two variables by the product of their
standard deviations. When it is squared, it represents the percentage of variation in y explained by the
regression in x. FTP, name this statistical parameter which measures the strength of a linear relationship
between two variables.
ANSWER: Correlation Coefficient Accept r Prompt on Correlation
One variable which measures this quantity is named after Maurice Kendall and represented by a Greek
letter tau. Another variable for this quantity, which has its calculation involve changing raw scores into
rankings, is named after Charles Spearman and represented by the Greek letter rho. The most common
measure of this value, which involves summing products of deviations for two different variables, is named
after Karl Pearson and represented by the letter r. Name this quantity which measures the dependence
between two variables and the precision of a regression equation.
ANSWER: correlation coefficient (prompt on "coefficient")
Malus' law gives the transmitted intensity of polarized light as the square of this function of the
polarizer's angle relative to the incoming light. In Compton scattering, the wavelength shift is
proportional to 1 minus this function of the scattering angle. The intensity observed from a
Lambertian surface is proportional to this function of the angle between the observer and the surface
normal. This function's hyperbolic version describes the shape of a freely hanging chain supported at both
ends and subject to a uniform gravitational force. The dot product of two vectors is given by the product of
their magnitudes times this function of the angle between them. For 10 points, identify this trigonometric
function whose square plus the square of the sine is always 1.
ANSWER: cosine
This function has a fixed point known as the Dottie number equal to roughly 0.74. This function names a
version of the discrete Fourier transform that uses only real numbers, and the Fourier series of an even
function has only terms proportional to this function. Its Taylor series has "2 n factorial" in the
denominators and begins "one minus one-half x squared." One law named for this function has a term in
which it is multiplied by twice the product of side lengths a and b. That law is a generalization of the
Pythagorean theorem. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function which for an angle in a right triangle
is the adjacent side length over hypotenuse length.
ANSWER: cosine
This function can be written as the quantity e to the i theta plus e to the negative i theta all divided by two,
and its hyperbolic type equals one half times the quantity e to the x plus e to the negative x. This function's
Taylor series expansion begins 1 minus x squared over 2 factorial plus x to the fourth over 4 factorial. The
derivative of this function is equal to the negative sine of x, and this function's namesake law is a
generalization of the Pythagorean Theorem for non-right triangles. For 10 points, name this function, which
is defined for a right triangle as the adjacent leg over the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: Cosine
In a certain range it can be approximated using Hardy's approximation and it has a fixed point at Dottie's
number, a value roughly equal to .74. A discrete transform of this type is used in compressing JPEG images
and its hyperbolic form can be used to describe the shape of a catenary. The dot product between two
vectors is equal to their norms times this function. Its hyperbolic form can be written as the sum of e to the x
plus e to the negative x all divided by two, and the first three terms of its Taylor series expansion are 1,
minus x squared over two, plus x to the fourth over 24. FTP, name this function that is the multiplicative
inverse of the secant function and can be calculated in a right triangle as adjacent divided by hypotenuse.
ANSWER: Cosine function
In computer science, a similarity metric named after this function can be used to find two vectors that are
the most similar. The Taylor series for this function begins with one minus x-squared-over-2-factorial plus
x-to-the-fourth-over-four-factorial. This function names a law that is an extension of the Pythagorean
theorem, and can be used to find the side lengths and angles of any triangle. The reciprocal of this function
is the secant. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function, which for a right triangle can be defined as
dividing the length of the adjacent side by the length of the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: cosine [do not accept or prompt on "sine"; do not accept "hyperbolic cosine"]
This function's Taylor series approximation begins 1 - X2/2! + X4/4! ("One minus X squared over two
factorial plus X to the fourth over four factorial"). In Euler's Formula, this function added to i(sin(x)) ("I
times the sine of X") is equal to eix ("E to the I X"). This function is also equal to the square root of 1-sin2
(theta) ("One minus sine squared of theta") and approaches zero as theta approaches p/2 ("pi over two").
Name this function equal to a triangle's adjacent side over its hypotenuse.
ANSWER: cosine
Repeated use of this function on any input converges to its fixed point at which x and y are about .749,
which is the Dottie number. This function appears in the integral formula for Fourier coefficients denoted asub-0 through a-sub-n. A variant of it used to model hanging chains in uniform gravity is the "hyperbolic"
type, and its Taylor series begins with 1, minus x squared over two, plus x to the fourth over twenty-four. Its
namesake law generalizes the Pythagorean Theorem, and this reciprocal of secant is equal to the xcoordinate of the unit circle. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function equal to adjacent over
hypotenuse in right triangles, the complement of the sine.
ANSWER: cosine of x, theta, etc. [do not accept "sin"]
This function of x is equal to one minus ver(x) [READ: "vurr of x"]. One-half of the quantity of e to the x
plus e to the negative x is the hyperbolic form of this function. This function is used to compute the real part
of e to a complex power in Euler's Formula. Twice the square of this function minus one gives this function
of 2x according to one of its double-angle formulas. The range of the inverse of this function is from 0 to pi,
and this function decreases from 1 to -1 on that interval. It gives the x-coordinate of a point on the unit
circle. For ten points, identify this function equal to the adjacent side over the hypotenuse and often
contrasted with sine.
ANSWER: cosine
In the exciting world of differential equations, the Laplace transform of this function equals s over the
quantity s-squared plus a-squared. The hyperbolic form of this function is found in the equation of a
catenary and equals e to the x plus e to the negative x all over two. In calculus, the Maclaurin series for it
begins one minus quantity x-squared over two factorial. Its namesake law and the Pythagorean theorem are
equivalent when this function is zero. The derivative of this function is negative sine, and its reciprocal is
secant. For 10 points, name this trig function that equals the length of the adjacent side over the hypotenuse
for an acute angle in a right triangle.
ANSWER: cosine [or cos]
The hyperbolic version of this function is e to the x plus e to the negative x, all over two, and the dot
product of two vectors is equal to the product of the length of the vectors multiplied by this function
of the angle between them. A generalization of the (*) Pythagorean Theorem to non-right triangles
includes this function and is known as its namesake "law." Its reciprocal is the secant function. For 10
points, name this trigonometric function, often represented as the ratio of the adjacent side to the
hypotenuse in a right triangle.
ANSWER: cosine
This function's hyperbolic version is given by "e to the x plus e to the negative x, all over 2," which can
be used to describe catenaries. The first two terms of its Taylor series are "1 minus x squared over 2,"
and the natural log of this function is found in the integral of the tangent. Its namesake law states "c
squared equals a squared plus b squared minus 2ab" times this function applied to gamma. The dot
product is defined in terms of, for 10 points, what trigonometric function that is the reciprocal of the
secant, and is given by adjacent over hypotenuse.
ANSWER: cosine
This operation yields the golden ratio divided by two for an input of pi over five. According to the law of
this operation, c-squared equals a-squared plus b-squared minus the product of 2 a b and this operation on
the angle between a and b. That law is used when two side lengths and one angle are known. The reciprocal
of this function is the secant. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function defined as side adjacent to the
input angle over the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: cosine
This function has a universal attracting fixed point at the Dottie number. Its hyperbolic analogue describes
the shape of a catenary. The limit as x approaches 0, of this function minus 1, all over x, equals 0, an
intermediate step in proving that its first derivative is its negative cofunction. Its namesake law is a
generalization of the Pythagorean Theorem. Positive in the first and fourth quadrants, in a right triangle it is
the adjacent leg over the hypotenuse. For 10 points, name this even trigonometric function which is the
reciprocal of secant and the cofunction of sine.
ANSWER: cosine function [accept things like cos x or cos theta]
The hyperbolic version of this function is equal to one-half times the quantity e to the z plus e to the
negative z, and the Taylor series expansion of it is negative one to the n times z to the two n divided by
quantity two n factorial. For an object on an inclined plane, the normal force is balanced by a term that
includes this function, which also appears with force and displacement in a formula for calculating work. A
namesake law states c squared equals a squared plus b squared minus two a b times this function, which is
the reciprocal of secant, and whose derivative is negative sine. For 10 points, name this trigonometric
function that is the ratio of the length of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse in a right triangle.
ANSWER: cosine
This function is equal to the real part of the complex number e raised to the i times x. When converting
from polar to Cartesian coordinates, x is equal to r times this function of theta. The law of this function is
used to calculate the side length of a triangle when the angle opposite it is known. This function is positive
one at zero. For 10 points, name this function of an angle equal to the length of the adjacent side divided by
the hypotenuse, often contrasted with sine.
ANSWER: cosine [do not accept sine]
The sum of this function applied to each of the three angles of a triangle gives one plus the inradius
over circumradius. This function's hyperbolic analogue is equal to e to the x plus e to the negative x
all over two, and is the equation for a catenary curve. This function of theta gives the real part of e to
the power of i times theta, and the (*) dot product of two unit vectors is equal to this function of the angle
between them. For ten points, give this even trigonometric function, which in a right triangle is equal to
adjacent over hypotenuse, and whose square is equal to one minus sine-squared.
ANSWER: cosine (accept cosh or hyperbolic cosine after that clue is read)
The fixed point of this function is known as the Dottie number, and this function equals the real component
of the value of e raised to the power of i times x. The derivative of the inverse of this function equals
negative one over the square root of the quantity one minus x squared, and the graph of its hyperbolic
version is known as a catenary (KAAtuh-nehr-ee). Its namesake law can be used to determine the length of
the third side of a triangle given the two other sides and the included angle and is a generalization of the
Pythagorean theorem to any triangle. Give the name of this function equal to both the x-coordinate on a unit
circle and the length of the adjacent leg divided by the hypotenuse of an angle in a right triangle.
ANSWER: cosine [accept addition of "of x" or any other variable]
One law concerning this function describes the radiant intensity from a certain type of surface, and is named
for Lambert. The hyperbolic version of this function defines a catenary, and equals half the quantity e to the
x plus e to the negative x. A double-angle identity for this function is that with an input of two theta, it
equals the quantity one minus the tangent squared of theta over the quantity one plus the tangent squared of
theta. Its Maclaurin series is one minus x squared over two factorial, plus x to the fourth over four factorial,
et cetera; and its namesake law generalizes the Pythagorean theorem. Name this trigonometric function that,
for an angle in a right triangle, equals the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: cosine function [or f of x equals cosine of x, etc.]
This function is equal to ex plus e-x all divided by two. Its corresponding hyperbolic function describes a
catenary. When converting polar to rectangular coordinates, the x-value is proportional to this function of
theta. This function is positive in quadrants I and IV. This periodic, even function is the reciprocal of secant
(SEE-kant) and the derivative of sine, which is also its cofunction. For 10 points, name this trigonometric
function defined as adjacent over hypotenuse.
ANSWER: cosine
If every open cover of a topological space has a subcover with this property, it is known as a Lindelof
space. Separable spaces are those with dense subsets having this property. Powersets of sets with this
property lack it according to (*) Cantor's theorem, while the set of discontinuities of monotone functions
must have this property. The real numbers were shown to lack this property by the diagonal argument, also
proposed by Cantor. Possessed by the integers and rationals, for 10 points, name this property of sets that
can be put into bijection with the natural numbers and have cardinality denoted aleph-null.
ANSWER: countability [accept word forms; accept countably infinite; prompt on infinite before "lack it"; accept denumerability or word forms thereof; accept answers involving aleph-null or aleph-naught before the end]
If a theory with this property is satisfiable then it has a model of every infinite cardinality by the
Lowenheim-Skolem theorem. An algebraic closure either has the same cardinality as the initial field
or has this property. The sets of a sigma algebra are closed under this type of union. Zorn's lemma is
frequently used rather than induction on sets without this property. Sets with cardinality (*) AlephNaught have this property. One proof that a certain set does not have this property lists the elements and
changes the ith digit of the ith entry for all i; that is Cantor's diagonalization argument. For 10 points, name
this property of a set which is not possessed by the reals, but possessed by the rationals and integers,
defined as having the same cardinality as the natural numbers.
ANSWER: countability [or countably infinite; accept word forms; prompt on infinite]
Up to isomorphism, the Rado graph is the only graph with this property and the extension property.
If a measure is diffuse, such as the Lebesgue measure, then it considers any set with this property to
be a null set. If a space has a subset that is dense and has this property, then the space is separable.
One behavior of infinite sets with this property is demonstrated by Hilbert's paradox of the Grand
Hotel. The cardinality of these sets is represented by aleph-null, and the fact that real numbers do
not have this property is demonstrated by Cantor's diagonal argument. Name this property of sets
that can be put into bijection with the natural numbers.
ANSWER: countablility [accept countable or countably infinite or denumerable]
Stein showed that groups of this kind are free and the third axiom of Kolmogorov involves an additivity of
this type. The Lowenheim-Skolem theorem states that if a first-order theory has a model, then it has a model
with this type of domain. Sets with this property have a Hausdorff dimension of zero and Cieslieski defined
this property as that which is equipollent to the finite ordinals. Cantor's diagonal argument shows that the
real numbers do not have this property thought sets with it are typically finite or denumerable. For 10
points, name this type of set whose cardinality is equal to a subset of the set of natural numbers.
ANSWER: countable
One family of these are described as VLIW, including the Itanium one. They can be superscalar or
SMT. Many of them use pipelining, or the breaking down of execution into stages including
fetch/decode and using the arithmetic (*) logic unit. They use fast pieces of memory called registers, and
high performance ones have large caches. For 10 points, name this core part of a computer that does the
majority of computations, which have clock frequencies ranging from megahertz to gigahertz.
ANSWER: CPU [or Central Processing Unit]
This device breaks up tasks into several stages; the first two, fetch and decode, are executed in parallel
using a pipeline. Moore's Law describes the number of transistors that can fit on one die. The von Neumann
bottleneck occurs because information must travel between the memory and this part of the computer. This
device contains an arithmetic logic unit and one or more caches to store instructions and/or data. For 10
points, name these devices that are responsible for doing most of the computing on a computer.
ANSWER: CPUs [or central processing units]
Asynchronous examples of these devices include AMULET and ILLIAC II, which are coordinated
using pipeline controls and FIFO sequencers. They operate primarily based on fetch, decode, execute,
and writeback, and the von Neumann bottleneck limiting their performance can be reduced by
adding a (*) cache. They transmit information between the ALU, registers, and memory, and their clock
rate is typically measured in gigahertz. Multiple cores can be found in ones manufactured by AMD and
Intel. For ten points, identify this hardware component that handles instructions and computation for a
computer.
ANSWER: CPU or central processing unit [accept microprocessor]
RISC and ARM are architectures for these devices, which typically use the four-step procedure of fetching,
decoding, executing, and performing writeback. They can become superscalar via parallelization, and
context switching allows them to undergo multithreading. Recent ones often use x86 architecture or the L3
multilevel variety of a cache. These devices- clock rate is their rate of instruction execution, and the most
advanced modern ones have rates of about three gigahertz. For 10 points, identify this computer component
that carries out programs- instructions.
ANSWER: CPU [accept central processing unit; prompt "processor"]
A common component found in this part of a computer is a TLB. This component of a computer using
pipelining to achieve greater throughput. Important components include the FPU, the ALU, and registers.
ARM and x86 are two popular instruction set architectures employed in them, the later of which is used by
Intel. Multiple cores are used in modern examples, so multiple programs can be running at once. For 10
points, name this component of a computer that does most of the general purpose computations.
ANSWER: CPUs [or central processing units]
Some types of this component use RISC, such as the SPARC and PowerPC ones. The 80386 one of these
gave rise to the i386 architecture. This component almost always contains a digital circuit to perform
operations such as bitwise logic, called an arithmetic logic unit, and there was a flaw in the floating point
unit of the P5 Pentium one of these. For 10 points, name this part of a computer that carries out instructions
from a computer program and is the primary product of Intel.
ANSWER: Central Processing Units [or microprocessors]
This operation is combined with the del operator to find the limiting value of circulation per unit area for
certain fields; that is the curl operation. This operation is used to find binormal vectors, the intersection of
two planes, and the area of a parallelogram. Often found by taking a three-by-three determinant, the result
of this operation is perpendicular to the two input vectors, and its direction can be determined using the
right hand rule. Name this vector operation whose result is equal in magnitude to the product of the
magnitude of the two vectors times the sine of the angle between them, and that in the scalar triple product
is combined with the dot product.
ANSWER: cross product [or Gibbs vector product; prompt on vector product]
This operation only exists in seven-space and in three-space. This operation will give the normal to a
plane when applied to an independent basis spanning the plane. It can be evaluated by finding the
determinant of a three-by-three matrix consisting of the two inputs. It gives the unit vector k when applied
to i and j. The right-hand rule is used to find the direction of the result of this operation, which has a
magnitude proportional to the sine of the angle between the two input vectors and is perpendicular to them.
For 10 points, name this method of vector multiplication distinct from a dot product.
ANSWER: cross product [or vector product]
. In abstract index notation, the Levi-Civita symbol is used to define it, by providing the appropriate signs to
a certain three-by-three pseudo-determinant. The computation of the volume of a parallelepiped uses this
non-commutative operation as part of the scalar triple product. The curl of a vector is equal to this operation
on del and the vector. The output of this operation is has magnitude proportional to the sine of the angle
between the inputs, and is governed by the right hand rule. For 10 points, what binary operation between
two vectors produces another vector and is symbolized with a small x?
ANSWER: cross product
This operation only exists in three or seven dimensions, and it is combined with the del operator to calculate
curl. This must be performed first when calculating a triple product. One way to calculate this operation
places the two inputs in the second and third rows of a matrix. This is anticommutative, and it can be used
to calculate the areas of triangles or parallelograms once you take the magnitude of its result. Name this
operation on vectors that produces a new vector perpendicular to both inputs.
ANSWER: cross product (accept vector product or Gibbs product, prompt on "product", do not accept answers using the word dot or inner)
The Goldreich-Goldwasser-Micali construction is used in this field to construct a PRF from a PRG.
The most widely used algorithm in this field is an implementation of a substitution-permutation
network. In this field, Luby and Rackoff showed that the Feistel permutation can be used to
transform a PRF into a PRP. A hardcore predicate is used by this field's Blum-Blum-Shub algorithm,
which is used to generate pseudorandom numbers. If integer factorization could be done in polynomial time
with Shor's algorithm, this field's public-key RSA algorithm, an example of a function that is easy to
compute but hard to invert, would be totally screwed. For 10 points, identify this field of computer science
concerned with encrypting information.
ANSWER: cryptography [or cryptology; prompt on computer science]
Kerckhoff's principle is central to the foundation of this practice, which was improved on by Claude
Shannon in his namesake maxim. The discrete logarithmic Diffie-Hellman protocol is used in a particular
type of this practice, which is sometimes implemented with the RSA algorithm, and that type of this practice
is called public key, which is contrasted with block and stream varieties. . For ten points, identify this
method for protecting data often accomplished with Vigenere or Caesar ciphers.
ANSWER: cryptography
When this 3-dimensional figure is rotated around its space diagonal, the resulting volume is pi
divided by the square root of 3 times larger, and the n-dimensional generalization of this figure has 2
to the power of n minus m times n choose m m-dimensional boundaries. Prince Rupert's variety of
this figure has an (*) edge length of 1.06, and there are eleven nets to build this figure, the most commonly
used of which is in the shape of a cross. This figure has 12 edges and 8 vertices, and is the dual solid of the
octahedron. The only platonic figure able to tile space, for ten points, name this geometrical figure which
has six square faces.
ANSWER: Cube
This geometric figure has Schlafli symbol {4, 3}, and its symmetry group has order 48. It is a zonohedron
with 3 generators, and rotating it about an axis through its two furthest points gives a hyperboloid of one
sheet. Menaechmus solved a problem involving the duplication of this figure, which is impossible with only
a compass and straightedge. This figure's dual is the octahedron, and its longest space diagonal is root-three
times its side length. With a dihedral angle of 90 degrees, it is the Platonic solid with the second-smallest
number of faces and the only one that can tile space. For 10 points, name this regular polyhedron with six
square faces.
ANSWER: cube or regular hexahedron
If an edge length of this figure is given as s, its volume increases at a rate of 3s2 ds/dt [three s squared d s d
t], and its surface increases at a rate of 12s ds/dt [twelve s d s d t]. Its vertices [VER-tih-sees] can be placed
on a three-dimensional grid so they are located at all the points where all three coordinates each have an
absolute value equal to a given constant. This shape is the basis for an optical illusion designed by Louis
Necker. The only Platonic solid which has faces with an even number of sides, it contains eight vertices and
six faces. All of its angles are right angles. Name this three-dimensional figure whose sides are all squares.
ANSWER: cube (accept regular hexahedron, prompt on "hexahedron" or "square prism")
The largest of these shapes that can pass through another is named for Prince Rupert. This shape has Schlai
symbol (4; 3) [READ: "Four Three"]. When this shape is truncated, the resulting object has six hexagonal
and eight triangular faces. The only space-filling regular tiling of three-dimensional space makes use of this
shape. The Delian problem concerned this shape, seeking to double its(*) volume using a compass and
straightedge. The dual of the octahedron, this shape has twelve edges and eight vertices as is sometimes
called a regular hexahedron. For ten points, name this three-dimensional shape with six square faces.
ANSWER: cube (accept regular hexahedron before mention)
This structure is described by the Schlafli Symbol 4,3. Prince Rupert's problem deals with two of these
and it is a equilateral zonohedron. It has thirteen axes of symmetry and eleven different nets. An analogue in
one higher dimension is the tesseract, and it is the dual of the octahedron. Its surface area is twenty four
times its radius squared and its volume is eight times its radius cubed. They have twelve edges, six faces,
and eight vertices. For 10 points, name this three dimensional construct with six square faces.
ANSWER: cube
If a prime p leaves a remainder of two when divided by three, then Fermat's Little Theorem can be
used to prove that these numbers leave all integer residues modulo p. The third finite difference of
this sequence of numbers is always six, and the sum of the first n of these numbers is equal to the nth
triangular number squared. Ramanujan pointed out that there were two ways to express 1729 as the
sum of two of these numbers, and the smallest case of (*) Fermat's Last Theorem proves no two of these
numbers can sum to a third one of them. Including 1, 8, and 27, for ten points, identify this set of numbers
consisting of integers raised to the third power.
ANSWER: positive perfect cubes (don-t prompt or accept "perfect numbers"; accept cubic numbers)
The fact that 2 times cosine of 2pi/7 is the solution to an instance of this sort of equation was used to prove
that a regular heptagon can be constructed using a marked ruler. Every curve of genus one is isomorphic to
this type of smooth projective plane curve. Tait incorrectly conjectured that certain planar graphs with
degrees describable as this were also Hamiltonian. This is the order of x in a elliptic curve. Discriminants of
this type of polynomial include a term of eighteen times the product of the coefficients. Cardano's Rule can
be used to solve equations of this order. Polynomials of this order have local extrema numbering at most
two. For 10 points, name the order of polynomials that have three roots.
ANSWER: cubic [accept three; or cube; prompt on polynomial]
This operation can be rederived from the octonions in R7 using the seven-dimensional cross product. A
field in R3 in which this operation vanishes can be written as the gradient of some potential function, and
the line integral between two points on such a field is path-independent. The surface integral of the result of
this operation on a vector field is given by a line integral of the field component normal to the surface over
the surface boundary, in accordance with Stokes- theorem. When this operation on a vector field equals
zero, the field is said to be conservative, and the divergence applied to the result of this operation is
identically zero. For 10 points, identify this vector derivative sometimes represented as the cross-product of
the del symbol and a vector field, which measures instantaneous rotation.
ANSWER: curl [accept descriptions of curl like del cross or similar before mention; prompt on "derivative"; accept cross product before "cross" is read]
If a field is orthogonal to this operator applied to the field, it is said to be complex lamellar. In
cylindrical and spherical coordinates, respectively, this operation is scaled by one over rho and one over r
squared sine theta. The Kelvin-Stokes theorem shows the surface integral of this operation applied to a
function equals the line integral on the surface's boundary of the function. Maxwell's form of the Faraday
equation equates it applied to the electric field to the negative time derivative of the magnetic field. If it
applied to a fluid's velocity field is zero, the field is irrotational, and more generally, this operation applied
to a fluid's velocity field gives the vorticity. For 10 points, name this vector operator usually symbolized as
del cross a vector field.
ANSWER: curl
He's not Lob, but saying that "if roses are red, then Rob Ford smokes crack" is a paradox named for
this man that affects naive set theory, lambda calculus and combinatory logic. The practice of
representing a function of multiple variables as a function returning a function was developed by and
is named after him; but it is his work on combinatory logic that explains why three functional
programming languages are named after him. He also showed that programs in several models of
computation are equivalent to proofs in a formal system and their types to the propositions proven; this
isomorphism is named after him and William Howard. For ten points, name this mathematician after whom
the programming languages Haskell and Brooks are named.
ANSWER: Haskell Brooks Curry
The Frenet-Serret formulae relate torsion and this quantity to a set of three vectors. One type of this quantity
is given as the determinant of the shape operator and is the product of the two "principal" values of this.
The "intrinsic" type of it is undetectable to observers who are not on the manifold, and is exemplified by the
Gaussian type of this quantity, while the Ricci and Reimann tensors also describe this property. The
"extrinsic" type is defined as the derivative of the tangent angle with respect to the arclength at a point.
This quantity is the inverse of the radius of the osculating circle associated with a curve. For 10 points,
identify this quantity which roughly describes how much a plane or a line is bent.
ANSWER: curvature [accept torsion until mentioned]
This quantity over certain closed loops must be greater than 4pi according to the Fary-Milnor theorem. For
3-dimensional manifolds, the shape operator is an extrinsic type of this quantity, while its determinant is an
intrinsic type. This quantity and torsion are coefficients for calculating the derivatives of the tangent,
normal, and binormal vectors of a curve according to the Frenet-Serret formulas. This quantity is the inverse
of the radius of a curve's osculating circle. This quantity can be measured using the Ricci or Riemann
tensors, and the aforementioned determinant is the Gaussian type of this quantity. For 10 points, name this
quantity which measures how much a manifold deviates from flatness.
ANSWER: curvature [accept "extrinsic curvature" until mentioned]
For space, this quantity is equal to the Hubble constant squared over c squared times omega-M plus the
mass density of the cosmological constant over the critical density minus one. One form of this quantity is
roughly equal to the inverse of the Hubble distance squared. For a parameterized space curve r(t) this
quantity is equal to the magnitude of r prime crossed with r double primed over the magnitude of r prime
raised to the third. One over the absolute value of this quantity is equal to its namesake radius. For a sphere,
this quantity is equal to one over radius squared. For 10 points, name this quantity that measures how much
an object deviates from being flat or a straight line.
ANSWER: curvature
The "sparsest" form of this graph property gives its name to an NP-Hard problem whose only known
efficient solution is an approximation algorithm that runs in "big O of the square root of N" time and
was developed by Arora, Rao, and Vazirani. Finding the "maximum" form of this property is also
NP-Hard, but Goemans and Williamson developed an approximation making use of semidefinite
programming. For planar graphs, finding that maximum value of it is the dual of the (*) routeinspection problem. The first algorithm to find the smallest number of edges affected by this property
repeatedly uses augmenting graphs to calculate residues; that algorithm was developed by Ford and
Fulkerson. In general, this term refers to a partition of a graph's vertices into two distinct subsets. For 10
points, name this property, whose "min" is equal to the max flow according to a namesake theorem.
ANSWER: the cut
In number theory, this term is used to designate integers with n minus one digits which, when multiplied by
an integer less than n, result in the same digits in a different order. In physics, this term designates a
generalized coordinate whose conjugate generalized momentum is conserved, and thus one on which the
Lagrangian does not depend. In group theory, this adjective is used to describe groups which are generated
by a single element, while in graph theory this term designates a graph which contains at least one path
whose first and last nodes are the same. For 10 points, identify this adjective which in chemistry is used to
describe molecules whose carbon atoms form a ring.
ANSWER: cyclic
The curtate variety of this figure contains a fixed point on its inside, which contrasts with its prolate variety.
Huygens used its isochronous properties to design the first pendulum clock guaranteeing regular swing
independent of pendulum height. This figure is represented parametrically by the equations x equals r times
the quantity one minus sine of t, and y equals r times the quantity one minus cosine of t. It provides the
solution to the problem of finding the curve of fastest descent, also known as the brachistochrone problem.
For 10 points, name this figure traced out by a point on a rolling circle.
ANSWER: cycloid
Though it is not a spheroid, variations on this shape include the curtate and the prolate, and it is used to
make the gears in a mechanical clock. The formula for the length of one unit of this shape multiplies a
different length by eight, and the formula for its area multplies three pi times that other length squared.
Though a path along this shape does not give the shortest distance between two points, it gives the shortest
time for an object traveling between two points under gravity, solving the Brachistochrone Problem. Name
this shape which follows a point on the surface of a rolling circle.
ANSWER: cycloid
A pendulum constrained by inverted examples of this curve will have a path that follows a
congruent, inverted example of this curve, which can be used to create isochronous pendulums
for clocks. Roberval derived the area under this curve by using the method of indivisibles due to
Cavalieri. The parametric form of this curve is given by x equals r times quant. t minus sine t and
y equals r times quant. one minus cosine t. This figure is the fastest path by which a question can
travel from one point to another under the influence of gravity, making it the solution to the
brachistochrone problem. For 10 points, name this curve traced out by a point on a rotating circle
traveling along a line.
ANSWER: cycloids
It has been called "The Helen of Geometers", because it often caused quarrels among 17th century
mathematicians. First studied by Nicholas of Cusa and named by Galileo, it is an example of a
roulette curve. It is related to the epitrochoid and hypotrochoid curves, which can be constructed
using a Spirograph toy. The solution to both the (*) tautochrone and brachistochrone problems, its area
is 3 times that of the generating circle, and its length is 4 times the diameter of the generating circle. FTP,
name this curve traced by a fixed point on the edge of a circle rolling along a straight line.
ANSWER: cycloid
Roberval found that the area under this curve is equal to three pi times its height squared, and Wren solved
Pascal's challenge to determine its arc length to be eight times its height. This shape is equal to both its
evolute and involute, and a parametric equation for this curve is given by x equals a times quantity t minus
sine of t and y equals quantity one minus cosine of t. This curve has the property that a particle along it
experiences simple harmonic motion with amplitude independent of starting location, and this curve is the
unique solution to the problem asking for which curve will a bead slide to another point in the least time.
For 10 points, name this solution to the brachristochrome problem, the path traced out by a point on the
surface of a circle rolling along a straight line.
ANSWER: cycloid [prompt on "trochoid"]
A Steinmetz solid is an intersection of two or three of these shapes. Archimedes inscribed a sphere in one of
these shapes to determine that the sphere's volume is two-thirds the volume of this shape. One method for
determining the volume of a solid of revolution is named for the shells of these objects, which can be
generated by revolving a rectangle around one of its sides. Its lateral surface area is equal to 2 pi r h and its
volume is pi r squared h. For ten points, name this three-dimensional shape with a circular cross-section and
straight sides.
ANSWER: cylinder
The intersection of this shape with a sphere is known as Viviani's Curve, and the name of this shape is
given as an alternative name for Bessel functions. Mathematicians define this as the locus of points given by
adding a fixed curve plus a parameter times a fixed point, sometimes bounding it with two parallel planes.
The namesake of a coordinate system that combines two distance measures with an angle measure, the best
known example of this shape is the right circular type, which has a volume of pi times r squared times h.
Name this three-dimensional shape which commonly is the space between two circles.
ANSWER: cylinder
In one sense, this figure is equal to the product of S1 and a subset of the real line. A Steinmetz solid is
produced from the intersection of these objects. The volume of a solid of revolution can be computed by
decomposing it into a number of shells of these objects and integrating. A system of coordinates named for
this figure is useful for solving problems that have an axial symmetry, and is constructed by adding a z-axis
to polar coordinates. The intersection of a plane with this figure will create an ellipse, since it is formed by
translating a circle along a perpendicular axis. For 10 points, name this three-dimensional shape whose
volume is given by "pi times radius squared times height".
ANSWER: cylinder
In a coordinate system named for this object, the volume can be found by integrating with respect
to rho d rho d phi d z. That coordinate system adds a height z to the polar coordinate system. This
shape, not a disc, is used when finding the volume of a solid of revolution with the (*) shell method.
The volume of this object is equal to pi times radius squared times height. For 10 points, name this solid
with two connected circular faces that lie on an axis.
ANSWER: cylinder
One of its successors, ICE, was published by Michael Kwan in 1997, and is a Feistel network with 16
rounds. Another of its successors, which uses the Rijndael method rather than Feistel networks, was adopted
by the US government in 2001. In April 2006, the parallel machine COPACOBANA at the University of
Bochum and Kiel in Germany broke it in 9 days. It had been under a great deal of scrutiny for supposed
government interference in design, involving both a shortening of the key length and a modified design of
the S-boxes. For 10 points, name this successor to the Lucifer cipher, a block cipher that was accepted by
the National Bureau of Standards in 1976, abbreviated DES.
ANSWER: Data Encryption Standard [accept DES before it is read]
The dependent form of these entities can depend on values and are implemented in the language Coq.
For a function, this entity is contravariant in its value for the input. Proving one of these is inhabited
is equivalent to proving a tautology, since they correspond to theorems in intuitionistic logic by the
(*) Curry-Howard correspondence. Allowing a function to have different behaviors based on the value of
this entity for its argument is called polymorphism. Depending on whether they are checked at compile-time
or runtime, a language can be classified as static or dynamic. These entities can be explicitly changed
through coercion or their namesake casting. For 10 points, name these classifications of programming
constructs such as int and string.
ANSWER: data types
Python employs the "duck" way of determining these constructs. C++ can use RTTI to determine these at
runtime as a form of introspection, and C++ uses templates in a similar fashion to "generic" ones.
Programming languages can be classified by having static, dynamic, strong, or weak systems of these. If
built into a language they can be called "primitive," while object-oriented programming allows the
programmer to implement new ones. For 10 points, name these programming constructs which include
characters, bools, integers, floats, and strings.
ANSWER: data types
Through the use of applications, abstractions and lets, Algorithm W infers these entities through
unification in the Hindley-Milner system. In the Curry-Howard isomorphism, mathematical
formulae are isomorphic to these constructs. These entities are not specified in the construction of
algorithms in generic programming paradigms because templates are made instead, which allows
these constructs to be determined at a later time. In C-like languages, a void pointer is not limited by
this entity's value, thus void pointers cannot be dereferenced; that's because a (*) reference is one of
these constructs in programming language theory. Correct usage of these entities are verified at compiletime in "static" languages; otherwise they are checked at run-time in "dynamic" languages. For 10 points,
name these constructs, such as "int," "bool," or "string," that specifies the kind of data of variables in
programming languages.
ANSWER: data types [prompt on "variables"]
The four properties that guarantee reliable transactions within these systems are atomicity, consistency,
isolation and durability. Common types of cardinality in these systems are one-to-one, one-to-many and
many-to-many. Their unique identifiers are known as primary keys. They most commonly adhere to the
relational model, in which foreign keys are used to relate multiple tables; the most popular language for
that model is SQL. For 10 points, identify these systems used to store data in rows, known as records.
ANSWER: relational databases
Armstrong's axioms govern the inference rules for this kind of structure. They can be partitioned
into horizontal units called shards. The logical consistency of these structures can be improved by
converting them into Boyce-Codd form, one of the many normal forms for these entities. Atomicity,
durability, consistency, and isolation comprise the ACID properties of these structures. Items
organized in these structures can be stored in (*) column-oriented or row-oriented formats. They are
typically accessed by using queries through a language like SQL. For 10 points, name these computer
programs that store large collections of information.
ANSWER: relational databases
Software that create and maintain these things should ideally follow the ACID ("acid") paradigm. They
are often implemented using B-plus trees; a simple implementation of one of them is a flat file. Different
models of them include hierarchical and relational. They are often structured into tables, rows, and columns,
which can be manipulated by languages such as SQL. For 10 points, name these organized collections of
information, which are manipulated by programs such as Oracle and Microsoft Access.
ANSWER: database [or DBMS]
Peter Pin-Shan Chen wrote an influential paper on the entity-relationship model of these constructs.
Integrity, distribution independence, and the nonsubversion rule are part of a set of "12 Rules" for these
constructs, created by Edgar F. Codd. One with no repeating elements or groups of elements satisfies their
first normal form. A hash join is a popular algorithm used with these constructs. Links between subunits of
these constructs can be created by using foreign keys. A popular language used with these constructs is
SQL. Records are stored in rows in these constructs, which are found in tables. For 10 points, identify these
constructs used to organize data.
ANSWER: relational databases
Ralph Kimball is a proponent of using a star schema to define a type of these objects used for
business intelligence known as a warehouse. HBase supports large types of these entities and
interfaces with Hadoop. These entities are typically backed by an audit trail, and they can be
traversed with cursors. Data types in these entities can be NVARCHARs. Durability, isolation, (*)
consistency, and atomicity make up the four ACID rules that govern transactions in these entities. Linking
different parts of these entities together is often done by joining on foreign keys. These entities are usually
organized into tables and columns. For 10 points, name these constructs from computer science that hold
information, often queried using SQL ["sequel"].
ANSWER: Relational databases [accept data warehouse during first sentence]
Performance and scalability of these things can be improved using denormalizations like materialized
views. These things can have a property named for Boyce and Codd which is an intermediate
between the third and fourth normal forms for these things. Atomicity, consistency, isolation and
durability are the ACID properties that must be guaranteed for (*) transactions in these things. An
inner join of two elements of these things is equivalent to a cross join followed by a select. JOIN, SELECT,
and INSERT are examples of operations for manipulating the records in the tables in the relational type of
these objects. For 10 points, name these objects managed by systems like mySQL and Oracle which are
computerized collections of information.
ANSWER: (relational) databases [anti-prompt on tables until mentioned]
In a Karnaugh table, these laws are used to calculate the product of sums. These are also used in digital
logic gates to show that only half of the 2*2n possibilities are unique, where n is the number of logic gates.
These laws are used to express conjunctions in terms of disjunctions and vice-versa via negation. Proved
through truth tables, this set of laws was named after a Madurai-born British mathematician. Name these
laws from Boolean algebra and propositional logic that state that not parenthesis p and q close parenthesis
equals not p or not q.
ANSWER: De Morgan's Laws
One can use this to determine the product of sums using a Karnaugh table They can be used for a
disjunction or conjunction operator and are often remembered using a variation of the line "If you need to
break the line, change the sign". They can be proved through truth tables, and when more than two sets are
involved one is proved by showing inclusion in both the intersection of each converse and the compliment
of the union of each of those sets. FTP name this set of laws from symbolic logic that state not parenthesis
p or q close parenthesis is equivalent to not p and not q.
ANSWER: DeMorgan Laws
In C, the keyword typedef can be used to create new objects for use in this operation. Global and local
scope is determined by whether this operation is performed outside of all functions or inside a function.
Statically typed languages without type interference must include the type of a variable or function when
performing this operation. For 15 points, identify this operation that must be done before a function or
variable is used, in which they are defined.
ANSWER: declaration [or word forms, such as declare; prompt on definitions]
This term of a field extension K over F is the dimension of the vector space K. Formally, this concept may
be extended to any function as the ratio of the limit as x increases of log of the magnitude of f of x over log
x. The Abel-Ruffini theorem states that the highest this quantity can be for a polynomial equation to be
soluble in radicals is four. For 10 points, identify this term that refers both to the highest power of the
variable found in a term of a polynomial, and to a unit equal to pi over one hundred eighty radians, used to
measure angles.
ANSWER: degree
A function partially named for this symbol is equal to the limit of a Gaussian distribution as the
standard deviation approaches zero. A function that is defined as zero everywhere except for when its two
inputs are equal is partially named for this symbol. It's not sigma, but this symbol is commonly used to
denote the uncertainty in a particle's position. This symbol lends its name to a function that is equal to zero
everywhere but at zero, where it is equal to one. Frequently, a function f of x is said to have a limit at a if
for a each real epsilon greater than zero there is a number, represented by this symbol, greater than zero
such that the absolute value of x minus a is less than this symbol. For 10 points, name this Greek symbol
that is frequently used in math to denote a change in a quantity's value.
ANSWER: delta
This Greek letter represents a function that equals zero everywhere except where its two inputs are equal.
This Greek letter is also used to name a function that has a value of zero everywhere except when the input
equals zero and has a magnitude at zero large enough to cancel out integration when it is multiplied inside
the integrand. Those values are named after Kronecker and Dirac, respectively. When an output can be off
by a value of epsilon, the input can be off by an amount represented by this letter in proofs of limits. Name
this Greek letter often used to represent uncertainty or change of a variable.
ANSWER: delta
This letter names a baryon that has spin and isospin three-halves, and it is also used to denote the
discriminant of a polynomial. This letter names a function of two variables which tests if they are equal
along with Kronecker, and a function which equals zero everywhere except at zero, in such a way that its
integral over the domain is one, is named for this letter and Paul Dirac. Along with epsilon, it is used in one
kind of a formal proof of a limit. In algebra, this letter is used in scenarios such as calculating the slope of a
line, or the average rate of change. For 10 points, name this fourth letter of the Greek alphabet, often used to
denote the change in a quantity.
ANSWER: delta
This Greek letter is used to represent the transition function in automata. With epsilon, this letter names
proofs used to prove limit statements. An upside down form of this letter, the nabla, is used to represent the
gradient. Ratios of isotopes are represented using this letter. This letter denotes the discriminant of a
polynomial. This term denotes the low-lying plain composed of sediment deposited at the mouth of a river.
For 10 points, identify this Greek letter often used to symbolize the change in a quantity.
ANSWER: delta
The Kronecker type of this is a function that takes two values and returns 1 if the values are equivalent,
0 otherwise. This letter represents the Laplace operator. Partial charges of a polar molecule are represented
by this letter plus or minus. With epsilon, it is used in giving the precise definition of a limit. One version
of this letter is used to represent the change in the quantity it is paired with. For 10 points, name this Greek
letter, the capital type of which looks like a triangle.
ANSWER: delta
An operator on the complex projective line that is zero for any fractional linear transformation is
called the Schwarzian one. The digamma function is given by this operation applied to the log of the
gamma function. This operation can be taken nowhere on the Weierstrass function. The sum of this
operation applied twice with respect to each (*) variable is the Laplacian. For functions of two or more
variables, the partial form of this must be taken with respect to one variable at a time. At a critical point, this
operation is nonexistent or equal to zero. For 10 points, name this operation on a function which, for p to
the x, is equal to x times p to the x - 1, the opposite of an integral.
ANSWER: derivative [accept word forms]
This operation can be performed nowhere on the Weierstrass function, and L'Hopital's rule uses
this function to evaluate limits of indeterminate forms. If this operation can be performed, the
function must be continuous, though the converse does not hold. The (*) chain rule is useful for
performing this operation on composite functions, and Leibniz' notation for it is written as d y over d x. For
10 points, name this measure of the instantaneous rate of change of a function, often represented by the
slope of a tangent line.
ANSWER: derivative [or differentiation]
Generalizing this operation to three dimensions requires the use of an operation symbolized with a
nabla, or an upside triangle; that operation is called the gradient. A lowercase delta is used to
represent the (*) "partial" form of this operation. To evaluate an indeterminate limit, one can apply it to
the numerator and denominator until the limit becomes determinate, according to L-Hopital's rule. It is
formally defined as "the limit as delta x goes to zero of f of x plus delta x minus f of x over delta x". For ten
points, name this operation which gives the slope of a curve, the opposite of an integral.
ANSWER: derivative (or differentiation; accept more specific forms like gradient before mention)
Faa Di Bruno's Formula gives an explicit formula for one type of this operation. Operations of this type for
a vector function form the entries of the Jacobian matrix, and operations of this type form the entries of the
gradient. L'Hospital's Rule uses a quotient of these operations to calculate limits. For composite functions,
this operation is applied using the chain rule. This operation finds the slope of a curve's tangent line, and is
defined as the "limit as h goes to zero of 'f of x plus h' minus 'f of x', all over h." For 10 points, name this
basic operation of calculus, the inverse of the integral.
ANSWER: derivative
The Frechet variety of this is defined on Banach spaces. The Gateaux variety of this is similar to its
more common "directional" variety. The Hessian Matrix is filled with second order ones of these,
while the Jacobian Matrix is filled with first order ones. One variety of this operation is commonly
used when dealing with (*) functions of more than one variable; that is this operation's "partial" variety.
The chain, product, and quotient rules are commonly used in performing this operation for a function. For
10 points, identify this process whose "anti" variety, according to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, is
the same as an integral.
ANSWER: derivative [accept word forms; accept things like taking the derivative or differentiation]
A generalization of these operations to mappings between Banach spaces is named for Frechet. Higher
order ones can be calculated by Faa di Bruno's Formula, and they do not exist for any point on the
Weierstrass Function. The entries of the Jacobian matrix are first order examples of these, as are the
components of the gradient. When there are multiple variables, partial ones are used. This mathematical
concept can be defined using limits. When there is a composition of functions, the chain rule can be used to
compute them. For 10 points, name this operation that describes the change of a function as its input
changes and which is the opposite of an integral.
ANSWER: derivatives
The "directional" form of this operation dots the gradient with a vector over the vector's magnitude. The
gradient consists of a vector where each component was created with the "partial" version of this operation.
When applied to compositions of functions, it can be found with the chain rule. It can only be applied to
continuous functions and yields e to the x when applied to e to the x. Leibniz's notation of d over dx is used
for this operation. For 10 points, name this mathematical operation that finds the instantaneous rate of
change of a function, which is the inverse of integration.
ANSWER: partial derivative [or partial differentiation]
In gas chromatography, this word describes a product obtained when silyl groups are added to a
molecule of interest to reduce polarity. In multi-variable calculus, one operator with this name is the dot
product of a unit vector with the gradient, known as the directional this. In biochemistry, this term refers to
a molecule that is synthesized by slightly modifying a given compound, usually by adding a named group for example, aniline is an amino one of these of benzene. In single-variable calculus, the nth of these of a
given function appears in the nth coefficient of the Taylor series of that function. For 10 points, give this
common word the one of which from calculus can be used on both dividends of an apparently
indeterminate limit according to l'Hospital's [low-pee-TALZ] rule.
ANSWER: derivative
The Weierstrass function is a function on which this operation may be performed only on a set of
points of measure zero. The Jacobian matrix includes all of these for a vector-valued function.
Performing this operation while treating all [*] variables but one as unspecified functions is known as
the implicit type of this operation. Methods of calculating this include the chain rule, the quotient rule, and
the product rule. For 10 points, name this inverse of the integral, the slope of the tangent line to graph of a
function at any given point.
ANSWER: derivative [accept partial derivative]
In complex analysis, this operation is well-defined if and only if the Cauchy-Riemann equations are
satisfied. The entries of the Jacobian are all examples of this operation applied to a function. This operation
is applied n times on a given function and is multiplied by "x minus x sub 0" in the numerator for the nth
minus one term of a function's Taylor series expansion. The inflection point of a function can be found by
setting 0 equal to this operation applied twice to the function. It is formally defined by taking the limit as the
spacing between points approaches zero of the difference quotient. For 10 points, name this basic operation
from calculus whose value represents the slope of the line tangent to the graph, whose inverse is the
integral.
ANSWER: derivative [accept word forms like "differentiation," accept all more specific answers, such as first derivative, directional derivative, partial derivative, etc. On the first sentence, accept integral ]
Given this operation on a function, the graph of the function can be approximated with Euler's method. This
operation, the result of which is set equal to zero to find critical points, performed on e to the x yields
itself. It is defined as the limit as h approaches zero of f of x plus h, minus f of x, all over h. Performing
this operation on the indefinite integral of a function produces the original function according to the
fundamental theorem of calculus. FTP, name this instantaneous rate of change, the computing of which is
called differentiation.
ANSWER: First Derivative
This operation, when applied to the logistic curve, gives the Hubbert curve. Functions on
which one can perform this operation an infinite number of times are known as smooth, while
the gradient vector is composed of each partial one. The unique function that remains
unchanged via this process is e to the x. Replacing the monomial x to the n with n times x to the
n minus one gives one by the power rule, and it reverses indefinite integration via the
fundamental theorem of calculus. For 10 points, name this operation that gives the rate of
change of a function.
ANSWER: taking the derivative [or differentiation]
The dot product of the unit vector with the gradient of a function is used to find the directional form of
this measurement. This measurement is applied to both parts of a fraction in L-Hopital's rule. For functions
containing multiple variables, the partial form of this measurement is used. For a function that is composed
of multiple other functions, the chain rule is used when applying this measurement. For 10 points, name this
measurement from calculus that describes how a function changes over time.
ANSWER: derivative [or word forms like differentiation or taking a derivative]
This operation is used to find each entry in a Jacobian [jah-KOBE-ee-un] matrix, and its directional type is
found by taking the dot product of a unit vector with the gradient of a function. If this operation can be
applied everywhere to a function, then it must be continuous and locally linear. Methods for finding this
include the product rule and the chain rule. The value of this either does not exist or equals zero at critical
points, which are often but not always at a local maximum or minimum. The most common method of
finding this involves finding a limit as h approaches zero. Name this operation that finds the slope of a
tangent line of a function, a major subject of calculus.
ANSWER: (partial or first) derivative (accept differentiation)
The Weierstrass function is notable since it lacks this quantity at all of its points. This quantity is zero at
a critical point and finding the partial form of this quantity is used when calculating the gradient. The mean
value theorem concerns the value of this quantity between two points a and b and this quantity is
sometimes found using the chain rule. At f(a) ["F of A"], this quantity is equal to the limit as h goes to the
zero of f(h+a)-f(a) all over h. For 10 points, name this quantity which describes the rate of change of a
function.
ANSWER: derivative
One formula that equates a pair of these operations is the Cauchy-Riemann equation, and a
matrix consisting of functions on which this operation has been performed is called the Jacobian. The
(*) gradient of a function is a vector field whose components have partially been subjected to this
operation. The local maxima and minima of a function can be determined using the first of this operation's
eponymous tests. This operation on x squared yields two x. FTP, name this rate-determining mathematical
operation that the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus states is the inverse of the integral.
ANSWER: derivative
The Frenet-Serret formulas give this operation on the tangent vector as the product of curvature and the
normal vector, and summing this operation performed twice with respect to each variable yields the
Laplacian. The entries of the Jacobian matrix are first order examples of them, and the gradient is calculated
by taking the partial form of this operation on a scalar field. Local extrema of a function are found by using
one of two tests named for it. It is performed on a composition of functions with the chain rule, and this
operation on x-squared yields two x. For 10 points, name this operation that describes the instantaneous rate
of change of a function.
ANSWER: Partial Derivatives [accept Partial Differentiation; do not accept "derivation"]
This person's name is associated with the quartic curve consisting of two ovals and with the graph of the
equation x3+y3-3axy=0, which is easier to graph in polar coordinates and is asymptotic to a line with a
slope of negative one. He also devised a method to determine the maximum number of positive and
negative roots for a polynomial, his rule of signs. Name this mathematician whose work influenced Newton
and Leibniz when they discovered calculus and who is generally considered to be the founder of analytic
geometry, which is why a common name for the coordinate system is based on his name.
ANSWER: Rene Descartes (prompt Cartesian)
A theorem named for him solves a special case of the Apollonius problem and gives the curvature of
two Soddy circles which are tangent to three mutually tangent circles. For a given curve, a method
named for this man to find the tangent line at any point relies on introducing a circle with its center
on the x axis, and the change of signs in a polynomial equation can be used to find the number of real
positive zeros of that polynomial according to this man's rule of signs. This French thinker lends his
name to the coordinate system using the coordinates x and y. For 10 points, identify this dude who notably
said "I think, therefore I am."
ANSWER: Rene Descartes
This man discovered a method of determining the maximum number of positive and negative roots a
polynomial can have, which is known as his namesake rule of signs. He is considered to have founded
analytic geometry by publishing his La Geometrie, and created the x, y, z axis notation on the standard
rectangular coordinate system, which is also sometimes named for him. For 10 points, name this French
mathematician and philosopher who may be better known for the statement "I think, therefore I am."
ANSWER: Rene Descartes
This man's namesake theorem gives the radius of a fourth circle which is tangent to three other mutually
tangent circles. An operation which gives all possible pairs from two sets is called his namesake "product."
The number of positive roots of a polynomial has the same parity as the number of sign changes of the
polynomial's coefficients according to his "rule of signs." This man's best-known mathematical
achievement is extended to three dimensions with the inclusion of a z-axis, and is centered at the origin.
For 10 points, name this mathematician who formulated a rectangular coordinate system.
ANSWER: Rene Descartes
This axiom implies that all sets of real numbers are Lebesgue [la-bayg] measurable; and if it is consistent, it
implies an infinity of inaccessible cardinal numbers. Incompatible with the Axiom of Choice, this axiom of
set theory also implies the consistency of the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms. Applying to infinite two-player
games of length omega where players choose integers, it states that one of the two players has a winning
strategy. Introduced by Polish mathematicians Mycielski and Steinhaus, name this axiom expressible by a
tautology in an infinitary logic, and which, FTP, helps prove that many games are determined.
ANSWER: Axiom of Determinacy or AD
A complex valued generalization of this notion is named for Fredholm, and Jacobi's formula expresses the
notion of their differential. Noted examples of them include the Cayley-Menger and Wronskian, and the
Cauchy-Binet formula generalizes the fact that they are multiplicative maps. Its absolute value can be
considered the volume of the parallelpiped which is described by its constituent vectors and they can be
calculated via Cramer's rule. For 10 points, name these functions, which, for a two by two matrix, are given
by a times d minus b times c.
ANSWER: Determinant
One type of this construct can be used to determine the linear independence of a set of differentiable
functions. That is the Wronskian (RON-ski-un) type of this function. The value of this is set to zero in order
to solve the eigenvalue (EYE-gen-val-yoo) problem. A matrix is invertible if and only if this function of the
matrix is nonzero. For 10 points, identify this function defined only for square matrices, which for a
two-by-two matrix a, b, c, d is equal to a d minus b c.
ANSWER: determinants
The Hill one arises in the solution of a second-order differential equation. The Wronskian and
Jacobian are examples of them, and they can be interpreted as being equivalent to the volume of a
parallelepiped. They are used in solving systems of equations in (*) Cramer's rule, and when this value
is zero, the corresponding matrix is singular. For 10 points, name this quantity, which is defined only for
square matrices, and for a two by two matrix with first row a, b, and second row c, d, is equal to ad
minus bc.
ANSWER: determinant
The change-of-variable theorem uses a type of these values that is comprised of partial derivatives of
multivariable functions. Calculating one type of these values uses the derivatives through the (n-minus-1)st
of n functions to find if a function is linearly independent. They can be calculated by adding and subtracting
products of co-factors in Laplacian expansion. This value is invariate for the transpose of a matrix, and
swapping rows or columns only changes its sign. For 10 point, name this value that, for a two by two matrix
abcd, has the value of a d minus bc.
ANSWER: determinant
The Cayley-Menger type of this function can be used to find the volume of an n-dimensional simplex, while
the Gram type shows that vectors are linearly independent if and only if it is nonsingular. A set of ordinary
differential equations is linearly independent if the Wronskian type of this function is nonzero, while one
can use Cramer's rule to solve systems of linear equations. The usual method for calculating the value of
this function for which the value is multiplied by negative one if rows are swapped is by cofactor expansion.
For 10 points, name this matrix function which implies that a matrix is invertible if it is nonzero.
ANSWER: determinant
Two methods for calculating this value are Dodgson condensation and cofactor expansion. This value
equals zero when a homogeneous equation has a nontrivial solution. This value gives the ratio of
the area of a shape after a linear transformation to the original area. This is evaluated to find a
characteristic equation, which is solved to find eigenvalues. Two of these values are divided to solve a 
system of equations using Cramer's Rule. This is the product of main diagonal values for a triangular
matrix. Name this value for a square matrix sometimes given by the formula ad - bc ["a times d minus b times c"].
ANSWER: determinants
This multilinear function can be used to determine orientation in Euclidean spaces, and the Gram is a type
of this obtained from integrals of functions. It can be used to find the eigenvalues of an endomorphism, and
can be calculated recursively using cofactors, summing the minors multiplied by one or negative one. It is
Abelian, while the structure it is calculated from is not, and is not invertible. The Wronskian is obtained
from functions and derivatives. When it has a value of one, that structure is unimodular, a value of zero
means that structure is singular, and it remains constant under the transpose operation. It is used in Cramer's
Rule to solve systems of linear equations. For 10 points, name this mathematical object derived from
matrices, which for a two by two matrix can be calculated as a*d - b*c.
ANSWER: determinant
Taking this operation on lambda times the identity minus A yields the characteristic polynomial. The
inverse of A is equal to one over this function of A times the classical adjoint, and this function is used to
find whether a particular linear transformation is invertible. This alternating multi-linear operation is used
to solve systems of linear equations via Cramer's rule. For 10 points, name this operation on a matrix
denoted by vertical bars, which for a two-by-two matrix is equal to a d minus b c.
ANSWER: determinant
One of these, a polynomial calculated from a similarly named object consisting of geometric
progressions, is named after Vandermonde. The scaling factor for a change of coordinates when
calculating double or triple integrals is the Jacobian example of this quantity. If this quantity is equal
to 1 for a unitary operator, it is a rotation. For a given operator, this quantity is equal to the (*)
product of its eigenvalues. A system of equations can be solved by the quotient of two of these by Cramer's
rule, and the cross product is calculated using one of these. For 10 points, name this quantity of a square
matrix indicated by straight lines around it, which for 2-by-2 matrices is calculated as ad minus bc.
ANSWER: determinant
The Berizinian generalizes this operation to superalgebras. Applying this operation to the metric tensor and
taking the square root gives the volume form on a manifold. This operation gives the volume of a
parallelopiped of arbitrary dimension. Applying it to successive derivatives of functions is used to conclude
whether the functions are linearly independent. In addition to the Wronskian type of this operation, applying
it to the Jacobian gives the change of basis formula. A matrix is invertible if and only if this operation is
nonzero. A ratio of two of these is used to solve linear systems via Cramer's rule. For 10 points, name this
operation that for a 2 by 2 matrix with elements a, b, c, and d is given by ad minus bc.
ANSWER: determinant [accept det]
Calculation of the number of minimum spanning trees of a graph can be done by applying this function to
the reduced Laplacian according to Kirchhoff's Theorem. The characteristic polynomial can be found by
performing this operation on a difference, one of whose terms has an eigenvalue. Solutions to a system of
linear equations can be expressed as a quotient involving this function according to Cramer's rule. This
function is the unique, multilinear alternating form on square matrices. In a triangular matrix, the product of
all diagonal entries yields this value. For 10 points, name this matrix operation computed using cofactor
expansion, and for a 2 by 2 matrix is A D minus B C.
ANSWER: determinants
A set of solutions to a differential equations can be shown to be independent using a form of this
quantity known as the Wronskian. The solution to a set of linear equations is given in terms of this
quantity by Cramer's rule. One way of computing this quantity is cofactor expansion. For a
two-by-two (*) matrix with entries a, b; c, d it can be written as a d minus b c. For 10 points, name this
function of square matrices that is signified by using vertical bars.
ANSWER: determinant
The Binet-Cauchy multiplication theorem applies to these functions, and the Sylvester theorem
about this function was published without a proof. Successive differentiation is used to determine
linear independence in the Wronskian type of this function. It can also be broken down to smaller cases
by finding the cofactors and related minors. Cramer's rule uses ratios of these functions to solve linear
equations, and if it is equal to zero, a matrix is called "singular." For 10 points, identify this quantity,
which for a 2 by 2 matrix is given by ad minus bc.
ANSWER: determinant
This quantity represents the volume of an n-dimensional parallelpiped given n vectors, while a
similarly named quantity can be found by evaluating the Alexander polynomial at minus one. The
infintesimal change in area is given by this operation applied to the Jacobean, and this quantity is
equal to the product of the eigenvalues of a linear transformation. This value can be calculated by
the levi-cevita permutation symbol or Laplace expansion. (*) Cramer's rule uses this operation to solve
systems of linear equations, which is singular if it is equal to zero. For 10 points, name this scalar operation
on a square matrix, which for two by two matrices is given by A D minus B C.
ANSWER: Determinant
This operation has the property of multilinearity, and it can be found by expansion by cofactors. The
solution to a system of linear equations with a unique solution can be found using ratios of this operation in
the method known as Cramer's rule. This operation must not return zero for a matrix to be invertible.
Switching the rows and columns of a matrix switches the sign of this operation. For 10 points, name this
matrix operation, which, for the two-by-two matrix a b; c d, is simply a d minus b c.
ANSWER: determinant [or mapping until "expansion" is read]
This quantity can be used to compute the hypervolume of a simplex with its Cayley-Menger variety,
and Hadamard's inequality attempts to find the largest possible value of this quantity, which can also
be calculated with the rule of Sarrus. Linear independence of a function can be determined using the
Wronskian type of this value, while eigenvalues can be computed by setting it to zero. [*] Cramer's
rule uses this value to find the solution of a system of equations. This value can be found with minor
expansion and when this value is zero, the matrix in question is singular. For 10 points, name this quantity
that for a two-by-two matrix is a d minus b c.
ANSWER: determinant
This operation is generally equivalent to the wedge product, which is also characterized by
anticommutativity and multilinearity. The differential of this operation can be calculated by Jacobi's
formula. If it equals zero, its associated object is singular; otherwise, its associated object is invertible. The
Wronskian is a special case of this operation, which is sometimes evaluated using Sylvester's theorem. For
the two-by-two matrix "a b c d", it is equal to "a times d" minus "b times c." For 10 points, name this
operation performed on square matrices, abbreviated "det."
ANSWER: determinant of a matrix [accept det before mentioned]
This value can be calculated by Dodgson's condensation. The volume of a parallelepiped is equal to the
absolute value of this for an object of which the shape's bounding vectors are the components. One can find
this value by applying the Laplace expansion, which also called expansion by minors. Taking a ratio of
them can be used to solve a linear system via Cramer's rule. For an identity matrix, the value for this is one,
and if this zero, then the matrix is singular. For 10 points, name this value which for a two by two matrix
can be found by taking the difference of the two diagonals.
ANSWER: determinant
The volume of a simplex in n dimensions can be given by the Cayley-Menger type of this function, and this
function can be generalized to non-square entities using the Cauchy Binet formula. The linear independence
of a set of solutions to a differential equation is given by a nonzero value for the Wronskian type of this, and
changing variables when integrating a function over its domain involves the use of the Jacobian type of this
function. One of these for a two-by-two matrix is used in Cramer's rule to find the solution to a system of
two equations. For 10 points, name this scalar function of a square matrix, denoted by single or double bars
around a matrix.
ANSWER: determinant [prompt on det]
This function is alternating and multilinear, and the Wronskian and Hessian types of these are useful in the
study of differential equations. One of these can give the volume change factor of an integral under a
coordinate change and is called the Jacobian, and Cramer's rule uses these to solve systems of linear
equations. For 10 points, name this function on matrices which, for two by two matrices, is equal to the
difference of the products of the values on the diagonals.
ANSWER: determinant
Superfactorials divide the one of Vandermonde, while for a knot, it can be determined by taking the
absolute value of the associated Alexander polynomial at negative one. Hero's formula can be derived by
applying the one named for Cayley and Menger, which is generally used to calculate the volumes of
simplices, while for a collection of vectors, it represents the volume of a parallelpiped spanned by those
vectors. A namesake theorem states that a nonzero one is equivalent to saying that a matrix's nullspace is the
zero vector. For 10 points, give this alternating multilinear function, which can be calculated for a two-bytwo matrix by subtracting the product of its off-diagonal elements from the product of its diagonal elements.
ANSWER: determinant
The value of this expression is the subject of Hadamard's inequality and the Cauchy-Binet formula. One
method of calculating this expression involves cofactors and uses the Laplace expansion, and a type named
for a Polish mathematician that can determine linear independence is known as the Wronskian. The area of
a parallelogram is the absolute value of this expression, and invertible matrices have non-zero values for it.
This expression can be used in Cramer's rule to solve a system of linear equations. For 10 points, name this
value that can be computed as ad minus bc for a two by two square matrix.
ANSWER: determinant
The sign of this operation tells whether a linear transformation preserves orientation. The
shoestring method for finding the area of a polygon is based on a formula that uses this operation. A
simplex in n dimensions can have its volume calculated using the Cayley-Menger type of this
operation. One method of calculating this operation involves expansion by minors, which takes into
account that this function is alternating multilinear. For a (*) system of linear equations, doing this on
collections of coefficients is used to find solutions according to Cramer's rule. Invertible entities have
nonzero value for this operation, which for a two-by-two input is equal to ad minus bc. For 10 points, name
this operation taken on matrices and symbolized by straight lines.
ANSWER: determinant
When solving linear second order differential equations, one often takes the Wronskian one of these.
In multivariable calculus, the Jacobian one of these is taken to map a function from one coordinate
system to another. Lambda is typically subtracted from (*) diagonal entries of a certain construct before
this quantity is taken to solve for eigenvalues. The aforementioned constructs are only invertible if this
quantity is not equal to zero, and this quantity can only be applied to square matrices. It is equal to one for
an identity matrix. For 10 points, name this value that for the 2 x 2 square matrix a b c d is equal to a d
minus b c.
ANSWER: determinant
A limit on this value under certain conditions was found by Jacques Hadamard, and a common method for
calculating this quantity is known as the Laplace (luh-PLAHS) Method. A value of zero for this quantity
can be used to show that vectors are dependent and the existence of a nonempty nullspace, and this quantity
together with derivatives is used to calculate a Wronskian. This quantity can be used to calculate the effect
of a transformation on area or volume. Give this value used in Cramer's Rule that is associated with a
matrix.
ANSWER: determinant
This is the only alternating multilinear function, up to a constant factor. This function can be expressed in
terms of the sign function of elements in the symmetric group, as in the Leibniz formula. Using the Laplace
expansion, it can be computed via expansion by minors. This function appears in the formula for a
characteristic polynomial, as well as in Cramer's rule. It equals 0 if and only if the matrix is non-invertible,
and it equals 1 for an identity matrix. For 10 points, name this value associated with a square matrix, which
for a 2 by 2 matrix is calculated as ad minus bc.
ANSWER: matrix determinant
The number of alternating sign matrices is given by the Hankel type of these for binomial coefficients, while
the top exterior algebra gives its value for a general linear transformation. This function of the matrix
exponential is equal to the exponential of the trace, and it is the unique alternating multilinear function from
the space of square matrices to its underlying field. For two vectors in three-space, it can be used as a
mnemonic for the value of the cross product, and it is invariant under elementary row and column
operations. FTP, give this function that associates to each square matrix a scalar and which can be
computed by cofactor expansion.
ANSWER: determinant
A problem posed by Hadamard attempts to find the largest value for one of these entities given the
elements of a set. Differential equations can be solved using one called the Wronskian, and these
entities can be computed using the technique of expansion by minors. Ratios of these are used to find
solutions to systems of equations via (*) Cramer's Rule. If this value is zero, the matrix associated with it
is singular. For 10 points, name this mathematical concept that, for a two by two matrix a b; c d, is equal to
a d minus b c.
ANSWER: determinant
Uniquely, this associative multilinear operation commutes with similarity transforms and with both
parts of Hermitian conjugation. A set of homogeneous, linear alegbraic equations can have a non-trivial
solution only if the one of these corresponding to the coefficients is zero. Ratios of these give the solutions
to inhomogeneous linear alegbraic equations through Cramer's rule. If this object is zero, its associated
array is singular. This operation maps the square matrices over a set of numbers onto that set, returning an
alternating sum of products of the matrix entries. For 10 points, name this operation given for a square
matrix a, b, c, d as ad minus bc.
ANSWER: the determinant
One of these operations named after Vandermonde can be computed to give the product of pairwise
differences of a set of numbers, and the Wronskian one will show independence of functions. Doing
this operation upon vectors of a parallelogram yields its area. The solutions to a set of linear
equations can be expressed as quotients of these entities, according to (*) Cramer's Rule. This value
may be calculated for larger inputs through "expansion by minors." For ten points, name this value
associated with a square matrix, which for a 2-by-2 matrix has value a times d minus b times c.
ANSWER: matrix determinant
A problem named after Hadamard asks to find the largest possible value for this given an arbitrary
set of numbers. Finding eignevalues involves solving the characteristic polynomial generated by this
function. It is often found through the technique of expansion by minors, and ratios of these are used to
find solutions to a set of linear equations by Cramer's rule. A square matrix is invertible if this quantity is
not zero. For 10 points, name this matrix operation, which for a two-by-two matrix a b c d equals a d
minus b c.
ANSWER: determinant
The norm of this function is one for certain operators that preserve inner products, and its derivative can be
found via Jacobi's formula or by summing the values obtained by differentiating one input at a time.
Multilinear and alternating functions can be written as a constant times this value. A cofactor is a multiple
of this value for its associated minor, and it is equal to the product of eigenvalues. Solutions from Cramer's
rule can be found by taking the quotient of two values for this quantity that can be found by expanding
along a row. For 10 points, name this function of the rows of a matrix that, for a two by two matrix a b c d,
equals a d minus b c.
ANSWER: determinant
The rule of Sarrus is an aid for calculating this quantity in one special case, wherein it corresponds to the
volume of a parallelepiped. A change-of-variables in an integral requires multiplying by the Jacobian one.
Objects for which this value is zero are called singular, as they lack inverses. For 10 points, name this
operation which, in one case, takes the difference between the product of the main and off diagonal
elements of a matrix.
ANSWER: determinant
The Cayley-Menger type of this mathematical construct is used to find the volume of a simplex. Charles
Dodgson developed a "condensation method" for calculating these values, which are invariant under a
singularity transformation and are multiplied by negative one if two rows are interchanged. Cofactors and
expansion by minors are used to calculate all but the simplest of these quantities, and a matrix for which this
value is zero is called singular. For 10 points, name this value, which for a 2 x 2 matrix a, b; c, d is found by
calculating a times d minus b times c.
ANSWER: determinants
Each ratio in the law of sines is equal to this measurement for the circle circumscribed about the
triangle. Given three points on a circle, Thales' [THAY-leez-] theorem says that if two of the points
form this, then the three points can form a (*) right angle. This line segment is the longest possible chord
of a circle, since it passes through the center. Pi is defined as the ratio between the circumference and, for
10 points, what measurement equal to twice the circle's radius?
ANSWER: diameter
The generalized Poincare conjecture sorts manifolds into top, piecewise linear, or having this
property. Functions with the complex version of this property have du dx equal dv dy and du dy
equal negative dv dx, which are known as the Cauchy-Riemann equations, and functions that possess
the complex version of this property in a disk are called (*) holomorphic. A function that lacks this
property everywhere but is continuous is named for Weierstrass. Due to infinite oscillations, the function
sine of one over x lacks this property at the origin. This property exists for a function at a point x if the
limit of f of x plus h minus f of x all over h as h goes to zero exists. For 10 points, name this property of a
function, in which it is possible to take its derivative.
ANSWER: differentiable [accept word forms, accept things like "you can take a derivative"; accept holomorphic or analytic until the world "holomorphic" is mentioned]
In addition to having a closed degenerate 2-form, symplectic manifolds have this property. Lie groups
can also be understood as these types of manifolds. If a complex function has this property, its closed line
integral will be zero. Meromorphic functions have this property at all but a set of isolated poles on the
complex plane, and entire functions have this property for all values of the complex plane. The Weierstrass
function does not have this property at any point, despite being continuous everywhere. The mean value
theorem holds for functions with it on open intervals. This property does not hold for functions with
singularities or cusps. For 10 points, name this property of functions whose tangent lines are not vertical.
ANSWER: differentiable [or obvious equivalents like "functions for which the derivative exists"]
The Cauchy-Riemann equations are necessary for a complex function to have this property. One hypothesis
of the Mean Value Theorem is that the function have this property on the interior of its domain. The
Weierstrass [READ: VY-ur-shtrass"] Function does not have this property but is continuous. Candidates for
extrema include endpoints, stationary points, and points where the function lacks this property. The
composition of functions with this property also have it according to the Chain Rule. The absolute value
function has this property everywhere except when x is zero. For ten points, name this property in which a
function has a well-defined slope.
ANSWER: differentiability (accept word forms like differentiable, prompt on answers containing the word "derivative")
Abel's identity uses a Wronskian to demonstrate a relationship between two solutions to this type of
problem, and a more general form of Abel's identity is Liouville's formula. Those solutions work when the
coefficients in this problem are all functions with respect to the independent variable, which is the
homogeneous type of this. Examples with a single independent variable can sometimes be solved with
Laplace (luh-PLAHS) transforms, while examples with more than one independent variable are "partial" as
contrasted with "ordinary". Slope fields graphically represent solutions to these problems, which can be
approximated by the Euler (OY-lur) method. The separable types can be solved by integrating both sides of
these equations. Name these equations that relate a function to its derivatives.
ANSWER: differential equation(s) [accept homogeneous differential equations before mentioned]
One of these things is classified as homogeneous if it does not contain any functions in terms of x that are
not multiplied by other functions, which means that it has no constant terms. The ordinary types of these use
only one independent variable, and some ordinary types are initial value problems. Solutions to common
types of these are exponential or logistic functions, and the simplest examples can be solved using the
separation of variables. Name this type of equation that relates a function to its rate of change.
ANSWER: (ordinary) differential equations
Dahlquist studied the stability of this process and names a barrier for which linear multistep methods
such as Adams Moulton can be used to perform this process when the input is stiff. Cauchy's kernal
is used in the variation of parameters method that was developed by Lagrange, while numerical
methods for this process include ones named for (*) Runge-Kutta and Euler. This process can be done
analytically using Picard Iteration or separation of variables. This can be done to first order linear
equations using an integrating factor, and general linear equations result in a homogenous term with
variable coefficients and an inhomogenous term. For 10 points, name the process which usually involves
finding a function that satisfies an equation involving derivatives.
ANSWER: Solving Ordinary Differential Equations [accept logical equivalents]
Approaches to this task which make use of a discretized mesh include the finite volume and finite
element methods. This type of problem often will include Dirichlet or Neumann conditions in the
problem statement. Abel's identity can be used to determine linear independence during this task by
seeing whether or not the Wronskian is nonzero. One approach to this task multiplies (*) both sides
by e raised to the integral of some function, while another rearranges to get an equation of the form f(x)
times dx equals g(y) times dy and integrating both sides. For 10 points name this task which can be done
numerically by Euler's method or analytically by integrating factor or separation of variables, in which a
function is found which satisfies an equation involving derivatives.
ANSWER: solving differential equations [accept any clear knowledge equivalent for "solving," accept "diff eqs," "ODEs" or "PDEs" in place of "differential equations," accept answers indicating specific types of differential equations]
A point at which this operation returns zero is described by Rolle's theorem, which is generalized by
the mean value theorem. The chain rule describes how to perform this operation on composite functions.
Performing this operation on the natural logarithm of x yields one over x, and performing it on x-squared
yields two x. For 10 points, name this operation that yields the rate of change of a function, often shown
graphically as the tangent of a two-dimensional curve.
ANSWER: differentiation [or taking a derivative]
Clairaut's theorem states that one form of this operation is commutative, and taking the dot product of a unit
vector and a function's gradient yields the directional type of this operation. This operation can be applied
on a quotient to evaluate limits with indeterminate forms in L-Hopital's rule. On any interval, there is at
least one point where this operation is equal to the average slope of a function over that interval, according
to the mean-value theorem. Performing this operation on a composition of functions requires the chain rule.
For 10 points, name this operation from calculus that finds a function's instantaneous rate of change, the
inverse of integration.
ANSWER: differentiation [accept word forms; or taking the derivative; accept partial differentiation or taking a partial derivative until "quotient"]
The Hessian matrix has entries which have undergone this operation twice and Clairaut's theorem
states that for a function of many variables, the order of performing this operation does not matter.
The dot product of a unit vector and a gradient of a function is known as the 'directional' variety of
this operation. For a natural logarithm, this operation is equal to the quantity one over (*) x. Setting
this operation equal to zero allows one to find the extreme values of a function and this operation gives the
slope of the function at any point. FTP, identify this mathematical operation which according to the
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is the inverse process of integration.
ANSWER: differentiation or taking the derivative [accept other word forms]
Along with addition, one type of this operation is used to find the divergence of a function. Under
certain conditions, requisite values returned by this operation are defined by Rolle's theorem and the mean
value theorem. This operation equals zero at a critical point and performing it on x to the n power returns n
times x to the n minus one power. This operation gives the slope of the line tangent to a curve. For 10
points, name this operation from calculus whose reverse is used in integration.
ANSWER: differentiation [or taking a derivative; or partial differentiation; or taking a partial derivative]
This operation can be performed on complex functions by increasing the power in the denominator
of Cauchy's integral formula. This operation is generalized to higher dimensions by the del operator,
which in turn is used to express the directional type of this operation, or curl, or divergence. Under
appropriate conditions, Rolle's theorem guarantees the existence of a point at which this operation
gives zero; such points, which may be minima or maxima, are called critical points. This operation
can be performed using the quotient rule or the chain rule. Name this operation used to find the
slopes of tangent lines which, according to the fundamental theorem of calculus, is the reverse of
integration.
ANSWER: differentiation [accept taking (or finding) the derivative; do not accept word forms of "derive"]
The real and imaginary parts of a function undergo this operation in the Cauchy-Riemann (koh-SHEE
REEmahn) equations, and this operation is used to find each entry in a Jacobian (juh-KOBE-ee-uhn) matrix.
The directional type of this function is found by multiplying a unit vector times a gradient, and different
iterations of these functions are multiplied by displacement and divided by factorials to find Taylor series.
When this operation is used twice on a function, the result characterizes the concavity of the graph of that
function. While this operation is often defined using a formula that involves the limit as h approaches zero,
it in some cases it may be calculated with the power rule or the chain rule. Identify this operation from
calculus that, for a function of one variable, gives the slope of the line tangent to the function at a given
point.
ANSWER: differentiation [or taking the derivative; accept partial differentiation or taking partial derivatives before "directional"; do not accept "deriving"]
This operation cannot be performed anywhere on the Weierstrass function. When this operation is
applied to two functions that are multiplied together, the result can be found using the chain rule. All
functions for which this operation is valid must be (*) continuous. This operation is defined as f of x
plus h minus f of x all divided by h. When this operation is performed on x to the a, it gives a times x to the
a minus one. For 10 points, name this operation that can be used to find the slope of a function.
ANSWER: differentiation [or finding a derivative; or obvious equivalents that include derivative]
One type of this operation is done to a scalar function to produce the gradient, and the entries of a
Jacobian matrix are results of one type of this operation. This operation applied to f(x) ("f of x") at a
is the limit as h goes to zero of f(a+h)-f(a) ("f of a plus h minus f of a") all divided by h. Applying this
operation to sine of x twice gives negative (*) sine of x, and applying it to x to the nth power gives n times
x to the n minus oneth power. Developed simultaneously by Newton and Leibniz, for ten points, what is this
slope-estimating operation from calculus, the opposite of integration?
ANSWER: differentiation (or taking the derivative, accept partial differentiation/derivative)
This scientist developed the shunting-yard algorithm to transform infix notation to reverse Polish
notation. This scientist introduced the dining philosopher's problem, which can be solved using another
concept he invented, semaphores. One algorithm named for this man fails when a graph has negative edge
weights. For 10 points, identify this author of "Go To Statement Considered Harmful" and namesake of a
greedy shortest path algorithm.
ANSWER: Edsger W. Dijkstra
This man invented a resource-allocation procedure that makes a safe-state check before granting requests,
the banker's algorithm. He developed a method for parsing equations given in infix notation, the shunting
yard algorithm, which can output in a format he developed with F. L. Bauer. This developer of reverse
Polish notation and semaphores also created an algorithm with a heuristic modification called "A*" (a-star)
that fails for negative edge weights. For 10 points, identify this formulator of the dining philosophers
problem, hater of GOTO statements, and namesake of a shortest path-finding algorithm, a Dutch computer
scientist.
ANSWER: Edsger Wybe Dijkstra
This man used a token ring to develop the first self-stabilizing algorithm in one paper, and one
method developed by this man is used in the OSPF routing protocol of IP networks. Another method
developed by this man can be used to create abstract syntax trees, but is more commonly used to
translate infix notation to RPN. In addition to the Shunting Yard Algorithm, he wrote the first
compiler for the Algol 60 language, and another construct developed by him uses the atomic operation V
and its inverse P to halt a procedure until s is greater than zero. Another of his methods was modified by
Hart, Raphael, and Nilsson to use a distance plus cost heuristic, and updates the distance functions from the
origin vertex to each surrounding vertex. For 10 points, name this developer of Semaphores and a namesake
shortest path-finding algorithm, a Dutch computer scientist.
ANSWER: Edsgar Dijkstra
In an algorithm developed by this person, reading a comma causes all operators up to but not
including a left parenthesis to be popped off the stack; that algorithm outputs operands in the order
in which they are encountered and pops operators off in order of precedence to rewrite infix
expressions to postfix expressions, which are also called Reverse Polish Notation. A Fibonacci heap is
used to implement a minimum priority queue in the (*) fastest version of an algorithm developed by this
man; that algorithm gives labels of "visited" or "unvisited" to nodes which have their distances calculated.
That algorithm only works with non-negative edge weights, so it can be replaced by the Bellman-Ford
algorithm and was the foundation for the A* algorithm. For 10 points, name this computer scientist who
developed an eponymous shortest path algorithm.
ANSWER: Edsger Wybe Dijkstra
Link-state routing protocols, such as Open Shortest Path First, use this algorithm to generate forwarding
tables in Internet routers, because each router has a complete map of the network links. Unlike the BellmanFord algorithm, this algorithm cannot be used in graphs with negative edge weights. This algorithm's
namesake famously looked poorly on the GOTO statement as
detrimental to structured programming. For 10 points, name this algorithm, named for a Dutch computer
scientist, used to find the shortest path tree for a node in a weighted graph.
ANSWER: Djikstra's [DIKE-stra] algorithm
This synonym of homothecy is classified as central when this type of transformation does more than
translation. This transformation can be represented by a matrix with off diagonal values equal to zero and a
constant greater than one along the diagonal. It is associated with a move away from its center, which is
equivalent to a vanishing point in perspective. Identify this type of transformation whose impact is to
enlarge its object.
ANSWER: dilation
One of these properties for a commutative ring is given by the supremum of the length of chains of
prime ideals. Another one of these is defined as the minimal value x such that every open cover
admits a refining open cover with no point contained in more than x +1 sets. By using the Steinitz
exchange lemma, the well-definedness of another one of these properties can be proven by (*)
swapping vectors between sets. For the domain of a linear map, this property equals the sum of its value for
the kernel and for the image, by the rank-nullity theorem. Rn is isomorphic to any real vector space with a
value of n for this property, given by the size of a basis. For 10 points, give this property which for
Euclidean space how many coordinates are needed to specify a point.
ANSWER: dimension
For a poset, this concept is the size of the smallest realizer. Topological covers are central to the Lebesgue
and Hausdorff definitions of this concept. One generalization defines this characteristic as the trace of the
identity map. For any linear map, this value for the image, plus this value for the kernel, gives this value for
the domain. For a vector space, it is defined as the number of elements in any basis. In Cartesian space, it is
the number of coordinates needed to specify a point. For 10 points, name this number, which is 3 for a cube
and 2 for a square.
ANSWER: dimension
A sequence of prime ideals is used to find this value with respect to rings, in which case this value is named
after Wolfgang Krull. One type of this based on open covers is named Lebesgue [leh-beg] covering. In
linear algebra, the number of elements in a basis is used to measure this quantity, which can be closely
related to the rank of a matrix. In a coordinate system, this number equals the number of independent
coordinates. The prefix hyper is used when this quantity equals four. Name this quantity which equals zero
for a point and one for a line.
ANSWER: dimension (accept Krull dimension, Lebesgue (covering) dimension, or dimensionality, prompt on "rank")
For a ring, this quantity is the least upper bound of its prime ideals and is named after Krull. For a vector
space, this value equals the cardinality of a basis. Another version of this quantity is given by the quotient of
the logarithms of the space-scaling rate and the log of the linear scaling rate; that form of this quantity is
named for Felix Hausdorff, and gives non-integer values for fractals. This value is equal to the number of
coordinates required to locate a point in a given space, which is why spherical and cylindrical coordinate
systems require three values, while polar coordinates require two. Give this value which equals zero for a
point and one for a line.
ANSWER: dimensions [or dimensionality; accept rank]
Whether one of these entities has a finite number of rational solutions can be determined by the topology of
an algebraic surface created by allowing variables to assume complex values, in Falting's theorem. Baker's
method sets the upper bound for their solutions, but only holds for the case of two variables. A set of
simultaneous ones can be used to solve Archimedes- Cattle problem. Hilbert's tenth problem was aimed at
the development of an algorithm to determine whether an arbitrary one has a solution and Catalan's
conjecture proposes a solution to a specific case. Gauss provided a procedure for determining solutions of
the quadratic type in two variables through reduction to the Fermat difference equation. For 10 points, the
Bachet and Pell equations are special cases of what type of equation in which only integer solutions are
allowed?
ANSWER: Diophantine equations
The Mordell conjecture about these entities was solved by Faltings's theorem. The more general
Hasse's local-global principle is used to study these objects, one example of which is Bezout's identity.
A method named for Stormer may be applied to their exponential types, such as that which appears
in Catalan's conjecture. The proof of Matiyasevich's theorem solved Hilbert's tenth problem about these
entities. Pell's equation is an example of, for 10 points, what polynomial equations whose variables take
integer values, named after a third century mathematician from Greece?
ANSWER: Diophantine equations
The property named after this mathematician applies to a set if the product of any two numbers in the set
plus a fixed constant is always a perfect square, a famous example of which was found by Pierre de Fermat.
He wrote a famous several-volume work titled Arithmetica, which became famous in mathematical lore
because a copy of it contained the famous note that became known as Fermat's Last Theorem. In an odd
twist of history, he always rejected negative solutions but was one of the first mathematicians to accept
fractional answers. Name this Greek mathematician whose name is now associated with problems requiring
integer solutions.
ANSWER: Diophantus (prompt Diophantine)
One theorem named for this man states that the group of units of a ring is finitely generated, and one
function named for this man has a pole at s=1 if chi is a principal character. Another theorem named for this
man states that there are an infinite number of rational numbers p over q within one over q squared of any
given irrational number, a result known as his diophantine approximation theorem. His namesake statistical
distribution is the conjugate prior of the multinomial distribution, and his original proof of his namesake
theorem on arithmetic progressions of primes used his L-functions, which are also used to generalize the
Riemann hypothesis. He gives his name to values that solutions of a partial differential equation, but not
their derivatives, must take on a border, known as his namesake boundary conditions. For 10 points, name
this French mathematician who also lends his name to the pigeonhole principle.
ANSWER: Johann Peter Dirichlet
This man's namesake convolution theorem is used to relate arithmetic functions by summing over
divisors, and he sometimes lends his name to the indicator function of the rationals. One result named
for this man is used to prove the Thue-Siegel-Roth theorem, and applies the pidgeonhole principle to
make a blunt diophantine approximation, while another theorem named for him is complementary to
the Green-Tao theorem and requires this mathematicians- namesake L-series to prove. In addition to that
theorem on the arithmetic progression of primes, this mathematician is more famous for a simple type of
boundary condition on the solutions of differential equations. For 10 points, name this French
mathematician and number theorist, who also came up with the pigeonhole principle.
ANSWER: Johann Peter Dirichlet
The stick-breaking process is a constructive algorithm used to generate samples from a stochastic process
named after this mathematician. This mathematician also names a multivariate continuous probability
distribution defined on a n-dimensional simplex, which is the conjugate prior of the multinomial
distribution. In analytic number theory, the Riemann zeta function is a simple non-trivial example of his
type of series, which are sums over n of a-sub-n over n to a complex power s. This mathematician also
names the eta function, a simple example of one of his L-functions. In contrast to Neumann boundary
conditions, boundary conditions named after this man specify a function's value on the boundary of its
domain. For 10 points, name this man who codified, and sometimes names, the pigeonhole principle.
ANSWER: Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet
A transformation described by this non-person adjective is given by a Vandermonde matrix whose elements
are the nth roots of unity. A unique property of that transformation described by this adjective is circular
convolution. That transformation is the subject of a form of Parseval's theorem that does not contain an
integral. Claude Shannon introduced his namesake entropy for this type of random variable, which is
described by a probability mass function rather than a probability density function. Examples of this type of
distribution include categorical, geometric and Bernoulli distributions. For 10 points, give this term that
describes objects that take on countable, distinct values, the opposite of continuous.
ANSWER: discrete [prompt on fast before "random" is read]
In a given topological space, if this function becomes arbitrarily small for any combination of inputs past
some point in a sequence, then the sequence is Cauchy. The total number of bits at which a string differs
gives the Hamming variety of this quantity. The value of p in an Lp space determines how this quantity is
calculated. This function must be zero if and only if the inputs are the same. The sum of absolute
differences of coordinates gives the "taxicab" variety of this quantity. Three related values of this function
must satisfy the triangle inequality, and the norm gives this value for a vector. For 10 points, give this
function that tells you how far apart two points are.
ANSWER: distance [accept metric or length, accept norm before mentioned, accept difference before "Lp" and prompt afterwards]
For any functions circle and star, this property states that a circle quantity b star c equals quantity a circle b
star quantity a circle c. This property is often used when one quantity does not have like terms. Applying
this property is the opposite of factoring out common factors. For 10 points, give this property that says that
three times quantity two x plus one equals six x plus three.
ANSWER: distributive property [or distribution]
For a general tensor field, this operator is equal to the comma operator plus the sum over indices of
the product of the connection coefficients and tensor components; in that context, it is also known as
the semicolon or covariant derivative. Vector fields that vanish under this operator are known as (*)
solenoidal, and its operation on the gradient yields the Laplacian. For 10 points, name the mathematical
operator that is equal, in Cartesian 3-space, to the sum of the partial derivatives of the components of a
vector field with respect to the appropriate coordinate, and is often symbolized del dot.
ANSWER: divergence [accept covariant derivative or semicolon derivative before they-re mentioned; prompt on del dot or grad dot or nabla dot]
On an exterior algebra in a finite dimensional inner product space, this construct can be expressed as
a combination of an exterior derivative and the Hodge star operator. By the Helmholtz
decomposition theorem, this construct is found in the numerator of an integral over 3-space for the
irrotational part of a stationary flux. In a special case of Stokes' theorem, a surface integral of a
vector field dotted with its normal vector can be expressed as a (*) volume integral of this operation on
that vector field. According to Gauss' Law for Magnetism, this operation applied to a magnetic field always
results in zero as does performing this operation on the curl of a vector field. Defined as the sum of the
respective partial derivatives of a vector's components, FTP, identify this vector operation that gives the
magnitude of the source or sink of a vector field and is analogous to a dot product for vector fields.
ANSWER: divergence
This operator of a field's gradient equals the Laplacian of that field. The theorem named after this operator
states that a double integral of flux is equal to the triple integral of this operator on the field. It is calculated
by adding the partial derivatives of a field, which can be expressed as del dot the field vector. For magnetic
fields this operator gives a value of zero, and for electric fields this operator gives the free charge density.
Name this operator on two- or three-dimensional fields that often is contrasted with curl.
ANSWER: divergence
The performance of this type of algorithm tends to not depend on cache size, making them "cache
oblivious." The time required to solve this type of algorithm is equal to a times T of n over b plus some
function f of n; the run time can then be solved based on where the latter function falls in the three cases of
the master theorem. Algorithms of this type include the Cooley-Tukey algorithm for calculating the fast
Fourier transform and Strassen's algorithm for matrix multiplication. A sorting algorithm that makes use of
this strategy uses a pivot value; that algorithm is quicksort. Prototypical examples of these algorithms
include binary search and merge sort. For 10 points, name this recursive algorithmic strategy of solving
large problems by breaking them into smaller problems and combining the solutions.
ANSWER: divide and conquer algorithms [or d-and-c algorithms; prompt on recursive algorithms]
An algorithm named for Euclid can be used to find the GCD, or to perform this operation on
integers. Subtraction of two logarithms is equivalent to first performing this operation on the two
arguments of the logarithms. A (*) "synthetic" version of this operation can be used on polynomials, but
this operation is not defined if the second operand is zero. Its result is called a quotient. For 10 points, name
this operation, the inverse of multiplication.
ANSWER: division (accept long division; accept answers mentioning greatest common denominator or greatest common factor or GCD or GCF or highest common denominator or highest common factor before "GCD")
A ring in which this operation is defined for all nonzero elements is a field. Taking the limit of an
expression containing two functions connected by this operation can be done with L'Hopital's rule.
One variant of this operation that can be done with a monic linear polynomial is its (*) synthetic
variety. Like subtraction, this operation is not commutative over the real numbers. The result of this
operation is the quotient. For 10 points, name this inverse operation of multiplication.
ANSWER: division
The area of this regular polyhedron is three times the radius of its circumscribed circle squared. In a
truncated tri-hexagonal tiling, each vertex borders one of these, a square, and a hexagon. It contains 54
diagonals, and it has the same number of sides as the Platonic solid with pentagon faces or as a standard
cross. Its internal angles are 150 degrees, so its external angles are 30 degrees, as are the central angles that
subtend a side. Name these regular polygons with twelve sides.
ANSWER: dodecagon (prompt on "12-gon")
When this word is preceded by the word fundamental, it names the union of conjugates of a subset. This
term preceded by the word integral is used to name a commutative [kah-MYOO-tuh-tiv] ring with no zero
divisors. The natural type of this set exists for a function that does not have any additional restrictions
placed on it. This set does not include any values that correspond to discontinuities on a graph such as a
hole or vertical asymptote [AS-im-tote]. This includes the possible values of the independent value for a
function. Name this set of inputs to a function, often contrasted with the range.
ANSWER: domain
Although not the absolute value, this operation is the first one used in the triple product used to
calculate the volume of a parallelepiped. The inner product is a generalization of this operation. This
operation gives zero when applied to two orthogonal (*) vectors. It is applied to two vectors and equals
the product of the vectors's magnitudes and the cosine of the angle between them. For 10 points, name this
basic vector operation that returns a scalar.
ANSWER: dot product [or scalar product until "scalar" is read; or inner product until it is read]
For an abelian group G, the characters of G are a locally compact abelian group that is given this
name. Poincare's theorem of this type states that if M is an n-dimensional oriented closed manifold,
then the jth homology group of M is isomorphic to the n minus jth such group. In projective
geometry, these transformations take points to lines and vice versa, and this construct for a planar
graph is another graph that contains a vertex at each planar region of the original graph, with edges
connecting adjacent regions. For a vector space, this type of space consists of the linear functionals on that
space, while for a platonic solid this construct is the convex hull of the midpoints of each face. For 10
points, name this concept in which two objects A and B are taken back and forth via some involution
operation, whose best known example in physics is probably the "wave-particle" one.
ANSWER: Duality
One procedure that uses this technique calculates the target score of the second-batting team in an
interrupted cricket match, while another is used for finding the maximum likely path in a Hidden Markov
model. In addition to the Duckworth-Lewis method and the Viterbi algorithm, its also used to evaluate Bspline curves in De Boor's algorithm. The optimality condition for this procedure is given by Bellman's
equation, and its more famously used in the Needleman-Wunsch sequence alignment algorithm and to find
the longest common substring of a set of strings. This technique also relies on optimal substructure and
recursion. FTP, name this programming technique that divides a problem into a set of subproblems.
ANSWER: Dynamic Programming
A Bellman equation is an condition associated with this technique, which is employed by the CockeYounger-Kasami algorithm that asks whether a string can be generated by a given context-free grammar.
The Needlemna-Wunsch algorithm for nucleotide alignment also employs this technique, and this method is
called stochastic if the immediate payoffs and the next state are known onyl as probabilities. An example of
this method is modifying a recursive program to calculate the Fibonacci sequence so that the program stores
each value of the sequence after calculating it and then reuses it if it is needed again instead of recalculating.
For 10 points, name this method of problem solving, which aims to efficiently solve optimization problems
which have overlapping sub-problems, and is often used to solve the traveling salesman problem and to
check edit distance in spellcheckers.
ANSWER: dynamic programming
This quantity appears in the time component of separable solutions to Fourier's heat equation, and it is
exponentiated by matrices by using the eigenmodes of a system to form the fundamental matrix. This
quantity raised to the power i pi is equal to negative one. It can be computed as the infinite series of one
over n factorial as n approaches infinity. It is the base for solutions to the differential equation y-prime
equals y, and the derivative of this number to the power x is equal to itself. For 10 points, identify this
irrational number that is used as the base of the natural logarithm, equal to approximately 2.71.
ANSWER: e [accept Euler's Number]
The number of derangements of an n-element set is equal to the closest integer to n-factorial divided
by this number. According to Stirling's formula, n-factorial approaches the square root of the
quantity 2pi n ("two pie en") times the nth power of quantity n divided by this number. Hyperbolic
cosine is equal to the average of a (*) power of this number and its reciprocal, and this number to the
power of i times pi is equal to negative one. This number is the infinite sum of the reciprocals of all the
factorials, and this number to the power of x is its own derivative. For ten points, identify this number
roughly equal to 2.718, the base for the natural logarithm.
ANSWER: e (or Euler's number or Napier's constant, DO NOT ACCEPT Euler's constant, prompt on 2.71828...)
This number used as x gives the largest output of the function x raised to the reciprocal of x power. In the
standard normal density function, this number is raised to the minus x squared over two power. This number
equals the limit of the sum of the reciprocals of the factorials of all whole numbers, and this is the limiting
value of the quantity one plus the reciprocal of x, end quantity, raised to the x power. Name this
transcendental number equal to about 2.718.
ANSWER: e (accept Euler's number or Napier's constant, do not accept "Euler's constant")
This number can be approximated by the infinite series quantity one plus quantity one over n end
quantities, all raised to the n. The Taylor series of this number raised to the power of x is the sum from n
equals zero to infinity of x to the n divided by n factorial. When raised to the power of x, it is also equal to
its own derivative. This number is the base of the natural logarithm. For 10 points, identify this number
whose symbol derives from the name of the first person to calculate it, Euler.
ANSWER: e [or Euler's number before it is read]
This number is equal to the sum of the infinite series as n goes from zero to infinity of one over n factorial.
First studied as an application of compound interest by Jacob Bernoulli, it is equal to the limit as x
approaches infinity of the quantity one plus one over x to the xth power. This number is the only positive
real number that, when taken to the xth power, is equal to its derivative. For 10 points, identify this number
named for a Swiss mathematician, the base of the natural logarithm, equal to approximately 2.718.
ANSWER: e [or Euler's number]
The absolute maximum of the function x to the power one over x occurs when x equals this number. The
nontrivial solution to the differential equation y prime equals y always includes this number. It is the sum
of one over n factorial, as n goes from zero to infinity. As n goes to infinity, this number also equals one
plus one over n, raised to the n power. The natural logarithm of this number is one. For 10 points, name this
irrational number equal to about 2.718.
ANSWER: e [or Euler's number; or Euler's constant; do not accept "Euler-Mascheroni constant"]
According to a problem formulated by de Montfort, the probability that a large number of hats will
all be sorted into the wrong box is given by this number's reciprocal. For large n, it equals n divided
by the nth root of n factorial according to Stirling's approximation. It's not zero, but the derivative
of a function involving this number yields (*) itself. Compounding a dollar continuously at one percent
interest will converge to this amount of money, formally defined as the limit as n goes to infinity of "one
plus one over n to the n." For ten points, name this number which is the base of the natural logarithm,
approximately 2.718.
ANSWER: e (or Euler's constant; do not accept Euler-Mascheroni constant)
This number can be calculated with the infinite series that sums 1 over n factorial from zero to infinity or as
the limit, as x goes to 0, of the quantity 1 plus x raised to the 1 over x power.. Cosine theta plus "i" sine
theta is the result of raising this number to the product of i and theta, which results in the equation where
this number to the power of i pi minus 1 equals zero. The function created by raising this constant to the
power of x is its own derivative. For 10 points, name this awesome irrational transcendental number, the
base of the natural logarithm.
ANSWER: e [accept Euler's Number, prompt on annoyingly pretentious people who try to give you "2.71828182845904523536" or some part thereof, prompt on "Napier-s" Constant, do not accept or prompt on "Euler-Mascheroni" Number or Constant]
This number can be calculated using the Pippenger product, and the Lindemann-Weierstrass Theorem states
that integer powers of this number are independent over the integers. It is the sum of the hyperbolic sine of
one and the hyperbolic cosine of one, and raising this number to the power of i times x gives the cosine of x
plus i times the sine of x. The exponential function with this number as its base is its own derivative, and
this number is the limit of the quantity one plus one over x, end quantity, raised to the x power; as x
approaches infinity. Give this number used as the base of natural logarithms.
ANSWER: e [or Euler's number; or Napier's constant; do not accept "Euler's constant"]
This number appears twice in the definitions for both hyperbolic sine and cosine. Raising this number
to the power of pi time i equals negative one. The cosine of theta (THAY-tuh) plus i times sine of theta is
related to this number raised to the i times theta in Euler's ("oilers") formula. When this number is raised to
the power of x, it is its own derivative. The logarithm with this number as its base is called the natural
logarithm. For 10 points, name this number approximately equal to 2.718.
ANSWER: e [accept Euler's number before "Euler" is read]
The probability that a permutation does not have any elements in their original position approaches one
over this number. The xth root of x has its largest value when x is this number. The sum of all reciprocal
factorials is this number, which was discovered by Jacob Bernoulli while studying compound interest. One
plus this number raised to the product of i and pi is equal to zero. This number raised to the power of x is its
own derivative. For 10 points, name this transcendental number that is the base of the natural logarithm and
is equal to approximately 2.718.
ANSWER: e [or Euler's number; or Napier's constant; do NOT accept "Euler's constant"]
For a node on an undirected graph, this term refers to the longest walk from that node to another node
on the graph. In another field, this term refers to a quantity equal to the square root of the flattening factor f
times two minus f. It can be calculated as the length from the center to the focus divided by the length of
the semimajor axis. This quantity is between 0 and 1 for an ellipse and greater than 1 for a hyperbola. For
10 points, name this quantity symbolized epsilon, which measures how different a conic section is from a
circle.
ANSWER: eccentricity
One class of algorithms for finding these numbers constructs Krylov subspace in order to cut down
on the number of iterations necessary; those algorithms include Arnold's method and the Lanczos
iteration. In vibrational analysis, for a system with N degrees of freedom, these numbers are the
natural frequencies of the system. Another popular method for finding them is based on finding the
QR decomposition and putting the argument into Hessenberg Form. These entities algebraic
multiplicity is greater than their geometric multiplicy, and for infinite-dimensional spaces, these
numbers are easily found using the (*) spectral decomposition. They are the roots of the characteristic
polynomial. When multiplying a matrix by one of their corresponding vectors, the result is one of these
times that vector. For 10 points, name these values symbolized lambda, important in the theory of linear
transformations.
ANSWER: eigenvalues
These quantities are found along the diagonal of the R in the QR algorithm, and they correspond to energy
in the Schrodinger equation. A common way to find these scalars is to solve a characteristic equation, which
is generated by setting a determinant equal to zero. The product of these values equals the determinant of
the matrix they come from. These values are multiplied by their corresponding vectors to give the same
result as multiplying those vectors by the generating matrix. Name these values often represented by a
lambda.
ANSWER: eigenvalues
The second of these quantities for a d-regular graph G is greater than or equal to d minus two times the edge
expansion of G . For regular non-negative systems, there exists a unique maximal one by the Perron-Frobenius
theorem, which implies that for a regular Markov chain, the largest of these is one. One method for calculating 
these does repeated factorizations into orthogonal and upper triangular components. These can be found through 
the QR algorithm and by finding the roots of the characteristic polynomial. The sum of these are equal to the 
trace and their product is equal to the determinant. For 10 points, name these non-zero numbers for a given square 
matrix that when multiplied with the eigevector equals the matrix times the eigenvector.
ANSWER: eigenvalues
The associated frequency for a normal mode of a system is found by calculating this value for
the equations of motion. These values lie in the union of Gerschgorin circles in the complex
plane. They are always real for a Hermitian matrix, and their sum is equal to the trace.
Multiplying three terms, the second of which contains these values, diagonalizes a matrix. They
can be found by finding the determinant of the matrix resulting from a square matrix minus
lambda, which are these values, times the identity matrix, which is equivalent to solving the
characteristic polynomial. For 10 points, identify these special values for a matrix, which gives
the scalar multiplier of an output vector when a matrix operates on an associated eigenvector.
ANSWER: eigenvalues [or characteristic values until "characteristic polynomial" is read; prompt on lambda]
These entites are bounded in a spectrum according to the Gershgorin circle theorem. John Francis
and Vera Kublanovskaya formulated the QR algorithm for these entities, whose corresponding
qualitative theory in the Sturm-Liouville theory. Rayleigh quotient iteration extends inverse
iteration and converges to them cubically, while multiple rotations are used to obtain a (*) diagonal
approximating these entities in the Jacobi algorithm. The Lanczos algorithm uses power methods to
calculate these entities, which can be used to characterize the stability of solutions to ODEs. The sum of
these values and the product of these values equal a matrix's trace and a matrix's determinant respectively.
FTP, name these solutions to a characteristic equation, which are special sets of scalars associated with the
invariants of a linear system of equations.
ANSWER: eigenvalues
Vieta's formula can be used to show that the sum of these quantities always equals the trace. One
consequence of the spectral theorem is that a change of coordinates can be applied so that these
entities all lie along the diagonal. All of these numbers equal one for a rotation, since vector lengths
remain unchanged. These are the numbers lambda so that A minus lambda times the identity matrix is
singular, which makes these entities the roots of the characteristic polynomial. For 10 points, identify
these numbers associated with a given square matrix, which are the coefficient of proportionality when a
matrix is applied to an eigenvector.
ANSWER: eigenvalues [prompt on "lambda" until mentioned]
Weyl's theorem can be used to show that the Dirchlet type of these are asymptotic, providing an answer to
the Mark Kac-proposed question "can one hear the shape of a drum?"In quantum mechanics, ladder
operators alter these quantities by one, and they are taken to be 1 or -1 for the permutation operator. Always
real for a Hermitian matrix, they are the roots of the characteristic polynomial, and for diagonal matrices,
they are given by the entries of the diagonal. For 10 points, name these scalars that, when multiplying a
matrix, are equal to the product of a vector with that matrix and which are usually denoted by the Greek
letter lambda.
ANSWER: eigenvalues [or latent roots; proper values; characteristic roots; characteristic values]
Examples include the principal axes obtained from the inertia tensor, a standing wave on a string with fixed
ends, and the solutions to the Fock equation. A complex Hermitian matrix or real symmetric matrix has a
basis of these, and an invariant subspace of a matrix A is spanned by one or more of these. They are also the
null space of the map A minus lambda I for some value of lambda. Examples from physics include the
solutions to the Schrodinger wave equation, which are molecular orbitals. For 10 points, name these objects
which take their name from the German for "characteristic" and are the v in A v equals lambda v.
ANSWER: eigenvector [prompt on "proper vector" or "characteristic vector", do not accept eigenfunction]
This is the number of faces of a truncated tetrahedron. The Platonic [plah-TAH-nik] solid with this number
of faces has six vertices [VER-tuh-sees], and the Platonic solid with this number of vertices has six faces.
This is the number of sets in a power set developed from a set with three elements, and this is the Fibonacci
[fih-buh-NAH-chee] number between 5 and 13. A polygon with this number of sides is created by making
straight cuts at the corners of a square. Identify this power of two, equal to the number of sides of an
octagon.
ANSWER: eight
The zenzi-zenzi-zenzic notation was used to represent this power of a number. John Graves
developed a normed division algebra over the real numbers in which each element has this many
components and in which operations are neither commutative nor associative, but are alternative.
The polyhedron with this man faces is the dual of the cube. In the fifth term of the Taylor series
expansion of cosine, this is the power to which the variable is raised. A regular polygon with this
many sides will have an internal angle of (*) 135 degrees. A number with this base is usually converted
from binary grouping in threes. This number is the Fibonacci number between 5 and 13. For 10 points,
name this number, the third power of two.
ANSWER: eight [or 8]
His namesake integers are complex ones of the form z=a+bw, where w is a complex cube root of
unity. This man's namesake series defines specific modular forms with infinite series expansions
which can be directly written down. One of his more famous accomplishments is proving the law of
(*) biquadratic reciprocity. This man was accepted into both the Academy of Gottingen and the Academy of
Berlin and Gauss was so impressed by this man, that he put him with Archimedes and Newton as one of
"only three epoch-making mathematicians." For 10 points, name this mathematician who has a criterion for
the irreducibility of polynomials over the integers named after him.
ANSWER: Ferdinand Eisenstein
Most modern editions of this text derive from T.L. Heath's translation of an edition by Johan Heiberg.
Concepts presented in this text include the "Dulcarnon" and the "pons asinorum". Its thirteenth book
constructs the five regular solids, while its first book is includes five axioms and five postulates, including
the parallel line postulate. For 10 points, name this geometry text by Euclid.
ANSWER: Euclid's Elements [or Stoicheia]
This shape is the special case of a hypotrochoid where the radius of the small circle is half the radius of
the large circle. One of these shapes has an eccentricity of between zero and one, and has two foci, which
lie on its major axis. Kepler's first law of planetary motion states that planetary orbits are in this shape. For
10 points, name this oval-shaped conic section.
ANSWER: ellipse [do not accept "oval"]
Doubly-periodic functions defined on the complex plane are named after this entity, along with curves of
the form "y squared equals x cubed plus ax plus b." One construction of this figure makes use of two
concentric circles and their radii, which applies its parametric equations, "x equals a cosine theta" and "y
equals b sine theta." With an eccentricity between 0 and 1, it can be constructed with a piece of string fixed
at two points, because it is defined as the locus of points for which the sum of the distances to two fixed
points is constant. For 10 points, name this conic section which resembles an oval.
ANSWER: ellipses [accept word forms, accept elliptic function or curve, prompt on oval]
An example of this shape named for Jakob Steiner shares its center with the centroid of a triangle.
The inverses of integrals developed to find the arc length of this shape create curves that were
mapped to modular forms in the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture. The parametric equations for this
shape, with a and b not necessarily equal, are x equals a cosine of t and y equals b sine of t. This
shape is commonly drawn by using a piece of (*) string fixed to two pins. This shape has a semimajor
and a semiminor axis, as well as an eccentricity between zero and one. For 10 points, identify this shape
that resembles a flattened circle.
ANSWER: ellipse
This shape is a special case of a hypotrochoid [hie-poe-TROE-koid] with the circle sizes having a ratio of
two. One of its generating equations only gives this shape if you get a negative value for B squared minus
four A C. This can be generated parametrically by setting x equal to one constant times the cosine of theta
and setting y equal to a different constant times the sine of theta. This is used to create whispering galleries
because in one reflection all sound goes from one focus to the other. Name this conic section equivalent to a
circle that has been stretched in one direction.
ANSWER: ellipse
Curves named after this shape have equation y-squared equals x-cubed plus a times x plus b and
were used to help prove Fermat's Last Theorem. If points A, B, and C are marked on a trammel, and
B and C are allowed to move freely on two perpendicular lines, then A will trace out one of these
figures. These simplest Lissajous figures are the shapes of the paths of objects trapped in (*) orbit by
inverse-square forces like gravity. This figure with positive eccentricity less than one has area equal to pi
times the product of its semi-axes, and this figure is the set of all points the sum of whose distances to two
foci are constant. For ten points, identify this oval-shaped conic section.
ANSWER: ellipses
This is the path of the centers of circles in a Pappus Chain, and when different magnitudes are used this is
the simplest Lissajous (LEE-suh-zhoo) Curve. This shape can be graphed parametrically by using different
amplitudes for each variable, with one of them graphing the sine of the parameter and the other one
graphing the cosine. This is defined as the locus of all points whose distance to a fixed point divided by
distance to a fixed line is less than one or as the locus of all points whose distances to two fixed points sum
to a constant. Name this conic section equivalent to a circle stretched along one axis.
ANSWER: ellipses
The "super" form of these shapes are modeled by the absolute value of x over a to the n plus the absolute
value of y over b to the n equals one, and are Lame curves. These shapes can be drawn by the trammel of
Archimedes, and their parametric equations take the form x equals a cos of t and y equals b sin of t. They
may be defined as the set of all points equidistant from two foci. Kepler's first law states that a planet's
orbit takes this shape. As their eccentricities decrease from one to zero, they approximate circles. For 10
points, name these conic sections often referred to as ovals.
ANSWER: ellipses [prompt on "ovals" before it is read]
The somewhat difficult task of matching a bounce to its source in this system can be made very easy
by using VERP. Validation in this system is popularly implemented using a combination of SPF and
DKIM. A special type of DNS record called an MX record is used for this system to determine
routing.
A protocol used for this system achieves real-time updates by using the IDLE extension. All of its
implementations use the (*) SMTP protocol for sending data. A crippling problem with this system was
resolved when some genius hit upon the idea of using naive Bayes classifiers to circumvent it. Delivery
status
notifications are the most common implementation of return receipts for this system, and its MIME
extension
allowed for the inclusion of attachments. For 10 points, name this system crippled in its early days by spam.
ANSWER: email [or electronic mail]
The characteristic function of this mathematical entity always returns 0. This is the result when a set is
subtracted from one of its own subsets, and this is also the intersection of two disjoint sets. This is an
element of every power set, since it is a subset of every set. For 10 points, name this complement of the
universal set, which can be symbolized by a circle with a diagonal slash and contains no elements.
ANSWER: empty set [or null set]
As a surreal number, 2 is defined as the pairing of 1 and this. According to the axiom of infinity, this must
be an element of any infinite set, and properties true of its elements are known as vacuous truths. This
object is the only element of its power set. Every set contains this as a subset, and the union of this set with
a set S is S. Over the real numbers, this is the solution set to x squared equals negative 1. Name this
complement of the universal set, which contains no elements.
ANSWER: empty set [accept null set; prompt on descriptions like the set with no elements]
An algorithm for this process that depends on the difficulty of prime factorization is known as the RSA
algorithm. In that algorithm, a user publishes a piece of information called a public key. Algorithms for it
are often explained in terms of communication between Alice and Bob. Protocols for implementing it on
the internet include TLS and SSL, and are used on websites with "HTTPS" in their URL. For 10 points,
name this process of making information unreadable to someone who cannot decode it.
ANSWER: encryption [prompt on cryptography]
A popular program that implements this process is GnuPG. The most popular form of this process relies
on the difficulty in factoring prime numbers and is RSA, an example of the public key type of this process.
Replacing a letter of the alphabet with one that is a fixed number of spaces away is a form of it known as
the Caesar cipher. This process is performed on plaintext. For 10 points, name this process of encoding
information so that only certain people can see it.
ANSWER: encryption [prompt on cryptography]
One system for performing this function is called ElGamal, and Shannon investigated the "One-time
pad" form of it. Common algorithms and schemes include AES and RSA, and methods can be divided into
block and stream types. Symmetric and asymmetric key types are used in the public key type. Central to the
SSL protocol, techniques for it are called ciphers. For 10 points, identify this security technique of
obscuring
information so that others cannot read it.
ANSWER: encryption [or crytopraphy; accept word forms]
Algorithms for completing this process include AES and DES, both of which use block cipher
algorithms. The asymmetric type of this process creates two components, on private and the other public, to
do this action.Output from machines that did this process made up the British ULTRA. One of those
machines was the Enigma machine. For 10 points, name this operation that uses keys to modify
information into unreadable and readable forms through the use of ciphers.
ANSWER: encryption [or cryptography]
One version of this process uses the concept of public and private keys, where a public key is
considered common knowledge and a private key is known only to the individual; that is the RSA
type. Keys are used to send messages that are obscured by the public key and can only be (*) read by
the holder of the private key. The algorithms used for its are typically referred to as ciphers and some
notable ones include Cesaer and Vernam. Notable early machines that could perform this task include the
Enigma Machine and PURPLE. For 10 points name this process where information is rendered
indecipherable to others.
ANSWER: Encryption [accept word forms like Encrypting]
Merkle and Hellman developed an algorithm for doing this through the use of the knapsack problem, which
was improved on by Graham and Shamir to eliminate the problem of trapdoors. The Pohlig-Hellman
algorithm for doing this task relies on exponentiation, while the Playfair algorithm, originally invented by
Wheatstone, uses a 5 by 5 matrix to perform this task. Diffey and Hellman proposed a way of doing this
through the use of public and private keys, while another way of accomplishing this task is with a
substitution method such as the shifting method once employed by Julius Caesar. It can also be
accomplished perfectly through the use of a random key stream in the one-time pad method, though perhaps
the best known method for doing it is the RSA method. For ten points, identify this task which involved
scrambling a message so that it can only be decoded by the intended receiver.
ANSWER: encryption (accept cryptography, accept "public key cryptography", accept "public key exchange" due to ambiguities)
One algorithm of this type is composed of steps including SubBytes, ShiftRows, and MixColumns. That
algorithm of this type, which is sometimes called Rijndael (RINE-dale), has been adopted by the U.S.
government as AES. The difficulty of factoring a composite number composed of two large prime numbers
is the basis of the RSA algorithm of this type. For 10 points, name these algorithms that transform plaintext
into secure information.
ANSWER: encryption algorithm [accept word forms; or cryptography; or cipher]
This process can be undertaken by two parties with no prior knowledge of one another using the
Diffie-Hellman protocol. One algorithm for doing this relies on taking the Euler totient (toh SHUNT)
function of the product of p and q. The difficulty of prime factorization is central to the (*) RSA
algorithm for doing this process. The information transmitted via this process is called "plaintext," and the
algorithms that do it are called "ciphers." For 10 points, name this process by which information is made
unreadable except by those possessing a "key."
ANSWER: encryption [or cryptography or word forms; prompt on encoding]
The first people to supply instructions to this machine were women such as Kay McNulty. It was built at
the Moore School of the University of Pennsylvania. Due to John von Neumann's involvement with this
machine, its first run actually involved computations for the hydrogen bomb. This machine was designed
by John W. Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert, Jr. to calculate artillery firing tables for the US Ballistics
Research Laboratory. For 10 points, identify this first general-purpose computer.
ANSWER: ENIAC [or Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer]
A group of six women including Kay MacNulty and Fran Bilas received little credit for helping to invent
this object, and it used several 6SN7 flip flops. Originally designed as part of Project PX by John Mauchly
and J Presper Eckert at UPenn, this device was used to simulate hydrogen bomb explosions and create
artillery tables. For 10 points, name this device consisting of over fifteen thousand vacuum tubes, the first
all-purpose digital computer.
ANSWER: ENIAC [or Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator]
This letter denotes a statement proven by Ken Ribet that, in turn, helped prove Fermat's last theorem.
This letter with a hat over it is used to denote the residual in statistics. This letter is used to denote the
neighborhood around a function f(x), while delta is used to denote the neighborhood around x, in a
particular definition of a limit. This letter is also used to denote the eccentricity of a conic section. For 10
points, give this Greek letter that denotes an arbitrarily small quantity.
ANSWER: epsilon
Leibniz's law in the context of computer science deals with this concept and Barbra Liskov argues that for
mutable objects it reduces to its referential form. Java specifies that it must be reflexive, symmetric,
transitive, consistent, and is false when dealing with null objects, but this definition runs into problems
when dealing with subtyping. It is denoted in imperative languages with two symbols and declarative with
one, before which an exclamation point is placed in Java if this condition does not hold. For 10 points,
name this relation that is true between two objects if they are the same.
ANSWER: equality [accept things that demonstrate understanding like equivalence]
Recurrence relations are also called difference types of these entities. When these entities contain
polynomials of degree five or higher, the Abel-Ruffini theorem applies to them. The characteristic
types of these entities are used to find eigenvalues. Ordinary and partial differential examples of these
entities contain derivatives. In addition to following properties named for the four basic operations,
these entities follow the symmetric and reflexive properties. Systems of these entities generally include
more than one variable that can be solved for. Name these entities with two expressions separated
by a symbol made of two parallel segments.
ANSWER: equations [or equality or equivalence relations; accept more specific answers]
Morley's theorem states that this figure can be constructed from another polygon's angle trisectors. A
fractal named for Sierpinski (SEAR-pin-skee) consists of these polygons placed inside one another. The
area of this shape can be found using the formula s squared times the square root of three divided by four.
All medians are congruent in this figure, as are all altitudes. For 10 points, name this kind of triangle that
has three sixty degree interior angles and three congruent sides.
ANSWER: equilateral triangles [or equilateral triangles after "this kind of triangle" is read; prompt on triangles]
Viviani's theorem states that the sum of altitudes to all sides from a point inside one of these is
equal to the length of its altitude. Morley's theorem states that one of these is formed by extending the
trisectors of a triangle. Napoleon's theorem states that a fourth one of these can be produced by
joining the centroids of ones erected on the sides of any triangle, and they are the repeating units of a
Koch snowflake and Sierpinski's triangle. For 10 points, identify these geometric figures which have
three congruent sides.
ANSWER: equilateral triangles [prompt on equiangular triangles; prompt on triangles]
Napoleon Bonaparte allegedly discovered a theorem that involves externally constructing these
figures. Only in these shapes can the length of the circumradius be exactly twice the length of the
inradius. When these shapes have side-length one, their area equals (*) one-fourth times the square root
of three. One can prove that a figure is of this type if any two of its circumcenter, incenter, orthocenter, or
centroid are the same. For 10 points, identify these triangles which have 60 degree angles and equal
side-lengths.
ANSWER: equilateral triangles [prompt on triangles]
Dropping perpendiculars in this geometric figure leads to Viviani's Theorem, and Morley's Theorem
constructs one of these figures. A theorem discovered by Napoleon Bonaparte states that the centers
of some of these shapes form another one, and the incenter and centroid are the same only in this
figure. The area of one of these (*) polygons is equal to side-length squared times the square root of three
divided by four. A median of this figure divides it into two 30-60-90 triangles, because it is a regular
polygon which has all 60-degree angles. For ten points, what is this kind of triangle that has three equal
sides and angles?
ANSWER: equilateral or equiangular triangles (prompt on isosceles triangles)
Hipparchus wrote a work criticizing this person's three-volume work Geographica, which described how to
map the inhabited world. This person was the first cartographer to use both parallels and meridians,
centering them at Rhodes. In a famous experiment, this person measured the shadow of a vertical stick at
noon at Alexandria during the summer solstice and approximated the distance from Alexandria to Syene,
which was almost due south near the Tropic of Cancer, to approximate the circumference of the Earth. This
person is also credited with devising a system in which all of the multiples of each number, other than
multiplication by one, are crossed out from a table. Name this ancient Greek who developed a technique for
finding prime numbers, his eponymous sieve.
ANSWER: Eratosthenes of Cyrene [or Erastosthenes]
With Faber and Lovasz, this mathematician names an unproved conjecture about a union of k copies of a k-
clique intersecting at one vertex, and another result partly named for this man regards transforming a non-
convex polygon into a convex one with a series of flips. He names the constant equal to the sum of the
reciprocals of the Mersenne primes along with Borwein, and an inequality named for him relates the
distances from a point to the vertices and edges of a triangle - that result is also named for Mordell. He
helped develop Ramsey theory and discovered an elementary proof of the prime number theorem, and
believed that all beautiful proofs came from THE BOOK. FTP, name this prolific Hungarian
mathematician, whose namesake number gives the publishing distance between him and a given
mathematician.
ANSWER: Paul Erdos
The Dawson integral is used in this function's imaginary counterpart. The nth Hermite
polynomial is proportional to the n+1 derivative of this function. The Q-function is equivalent to
one-half minus one-half this function, evaluated at x over the square root of 2. This function
appears in the solution to partial differential equations like Fick's Second Law. This function of
x arises from the integral of the exponential of negative x squared, an integral which has no
elementary analytical solution. It equals zero at zero, one at infinity, and in general, equals twice
the cumulative normal distribution function, shifted down one-half. For 10 points, name this
sigmoidal function which shares its name with "type I" and "type II" methods of making
mistakes in statistical testing.
ANSWER: error function [or erf]
His proof took a finite list of numbers, multiplied them together, and added one. He then showed that the
resulting number is not a multiple of any of the numbers in the original list. His algorithm involves starting
with two numbers and repeatedly subtracting the smaller from the greater and replacing the greater number
with the difference. The proof showed that there were infinitely many primes and the algorithm computer
the greatest common divisor of two numbers. For 10 points, this is what mathematician that proved many
geometric theorems in The Elements.
ANSWER: Euclid
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic is a corollary of this man's first theorem. He names a method in
which the larger of two numbers is replaced by the remainder formed when the numbers are divided, used
to calculate the greatest common divisor. He showed that there are an infinite number of primes. His fifth
postulate is that there is only one line parallel to a given line which passes through a given point. For 10
points, name this Greek "father of geometry," the author of the Elements.
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria
Bertrand Russell criticized this man's approach to mathematics in a work titled The Teaching of
this man. One work by this man is preserved only partially and in Arabic; that work is his Divisions.
A square, three-dimensional array of line segments is known as this man's orchard. His best-known
work includes a proof of the Pythagorean theorem and a (*) fifth postulate that implies requirements for
two lines to be parallel. For 10 points, name this Greek mathematician who wrote Elements and is
considered the father of geometry.
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria
This man argued that one plus the product of the first n primes must itself be prime, thus
giving a proof for infinitely many primes. This man's namesake algorithm can be used to find
the greatest common divisor of any two integers, while his namesake constructions are those
that can be made with a compass and an unmarked straightedge. Better known is this thinker's
introduction of the parallel postulate alongside four other axioms. For 10 points, name this
Greek mathematician, the author of the Elements and the "father of geometry."
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria
This man detailed the phenomenon of spherical concave and plane mirrors forming images from
reflected light in his book Catoptrics. One of his namesake algorithms takes the multiples of one
integer and subtracts those multiples from another integer, giving the greatest (*) common factor of
those two integers. In certain situations, hyperbolic geometry arises when one of his postulates does not
hold. That theorem was part of his most famous thirteen work collection and was his parallel postulate. For
10 points, name this Alexandrian mathematician who wrote the Elements.
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria
This mathematician is the namesake of relations that are both symmetric and transitive, and he wrote that if
a prime number evenly divides a product, then it evenly divides one of the factors. The standard dot product
is sometimes named for him, and the algorithm named after him is used to find the greatest common divisor.
He wrote one of the first proofs showing that there are infinitely many prime numbers, and the geometry
named after him follows his parallel postulate. Name this ancient Greek mathematician whose book
Elements develops geometry.
ANSWER: Euclid
This man names an algorithm that takes numbers a and b and returns the answer of the algorithm on
numbers b and a mod b. That algorithm computes the greatest common divisor. He proved that there are
infinitely many primes, and he wrote a work in which the first four books deal with plane geometry and
include the Pythagorean Theorem and the parallel postulate. For 10 points, name this Greek mathematician
who wrote Elements and is considered the father of geometry.
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria
This man's namesake orchard consists of one-dimensional trees planted at lattice points in the plane. His
namesake metric is the L-P metric with p equaling two, which is also the "usual" metric. His namesake
algorithm subtracts integer multiples of one given number from another to compute the two numbers-
greatest common factor. He also names geometries that assume that given a line and a point not on it, there
is exactly one line that does not intersect the given line. His most famous work started from five axioms and
five postulates. Name this mathematician who created the parallel postulate in his treatise on geometry, The
Elements-an ancient Greek.
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria [or Eukleides]
One theorem named for this man says that if a prime p divides "a times b," then either p divides a or p
divides b, and this man proved that there are infinitely many primes. The solutions predicted by the Chinese
Remainder Theorem can be found using the extended form of this man's namesake algorithm, which finds
the greatest common divisor of two numbers. Hyperbolic geometries arise when a statement of this man
does not hold; that statement is known as his fifth postulate, or parallel postulate. For 10 points, name this
Greek mathematician who created a treatise on geometry, the Elements.
ANSWER: Euclid
The "extended" version of this man's algorithm gives solutions to Diophantine equations. He proved
that there are an infinite number of prime numbers, and his aforementioned namesake algorithm is
used to find the (*) greatest common denominator. He names a claim about the existence of a unique
parallel line, his fifth postulate. This "father of geometry" is, for 10 points, what Greek mathematician who
wrote The Elements?
ANSWER: Euclid
The lemma named for this person states that if a prime number divides a product, then it divides a
factor of that product. Janos Bolyai and Nikolai Lobachevsky developed a system that was notable
for not following all of this person's rules. A so-called orchard is named for this person because of
his algorithm for finding greatest common divisors. A book he wrote states that if a line segment
intersects two lines, then the lines meet on the side of the segment where the interior angle sum is
less than two right angles, the last of his five postulates. Name this mathematician whose Elements
was a standard text of geometry.
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria
Isidore of Miletus wrote an apocryphal addition to one work of this man. His Phaenomena was of
use to astronomers and he countered Aristotelean thought in his Optics. He is the namesake of a
proof of the unbounded number of primes and an algorithm for computing GCD. His most read
work is a textbook consisting of thirteen books ranging in subject from number theory to three
dimensional solids. That work is the source of (*) five particular postulates. For 10 points, name this
Alexandrian author of the Elements and namesake of the traditional type of geometry.
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexand
This man stated that any straight line segment can be extended into a straight line. When not using his
namesake "tools," the straightedge and the compass, he theorized the existence of infinitely many primes.
This man stated that, given a straight line and a point, there is only one line passing through the point that
never intersects with the line, his Fifth or Parallel Postulate. For 10 points, name this Greek mathematician,
the author of Elements and father of pure geometry.
ANSWER: Euclid
The Kakutani fixed point theorem applies to functions operating on subsets of this. The standard
formulation of the Vitali covering lemma has a collection in this as its subject. Transformations in these are
called rigid motions. One way to generalize length to subsets of this is the Lebesgue measure. Each point in
a manifold has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic to a set in one of these. The linear combinations of
either the rows or columns of a real valued matrix make a closed, zero containing subset of this. It is a
metric space whose metric function is the Pythagorean theorem for its dimension and its inner product is
the dot product. For 10 points, name these spaces symbolized by a blackboard capital R to the n, which are
named for the Greek author of the Elements.
ANSWER: Euclidean Space [prompt on metric space]
Along with Rodrigues, this man names parameters that convert a specific Lie group to unit
quaternions, and a cuboid whose edges and face diagonals are all integers is known as his brick. He
names a constant defined as the limit of the harmonic series minus the natural log, and his namesake
circuit was developed while solving the bridges of Konnigsberg problem. One of his namesake formulas
relates trigonometric formulas to a complex exponential. For 10 points, identify this Swiss mathematician
and namesake of the base of the natural logarithm.
ANSWER: Leonard Euler
This man found the sum of the squares of the reciprocals of all natural numbers, thus solving the
Basel problem, to be pi^2/6 ["pi squared over six"]. The limiting difference between the natural log
function and the harmonic series is a constant named for him and Mascheroni [mas-kair-OH-nee]. In
1736, he proved that no (*) path crossed each of the Pregel River's seven bridges in Konigsberg exactly
once. Graph theory was essentially invented by, for 10 points, what Swiss mathematician and namesake of a
constant about equal to 2.718, called e?
ANSWER: Leonhard (Paul) Euler [OY-lur]
This mathematician proved the product sum identity for a real-number analogue of the Riemann zeta
function and used its divergence at a value of one to show that there are infinitely many primes. As n goes
to infinity, the difference between the nth harmonic number and the natural log of n goes to a constant of
which he is the first namesake and that is symbolized gamma. For a polyhedron, the number of vertices
minus number of edges plus number of faces is equal to his namesake characteristic, chi [rhymes with
"eye"]. He inaugurated graph theory by solving the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg [KER-nigs-bairg]
problem. For 10 points, name this prolific mathematician who discovered a constant equal to about 2.718,
the usual symbol for which is his last initial.
ANSWER: Leonhard Paul Euler [OIL-er]
With an Italian colleague, this mathematician names the constant that is the difference between the
harmonic series and the natural logarithm. He names a line which connects a circumcenter, centroid, and
orthocenter. The summation of one over n-factorial from n equals zero to infinity converges to his
namesake number. That number raised to the i times pi power is equal to negative one. For 10 points,
identify this Swiss mathematician whose number is the base of the natural logarithm function.
ANSWER: Leonard Euler
This mathematician was the first to provide the solution pi squared over six to the Basel problem.
DeMoivre's formula is a generalized form of one this man's most famous formulae, and his namesake
characteristic is two for any convex polyhedral. His solution to the Konigsberg Bridge Problem created the
field of graph theory. For ten points, name this Swiss mathematician whose name lends itself to the number
e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
Numbers that generate primes using a certain prime generating polynomial are known as his lucky numbers
and Gauss proved this man's law of quadratic reciprocity. His product formula can be used along with the
Riemann zeta function to prove the infinitude of primes and he proposed a value of pi squared over 6 as the
solution to Mengoli's Basel problem. He demonstrated why it was impossible to transverse the Pregel river
using each of the seven bridges of Koningsberg only once and his identity, e to the i times pi equals
negative 1, contains several symbols he popularized. For 10 points, name this Swiss mathematician, after
whom the base of the natural log is named.
ANSWER: Leonhard Paul Euler
In graph theory, this man names a closed path which traces each edge precisely once. He lends his name to
a set of polynomials related by Bernoulli numbers. A topographical formula named for this man states that
faces minus edges plus vertices equals his namesake characteristic, two for any polyhedron. This
mathematician proved that the Seven Bridge of Konigsberg problem had no solution. For 10 points, name
this Swiss mathematician who lends his name to the base of the natural logarithm, e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This man names a function that gives the number of positive integers that are less than or equal to n and
relatively prime to n. His namesake "characteristic" defines a polyhedron based on its number of vertices
minus its number of edges plus its number of faces. This man formulated his namesake "circuit" when he
proved that there was no way for a person to traverse each of the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg once and
only once. For 10 points, name this Swiss mathematician whose namesake number is the base of the natural
logarithm.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler (OY-ler) [or Euler's totient function, Euler characteristic, etc. at any time]
This man proved that arctan of one-half plus arctan of one-third equals pi over four, and was one of two
people who found continued fraction expressions for the arctangent. This mathematician solved one
problem by observing that all but two of the nodes in a certain graph must have an even number of edges. A
formula named for him relates the complex exponential function to cosine and sine, and when phi equals pi,
that formula gives that the exponential of i pi plus one equals 0. This man pioneered graph theory by
solving the Seven Bridges of Konigsburg problem. For 10 points, name this Swiss mathematician who
introduced a constant equal to about 2.718 and written e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
Along with an Italian, this man names a constant with value equal to the difference between the
harmonic series and natural logarithm; that value is about 0.577 and is named for him and Lorenzo
Mascheroni. This man proved Euclid's conjecture that there was a bijection between the Mersenne
primes and the perfect numbers. The number of natural numbers less than and relatively prime to a
given integer is his (*) totient function. This man's namesake path traverses every edge once, and he used
graph theory to prove that it was impossible to cross the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg. For ten points,
identify this Swiss mathematician whose namesake formula expresses imaginary powers of e as complex
numbers.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler (accept Lorenzo Mascheroni early)
A value named for this man is proportional to the integral of Gaussian curvature over a closed surface. He is
the namesake of an identity stating that "cosine theta plus sine theta times i" equals "e to the i times theta."
His namesake "characteristic" equals vertices minus edges plus faces. The limit of the difference between
the harmonic series and the natural log is named for Mascheroni and this solver of the Bridges of
Konigsberg problem. A value of about 2.718, the base of the natural log, is named e in his honor. For 10
points, name this Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
A cuboid with integer sides and diagonals are special cases of this man's namesake bricks, and he lends his
name to a set of polynomials which are related to the Bernoulli numbers. His namesake line connects the
circumcenter, orthocenter, and the centroid, and he names a constant whose irrationality is yet to be
confirmed, along with Mascheroni. For 10 points, identify this mathematician whose namesake formula
relates complex exponents to the sine and cosine functions, and whose namesake number is the base of the
natural log.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
Together with an Italian, this man is the namesake of a constant that is the limit of the difference between
the harmonic series and natural logarithm. In geometry, this man is the namesake of the line on which the
orthocenter, centroid, and circumcenter lie, and in graph theory, a circuit that uses each edge exactly once is
named for this man, who resolved the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem. His namesake characteristic is
equal to the number of vertices plus faces minus edges, and his namesake number raised to the i times pi
power plus one is equal to zero. That namesake number is the base of the natural logarithm, is equal to
approximately 2.71, and is symbolized by a lowercase e. FTP name this Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
With Maclaurin, this man lends his name to a formula for evaluating finite sums and infinite series
with integrals. His namesake formula relates trigonometric functions and the complex exponential
function. He names a constant symbolized lowercase gamma with Mascheroni, considered the father
of (*) graph theory for his solution of the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg Problem. For 10 points, name this
mathematician whose namesake number is approximately 2.718 and denoted with a lowercase e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
The substitution named for this mathematician is used to take the integral of the square root of a quadratic
expression. The path visiting each edge of a graph is named for this person because he proved that the
Seven Bridges of Konigsberg Problem is unsolvable. The characteristic named for this person equals the
number of vertices minus edges plus faces, which equals two for any simple polyhedron. Identify this
namesake of the identity e raised to the i pi power plus one equals zero, and of the number e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
One theorem named for this man can be rewritten to give a theorem of Gibbs that gives the number of
degrees of freedom of a mixture of different phases. With Lagrange, this man gives his name to the central
equation of the calculus of variations. He lends his name to the formula that states that e to the i times pi
equals negative 1. He also names a modification of Fermat's Little Theorem which uses his Totient
function, which gives the number of integers less than and coprime to the given input integer. He created the
field of graph theory by solving the Bridges of Koningsberg problem. FTP, name this Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Leonard Euler
This man names a line passing through a triangle's orthocenter, circumcenter, and centroid, while a cuboid
with integer edges and face diagonals is known as his brick. A generalization of Kurrah's rule for finding
amicable pairs is his rule, and his formula relates the number of vertices, edges, and faces in a convex
polyhedron. His namesake method is used to solve initial value problems in ordinary differential equations,
and his totient function is used in a generalization of Fermat's Little Theorem. For 10 points, this is what
namesake of a constant along with Mascheroni, a Swiss mathematician who is also the namesake of the base
of the natural logarithm?
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This man names a numerical method, improved upon by Runge and Kutta, used to solve ordinary
differential equations. The limiting difference between the harmonic series and the natural logarithm is
named after this man and Mascheroni. A theorem named for him generalizes Fermat's little theorem and
includes his namesake totient function. He names a type of circuit which he used to solve the Bridges of
Konigsberg problem, as well as an identity stating that "e to the pi i equals -1." For 10 points, name this
18th-century Swiss mathematician, namesake of the constant e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This person is the namesake of the three angles used to describe the orientation of a rigid question, and the
continued fraction named after him can be used to calculate the inverse tangent. His name is also attached to
the simplest method of approximating solutions to differential equations by linear approximations, and the
formula relating vertices, edges, and faces of a polyhedron. His name is also attached to an identity which
uses the numbers zero, one, pi, i, and e. Name this eighteenth century mathematician who popularized
expressing an important irrational number with the letter e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This mathematician's name is given to a line that passes through the orthocenter, circumcenter, and centroid
of a triangle. His phi function yields the amount of numbers between 1 and n that are relatively prime to n.
He solved the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem, and his polyhedral formula states that vertices plus
faces minus edges equals 2. The author of the identity involving e to the i theta is, for 10 points, what Swiss
mathematician who is the namesake of the base of the natural logarithm?
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This man proved that geodesic structures must contain 12 pentagons and some number of hexagons in order
to be spheroid. He names lines passing through the center of a nine-point circle, centroid, circumcenter, and
orthocenter of a triangle. This man generalized Fermat's little theorem using his namesake totient function
and derived a formula stating that the vertices minus the edges plus the faces must be two for polyhedra.
Another formula he names states that "e to the i pi" plus one equals zero. For 10 points, name this Swiss
mathematician who solved the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem and defined transcendental numbers
such as e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
One object named for this man is a cuboid whose sides and face diagonals have integral lengths, his
namesake bricks. A function named for this man is the number of integers less than n relatively
prime to n, his totient function. The quantity chi, this man's namesake (*) "characteristic," is equal to
vertices plus faces minus edges for polyhedra. This mathematician ushered in graph theory in proving that a
certain traversal was impossible because it had none of his namesake cycles. His identity states that a certain
number to the power of i times pi equals negative 1. For 10 points, name this Swiss mathematician who
solved the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem, the namesake of a constant with Mascheroni who did
work with the number e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
On a graph, this man's namesake path visits each edge exactly once, and the line connecting the orthocenter
and circumcenter of a triangle is also named for him. He lends his name to a method of solving differential
equations by estimating the slopes, and he also proved that there is no solution to the Seven Bridges of
Konigsberg problem. For 10 points, identify this mathematician who gives his name to the base of the
natural logarithm, a number symbolized by the letter "e."
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
In graph theory, this man lends his name to a closed path that traverses every edge precisely once.
The topological formula named for this man states that faces minus edges plus vertices equals two for
any polyhedron, giving the surface a value of two for his namesake characteristic. Another equation
named for him relates the complex (*) exponential function to cosine of x plus i times sine of x. For 10
points, identify this namesake of a "phi" function, a prolific Swiss mathematician for whom the number
e was supposedly named.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This man found the sum of the squares of the reciprocals of all natural numbers, thus solving the
Basel problem, to be pi^2/6 ["pi squared over six"]. The limiting difference between the natural log
function and the harmonic series is a constant named for him and Mascheroni [mas-kair-OH-nee]. In
1736, he proved that no (*) path crossed each of the Pregel River's seven bridges in Konigsberg exactly
once. Graph theory was essentially invented by, for 10 points, what Swiss mathematician and namesake of a
constant about equal to 2.718, called e?
ANSWER: Leonhard (Paul) Euler [OY-lur]
Differential equations of the form x squared y double prime plus b x y prime plus c y equals zero are
named after Cauchy and this man. All polyhedrons are defined as having a characteristic named after
this man equal to two, and a line named after him contains the orthocenter, circumcenter, and
centroid of a triangle. This man's formula is often used in conjunction with De Moivre's Theorem and
states that cis x equals e to the i x. For 10 points, name this Swiss mathematician who lends his name to
that transcendental constant, e.
ANSWER: Leonard Euler
This mathematician devised a topologically invariant measure that is two for all convex polyhedra. This
man laid the foundation of graph theory in solving a problem that asked if it was possible to walk through a
certain town while only crossing over every bridge in it once, the seven bridges of Konigsberg problem.
His identity equates cosine of x plus i times sine of x to his namesake constant raised to the i x power. For
10 points, identify this Swiss mathematician who is the namesake of the constant e, equal to about 2.718.
ANSWER: Leonard Euler (OIL-er)
With Bernoulli, this mathematician developed the classical theory of beams, and he names the
fundamental equation of the calculus of variations with Lagrange. This mathematician's namesake
characteristic is used to classify topological spaces. He names a function defined as the number of
positive integers less than or equal to n that are coprime to n; that is his (*) totient or phi function. This
man who names a line passing through the orthocenter, circumcenter, and centroid of a triangle has a
namesake constant that is approximately 2.718. For 10 points, e was named after which prolific Swiss
mathematician who solved the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem?
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This man lends his name to the prime-generating polynomial n squared minus n plus 41. He names a
function which gives how many positive integers less than n are relatively prime to n, his totient [TOHshunt] function. He proved one task's impossibility by demonstrating that each vertex of a graph
corresponding to it has odd degree; in doing so, he essentially invented graph theory. This solver of the
Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem names an equation stating that vertices minus edges plus faces equals
two, as well as an equation which relates five fundamental mathematical constants. Identify this Swiss
mathematician who names the constant used as the base of the natural logarithm, e.
ANSWER: Leonhard (Paul) Euler [OY-lur]
This scientist developed a set of three angles that can be multiplied to produce any rotation of a
rigid question. This scientist proved that no circuit will cross each of seven edges once before returning
to its starting point, thus solving the (*) Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem. He sometimes names the
number that is the base of the natural logarithm and approximately equal to 2.71828. For 10 points, name
this Swiss mathematician and physicist.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
In fluid dynamics, this man's namesake equations govern inviscid flow. He names a formula for the distance
between a triangle's incenter and circumcenter. In topology, his namesake characteristic, chi, is the number
of vertices, minus edges, plus faces, which for a polyhedron is always 2. The number of smaller natural
numbers coprime to a given natural number is this man's totient function. His namesake circuit is a solution
to the Bridges of Konigsberg problem, and his namesake formula states that e to the ix equals cis x ["sis
ecks"]. For 10 points, name this 18th century Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This man introduced the standard notation for functions, summations, and the square root of negative
one. He proved that the infinite series of one over n squared converged to pi squared over six, and that one
could not cross the Pregel River via seven existing bridges and return to the start point. For ten points, the
identity that e to the i pi plus one equals zero is named after what partially-blind Swiss mathematician who
also names that base of the natural logarithm?
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This mathematician proved that the Riemann zeta function may be written as an infinite product over the
primes. This figure proved a generalization of Fermat's little theorem involving his own totient function,
and the derivative of the graph of this figure's namesake number raised to the x power at x equals 0 is 1.
This mathematician solved the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem, and a constant he names is
approximately equal to 2.718. For 10 points, identify this Swiss mathematician who proved the identity e to
the i times pi equals negative 1.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler [pronounced "oiler"]
With Lagrange, this man names a differential equation whose solutions are stationary for some functional;
that equation appears in the calculus of variations. He is alphabetically the first of two co-namers of a
constant that measures the difference between the harmonic series and the natural log. He names the first-
order Runge-Kutta method, the simplest method for integrating ODEs. One quantity named for him is an
invariant that equals 2 for all convex polyhedra. He devised his namesake cycles while studying the bridges
of Konigsberg. His identity states that "e to the i pi equals negative one". For 10 points, name this Swiss
mathematician for whom the constant e is named.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler [pronounced "oiler", but accept any reasonable pronunciation] <
This man names an approximation that includes an error term of a Bernoulli number-containing integral,
used to approximate infinite series. He names a numerical process used to find solutions to ordinary
differential equations. The number of positive integers less than and coprime to n is his totient function.
This man found that all convex polyhedrons have the same value for the sum of their vertices, edges, and
faces, his so-called "characteristic." That finding, as well as his negative resolution of the Seven Bridges of
Konigsberg problem, formed the basis for topology. For 10 points, name this Swiss mathematician whose
namesake identity relates e, pi, i, and 1.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
The Milstein scheme is a refinement of this man's namesake scheme for approximating stochastic
differential equations- solutions. Lagrange, along with this man, names a differential equation that gives
solutions given stationary functionals in the calculus of variations, while Carmichael's theorem generalizes
this man's work on Fermat's little theorem. The first term of the Taylor series expansion for the Riemann
zeta function contains a term named after this man and Lorenzo Mascheroni. This mathematician names a
first-order method for solving ordinary differential equations, while a relationship between trigonometric
functions and complex numbers is defined in his namesake formula. The base of the natural logarithm is
named after, FTP, which Swiss mathematician?
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This man proved that the sum of the reciprocals of the prime numbers diverged, which was the key to his
proof of the infinitude of primes. This man used an infinite product representation of the sine function to
solve the Basel Problem. This mathematician defined a function counting the numbers smaller than and
relatively prime to the input and used it to generalize Fermat's Little Theorem; that function is his totient
function. This man related sine and cosine to imaginary powers of his namesake constant. For ten points,
name this Swiss mathematician after whom the constant e is named.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler [pronounced "oiler"]
With Cauchy, this mathematician names a class of differential equations with variable coefficients.
He generalized Fermat's Little Theorem to composite moduli using his namesake totient phi function,
phi, and his characteristic for a polyhedron is the number of vertices plus the number of faces minus
the number of edges. His path traverses each edge of a graph exactly once, and he demonstrated that there
were no solutions to the Konigsberg bridge problem. For 10 points, identify this namesake of the constant
that is the base of natural logarithms, e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
This scientist's namesake circle was conceptualized through the creation of this scientist's namesake
diagrams. This scientist's namesake line passes through the centroid, circumcenter, and orthocenter of a
triangle. This scientist proved that the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg problem had no solution. This
scientist's namesake method is used to numerically approximate differential equations and in his namesake
identity, e to the quantity i times pi plus one equal zero. For 10 points, name this Swiss mathematician who
went blind in 1766 and whose namesake number is the base of the natural logarithm.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
An equation for the loading of beams in physics is named for Daniel Bernoulli and this man. This man's
contributions to graph theory included determining an equation to relate the number of edges, faces and
vertices of a convex polyhedron, and he determined that no solution existed for the Seven Bridges of
Konigsberg problem. For 10 points, name this Swiss mathematician, who lent his name to the base of the
natural logarithm, e.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler
The number of odd alternating permutations of a set are given by this man's namesake numbers, and he
names an iterative method for solving differential equations. The number of integers less than or equal to
and coprime to an integer is given by his totient function, and for a polyhedron, vertices minus edges plus
faces gives his namesake characteristic number. He names a formula that relates "cosine x plus i sine x" to a
constant named for him that is the base of the natural logarithm and symbolized by e. For 10 points, name
this Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Leonhard Paul Euler
In a Butcher tableau, this method is diagrammed with zeroes in the top row and a one in the
bottom right. The first step of the Adams-Bashforth methods use this procedure. Huen's method
is a variant on this procedure though his method's error scales with the interval cubed while this
one scales with the interval squared. Implicit versions of this method and its variations are used
for stiff equations. It is a first-order Runge-Kutta method. It corresponds to truncating the
function's Taylor series to two terms, so the function evaluated at x plus delta x is equal to its
value at x, plus delta x times the derivative at x. For 10 points, name this method of numerically
approximating ODE solutions by approximating the function as linear over small intervals, that
is named for a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Euler's method [prompt on Runge-Kutta methods until it is read]
This quantity can be defined on a finite CW complex as an alternating sum, and an extension of this
quantity to higher dimensions can be obtained through Betti numbers. Examining the trace of the matrix for
a map homotopic to the identity shows that this quantity for such maps is equal to the Lefschetz number. It
can be determined by taking the number of maxima and minima and subtracting saddle points or by
subtracting twice the genus from two, and Poincare's formula for polyhedra gives it by subtracting the
number of edges and faces from the number of vertices. For 10 points, what is this property of a compacted,
closed surface that is zero for the Klein bottle and Mobius strip and positive 2 for a sphere, and which was
first introduced by its namesake in his solution to the "bridges of Konigsberg" problem.
ANSWER: Euler-Poincare characteristic or number
Hadwiger's theorem characterizes this quantity as the measure for the finite union of compact convex sets
that is homogeneous degree zero. For a chain complex, it is defined as the alternating sum of the ranks of
the homology groups, and can be defined as the alternating sum of Betti numbers. The this quantity is
proportional to the integral of the curvature of a closed Riemannian manifold according to the GaussBonnet theorem. The only closed compact surfaces for which it is zero are the torus and the Klein bottle,
and its namesake's formula states that it is equal to two for the surface of any convex polyhedron. For 10
points, name this topological invariant, denoted by the letter chi, which was defined by its Swiss namesake
as vertices minus edges plus faces.
ANSWER: Euler characteristic [or Euler number]
Gauss proved that an n-gon is constructible with compass and straightedge if and only if this function
of n is a power of 2. This function of n gives the degree of the field extension when adjoining a
primitive nth root of unity to Q. Taking the sum over this function applied to all (*) divisors of n
returns n. As a corollary of the fact that the order of a subgroup divides the order of the finite group it's in,
since this function of n gives the order of multiplicative group of integers mod n, any element of that group
raised to this function of n equals 1, giving Euler's theorem. For any prime p, this function returns p-1. For
10 points, name this number-theoretic function giving the number of integers less than and coprime to its
argument.
ANSWER: Euler's totient function [or Euler's phi function]
The Bell series of this function is equal to one minus x over 1 minus px, while the partial sums of this
function show that its average order is equal to 3n divided by pi squared, a result which can be used to find
the number of lattice points visible from the origin. The Dirichlet convolution of the identity function N and
the Mobius function gives this function, and if a number has r distinct odd prime factors, 2 to the r divides
this function of the number. Summing this function over the divisors of a number n gives n. It gives the
number of elements in the group Z sub n star, and for a prime number p this function returns p minus 1.
Also used in its namesake's generalization of Fermat's Little Theorem, for 10 points, name this function
that returns the number of integers less than and relatively prime to the input.
ANSWER: Euler phi function [or Euler totient function]
Ford proved a result showing that for each k, the equation this function of x equals m has
exactly k solutions. Jordan extended this function to k-tuples. This function appears in the
denominator of the definition of the Silverman Constant. The Dirichlet convolution of one with
this function returns the identity function. This function can be used to find the order of the ring
Z over n Z, and a polygon is constructable if this function of the number of sides is equal to a
power of two. For a prime input, this function returns one minus the input. This function appears
in the exponent of its namesake's extension to Fermat's little theorem. For 10 points, name this
function that returns the number of integers less than the input that are relatively prime to it.
ANSWER: Euler totient function [or Euler phi function]
Along with the divisor function, it appears in the denominator of the summation used to determine
Silverman's constant. The statement that all integers occur as multiplicities of its variance function is
the basis of Sierpinki's (*) conjecture. Carmicheal's conjecture states that it is possible to have two integer
inputs that yield the same output from this function. It can be used to generalize Fermat's little theorem. For
10 points, name this function that gives the number of positive integers that are relatively prime to given
number.
ANSWER: Euler totient function
The Dirichlet series of this function is equal to the Riemann Zeta function of s minus one divided by zeta of
s. A conjecture by Carmichael about this function concerns the multiplicity of its outputs. If this function of
n is equal to a power of two, it is possible to construct an n-gon. This function of the order of a finite cyclic
group gives its number of generators. The asymptotic average of it over its input, which is about six over pi
squared, gives the probability that a random integer will be squarefree. This function is equal to the sum
over d divides n of the Mobius function times n over d. b to the power of this function of m is congruent to
one mod m in a generalization of Fermat's little theorem. For a prime p, it returns p minus one. For 10
points, name this function that returns all positive integers less than and relatively prime to its input and is
sometimes named for a Swiss mathematician.
ANSWER: Euler's totient function [or Euler's phi function]
The Dirichlet series with the values of this function as coefficients evaluates to zeta of s minus one over zeta
of s, while summing it over the divisors of any integer gives the integer itself. The sum of it and the sum of
the divisors of an integer n is equal to 2n if and only if n is prime, and it is multiplicative for relatively
prime integers. It is the order of the group of units of Z mod Z n, meaning that any unit taken to this power
is one, as implied by Euler's theorem. FTP, name this arithmetic function first defined by Euler, which for
an integer n is the number of integers less than n that are coprime to n.
ANSWER: Euler totient function (or Euler phi function)
Binary codes with this property have generator polynomials that include a factor of 1 + x. If a finite
group does not have this property, then the Feit-Thompson theorem guarantees that it is solvable.
Permutations that possess this property form a subgroup of all permutations called the (*) alternating
group, and they all have Levi-Civita symbol equal to positive one. Functions with this property have Fourier
expansions that consist only of cosines, since for cosines f(x) = f(-x) ("eff of x equals eff of negative x"); by
definition, such functions exhibit reflectional symmetry over the y-axis. For 10 points, name this property
shared by numbers divisible by two.
ANSWER: even
Alternating groups consist of permutations with this property. A connected graph
with this property has an Eulerian circuit. This property names a part of a function found by averaging fof x
and f of minus x. Euler found a formula for all perfect numbers with this property, and all known perfect
numbers have this property. A function satisfying f of x equals (*) f of negative x has this property, which
causes reflectional symmetry over the y-axis in the graphs of cosine of x and x squared. For ten points,
name this property of integers which are divisible by 2.
ANSWER: even
The sum of the degrees of the vertices [VER-tuh-sees] of a simple graph always are this type of number. A
proof of the irrationality of the square root of two is based on the fact that the numerator and denominator
of a rational value would both have to be this type of number, which contradicts the assumption that the
fraction is irreducible. Goldbach's conjecture states that all of these except the least positive one can be
represented as the sum of two prime numbers. These numbers are equivalent to zero mod two. Name these
numbers, each of which is equal to twice an integer, contrasted with odd numbers.
ANSWER: even numbers (accept evens, prompt on "numbers divisible by two" or equivalents)
Chen's Theorem describes the representation of large instances of these. All degrees in a graph with an
Euler walk have this distinction. The Goldbach conjecture states that these above a certain value can be
written as the sum of two primes. Polynomials whose degree are of this type must have a global maximum
or minimum. The positive examples of these correspond to the binary numbers whose least significant
place is zero. For 10 points, name these numbers which are multiples of two and thus not odd.
ANSWER: even number [or even integer]
The Levi-Civita [LAY-vee CHEE-vee-tah] symbol equals positive one for these types of permutations,
and these types of permutations correspond to determinant terms that are added instead of subtracted.
A common proof that the square root of two is irrational is based on the fact that a reduced fraction
cannot have a numerator and denominator that both have this property. Each of these numbers is
the sum of two primes according to Goldbach's conjecture. These numbers are equivalent to zero
modulo two. There is only one prime number of this type. Name these numbers that are divisible by
two.
ANSWER: even numbers [or evens; prompt on answers that mention divisibility by two or a factor of two or similar constructions]
Swap functions are often used to avoid data corruption when using these, and some of these constructs can
be classified as "basic" or "strong" by Abrahams Guarantees. The Eiffel language's design by contract
approach to these does away with changes in control flow, and they are often implemented using C's
longjump function. Some languages support these in a vectored rather than structured form, and checked
ones appear in a method's signature and must be dealt with in calling methods. They provide clearer and
more verbose descriptions than return codes, and can terminate a program when propagated completely up
the call stack. Handled via catch blocks in Java, for 10 points, name these constructs including
IndexOutOfBounds and NullPointer types.
ANSWER: Exceptions
In one system, these files contain an ImageBase field along with a Sections Table. On a different
platform, these files contain dot data and dot text sections. Types of these files include Mach-O and ELF.
Dynamic linking allows these files to use shared libraries, such as a DLL. These files are created by a
compiler. The headers of these files usually indicate the architecture platform on which they can be used.
For 10 points, name these files containing instructions that can be run on a computer.
ANSWER: executables [or exe; or programs]
Its skewness is 2, which can be inferred from the fact its moment generating function is "p divided by
the quantity p minus t", where p is its single parameter and t is time. Given a series of random
variables characterized by this distribution, the sum of those random variables fits the Erlang
Distribution. Though its variance is one over its parameter (*) squared, its expected value is one over
that parameter, which is often represented with a lambda. This distribution is the continuous analogue of the
geometric distribution, which means that it too, is memoryless. For 10 points, name this probability
distribution that is closely modeled by the function "e to the x."
ANSWER: exponential distribution
It provides a map to any Lie group from its corresponding Lie algebra. Its matrix form may be used to give
solutions to systems of linear differential equations, while for the reals it is the unique Lebesgue measurable
function f that satisfies f(x+y) = f(x) f(y). Its MacLaurin coefficients are equal to one, and it is the only
function that is its own derivative. Euler's identity shows that its value at pi i is negative one, while its
inverse is the natural logarithm. FTP, name this function whose value at positive integers is the product of
several copies of Euler's constant.
ANSWER: exponential function (accecpt y = e to the x after "reals" is read)
The link between Lie algebras and Lie groups is a map with this name; that map involves applying
this function to the infinitesimal elements of the Lie algebra, which are the generators of the Lie
group. The Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula gives a way to find the product of this function
applied to two non-commuting operators. Applying this to two irrational algebraic numbers always
results in a transcendental number according to the (*) Gelfond-Schneider theorem. Like the geometric
distribution, the distribution with this name is memoryless, and its mean equals one over its rate parameter.
This function solves the differential equation y equals y prime. For 10 points, name this function which is its
own derivative and is the inverse function of the natural logarithm.
ANSWER: exponential function or distribution or map (accept e to the x or e to the negative x or other equivalents of exponential; accept exponentiating)
This function appears in the integral definition of the gamma function where it of negative t is
multiplied by t to the z minus one times dt. This is given as the limit as n goes to infinity of quantity 1
plus x over n to the nth power. Relatedly, its power series is the sum from n equals zero to infinity of
x to the n divided by n factorial. This function is its own (*) derivative. Its inverse is the natural log. For
10 points, name this function of x which is approximately 2.718 raised to the xth power.
ANSWER: exponential function [or ex (e to the x, or e raised to the xth power, etc)]
A phasor plot represents this function in a complex plane, and this function also appears in the
Fourier and Laplace transforms. It is equal to the sum of the hyperbolic sine and hyperbolic cosine.
Euler's formula states that this function of i theta equals cis theta. This function, the only nonzero one
to equal its own derivative, is often used in problems involving radioactive decay and compound
interest. For 10 points, name this inverse of the natural logarithm, which involves a base e being raised
to a power.
ANSWER: natural exponential function [accept exponentiation]
The nth term of the Fibonacci sequence can be obtained by applying this operation to the matrix
"one one one zero." Knuth's double-arrow notation is used to describe repeated iterations of this
operation. Applying this operation to cosine theta plus i sine theta equals cosine n theta plus i sine n
theta, according to (*) De Moivre's theorem. Pascal's triangle is used in Newton's theorem for applying
this operation to a binomial. For ten points, name this operation which involves multiplying a number by
itself a certain number of times, and is represented with a superscript.
ANSWER: exponentiation (or raising to a power; accept same-knowledge equivalents; reverse-prompt on specific examples of exponentiation such as "squaring" or "cubing")
This theorem is a consequence of both the boundedness theorem and the fact that the reciprocal of the
difference of a function minus its least upper bound on a compact set cannot be bounded. Though it is not a
more general case of Rolle's theorem, it can be used to prove Rolle's theorem, and the points predicted to
exist by this theorem and Rolle's theorem turn out to be identical. In some proofs of the fundamental
theorem of calculus, this is applied before the intermediate value theorem. Name this theorem which states
that any continuous function over a bounded and closed interval must attain minimum and maximum values.
ANSWER: extreme value theorem [or EVT]
For a Wilson prime p, this function on p minus one is congruent to negative one modulo p. This
function of z is given by the integral from zero to infinity dt of t to the z times e to the negative t. For
large values of n, this operator on n can be approximated by Stirling's formula, and e can be written
as the (*) infinite sum of the reciprocals of this function on whole numbers. It is extended to all complex
numbers except the negative integers by the gamma function. This function on n represents the number of
permutations of n items. For 10 points, name this operator equal to the product of all positive integers less
than or equal to a given number, symbolized by an exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial [prompt on "Gamma Function"]
This function is applied along with addition and subtraction to prime numbers in Wilson's Theorem. When
this function is applied after doubling a number, it has a simple relationship with products of triangular
numbers, and this is shifted one unit over from the gamma function. This function appears in the
denominators of both the terms in a Taylor Series and in solutions to problems on the rearrangements of
letters. Name this function used to calculate permutations and combinations, the product of all of the natural
numbers up to a given number.
ANSWER: factorial
This function of n approaches a constant times n over e all to the nth power, according to Stirling's formula
for it. The sum of the reciprocals of the values of this function is one way of finding e. The binomial
coefficients can be written as a ratio of one of these functions over two other ones. When applied to 5 this
function yields 120, and when applied to 4 it gives 24. For 10 points, identify this function whose nth value
is the product of all integers less than or equal to n, denoted by an exclamation mark.
ANSWER: factorial
The gamma function extends this function to positive reals, and for large values of n, Stirling's formula
provides an approximation for it. In a Taylor series, this function of n is in the denominator of the nth term.
The total number of permutations possible out of n objects is this function. For 10 points, name this
function that for a whole number n equals n multiplied by all the positive integers before it, usually
represented with an exclamation mark.
ANSWER: factorial function
Sloane and Plouffe defined the "super" version of this function, while the number of un-rooted
binary trees with a given number of leaves can be found using the "double" version of this function.
Brute-force-searching the travelling salesman problem can be done in big O of this function. This
function can be approximated as equal to the square root of two pi n times n to the n divided by e to
the n, a method devised by Stirling. This function, which is applied to p minus 1 in Wilson's theorem, is
most commonly used to find the number of permutations of n objects. Generalized by the gamma function,
for 10 points, name this function symbolized by an exclamation point, equal to the product of all integers
between 1 and the operand.
ANSWER: factorial
This function is approximated for large numbers by Stirling's approximation. The traveling salesman
problem can be solved in Big O of this function. The pi function and gamma function extend this function
to complex numbers. This function appears in the denominator of the Taylor series of polynomials, and this
function is said to grow faster than all polynomial and exponential functions. Often used with combinations
and permutations, for 10 points, name this mathematical function, defined as the product of all positive
integers less than or equal to n, denoted by an exclamation point.
ANSWER: Factorial [prompt on "exclamation point/mark" before read]
Stirling's approximation is used to calculate very large terms of this operation. The reciprocals of its
terms converge to e, and this operation is defined at zero as one. It is used in the formula for (*)
permutations and combinations, and the number of ways to arrange n elements is given by this function of
n. For 10 points, name this operation where consecutive numbers are multiplied together, symbolized by an
exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial (prompt on exclamation point before mentioned)
Brown numbers are pairs of numbers [m,n] such that m squared minus one equals this function of
n. This function appears in the denominator of the formula used to compute Catalan numbers. It can be
defined as the integral of the product of an exponential and a polynomial. It is equivalent to the gamma
function for positive integers, and it also appears in the formula for permutations and combinations.
For 10 points, name this function, usually denoted with an exclamation point, which for a positive
integer n equals the product of all positive integers less than or equal to n.
ANSWER: factorial [prompt on exclamation point]
This function can be defined recursively, stating that at zero it is equal to one and at n it is equal to n
times this function for n minus one. This function can be generalized with the gamma function and is found
in the denominator of the Taylor series expansion and in the definition of a combination and a permutation
in probability. For 10 points, name this function which for an integer n is equal to the product of n times all
integers smaller than n, denoted with an exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial
This word preceded by "hyper" describes a function of a equal to the K-function of a+1. The formula for
the kth Catalan number is this function of 2k divided by this function of k times this function of k+1. This
function of successive natural numbers forms the denominators of the terms in a Taylor series. For zero, this
function can be shown to equal one, by equating this function of n to the number of permutations of n
objects. For 10 points, name this function which gives the product of all positive integers equal to or less
than a specified integer, symbolized by an exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial
According to a Donald Knuth [k--NOOTH] conjecture, this function along with the square root and
floor functions and the number 3 can generate any natural number. The Pochhammer [POHK-hah-mer]
symbol is used to represent its rising or falling types. A horizontal shift changes this function into
the gamma function. This function appears in the denominators of Taylor series terms, and two of these
functions are divided to evaluate permutations. Give this function equal to the product of all natural
numbers up to and including its input, represented by an exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial
For a prime number n, evaluating this function at the quantity n minus one will equal -1, modulo n,
according to Wilson's theorem. One approximation of this function for large n values is named for Stirling,
and Euler devised an extension for this function to the complex numbers and negative non-integers called
the gamma function. This function, which appears in the denominator of a Taylor series, is an empty
product when evaluated at zero, and is therefore equal to 1 there. For 10 points, name this function, useful
in performing permutations and combinations, which for some natural number n is defined as the product of
all natural numbers less than or equal to n.
ANSWER: Factorial
For a symmetric group of degree n, this function gives the order of the permutation group, and the
Pochammer symbol is a rising type of this function. The Taylor approximation for e to the x contains this
function in the denominator of each term. One approximation of it often used to calculate entropy is named
after Stirling, while it can be generalized to complex numbers using the gamma function. For 10 points,
identify this function which for a natural number n gives the product of all natural numbers from 1 to n and
is represented by an exclamation mark.
ANSWER: factorial
One variant of this function appearing in the formula for a Newton series is the "falling" form, represented
by the Pochhammer symbol. The natural log of this function is related to elementary functions in Stirling's
approximation. Extended to complex numbers by the gamma function, it appears in the denominator of each
term in a Taylor series expansion. Applied to a positive integer n, this function gives the number of ways to
permute n objects, which equals the product of all integers from 1 to n. For 10 points, name this function
denoted by an exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial function
Wilson's theorem states that this function of p-minus-1 is congruent to negative 1 modulo p. Stirling's
formula is used to approximate this function, and the gamma function extends it to non-natural numbers.
Taylor series include terms with this function of each number in the denominator. Computing n choose k
involves three applications of this function. For 10 points, name this function that multiplies all the natural
numbers less than or equal to the input, which is usually denoted by an exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial
This function can be estimated for large values using Stirling's approximation. One can compute this
function for any element in its domain by adding one and applying the gamma function. Used three
times in the formula for calculating binomial [*] coefficients, this function is found in the denominator of
each term in a general Taylor series. For 10 points, name this function that, for any positive integer n, is
equal to the product of the integers from one to n, symbolized by an exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial [prompt "gamma function" before mention; prompt "exclamation point"]
The gamma function extends this operation to complex numbers, and an approximation named for Stirling
can calculate very large ones. This function, whose rate of growth surpasses the exponential function, can
be used to find how many permutations there are of n objects. For 10 points, name this function whose
symbol is the exclamation point, which for a positive integer consists of multiplication by all lower positive
integers.
ANSWER: factorial [prompt "exclamation point" before mention]
Brocard's problem asks which outputs of this function are one less than a perfect square, and Christian
Kramp was the first to use the notation commonly used to denote this function. By Stirling's approximation,
the natural log of this function on n is equal to n natural log of n all minus n. It is extended to all the
complex numbers except the non-positive integers by the gamma function, and the Taylor series of e to the
x features this function acting in the denominator of the polynomial terms. This function can be defined
recursively as n times this function for n minus one. For 10 points, name this function denoted by an
exclamation mark.
ANSWER: factorial
In a Poisson (PWA-sohn) probability mass function, this function appears the denominator. An
extension of this function, which has an output of square root of pi for the value one-half, is the
gamma function. For large values, it is well-approximated with (*) Stirling's formula. This function
appears in the denominator of each term of a Taylor series. When choosing k objects from n objects, this
function is applied to n in the numerator as well as to n and n minus k in the denominator. For 10 points,
name this function represented by an exclamation mark.
ANSWER: factorial
Fermat's little theorem can be used to prove that this function of a prime minus one equals negative
one modulo that prime according to Wilson's theorem. When this function's argument is downshifted
by one, the gamma function results. The natural log of this function of n is equal to n log n minus n
for very large n according to [*] Stirling's approximation. This function appears in the denominator of all
the terms of the Taylor series, and it is used to calculate binomial coefficients with combinations. For 10
points, name this function of n equal to the product of all positive integers less than or equal to n,
symbolized with an exclamation point.
ANSWER: factorial
According to Raabe's formula, the integral, from a to a plus one, of the log of a function that reduces
to this function, equals one-half log two pi plus a log a minus a. Wilson's theorem states that if n is
prime, then this function of n minus one is congruent to negative one, modulo n. Stirling's formula
approximates this function as x times ln x minus x, and is used for extremely large values of it. A
function that (*) generalizes this function to the real numbers equals the integral of x to the t minus one
times e to the negative x. The denominator of every term in a Taylor series has this function of the order of
the term. The gamma function generalizes, for 10 points, what function that recursively multiplies numbers
and is denoted by an exclamation point?
ANSWER: factorial (accept gamma function before mention)
The Pochhammer symbol represents a version of this function, and its value on n is square root of 2 pi
n times quantity n over e to the n according to Stirling's approximation. The number of trailing zeros of
this function on n are given by counting the multiples of powers of 5 less than n. Taylor expansions
contain this function in the denominator, and three occurrences of this function appear in the binomial
coefficient. For 10 points, name this function that gives the product of all integers from 1 to n,
symbolized by an exclamation mark.
ANSWER: factorial [or rising/falling factorial before "Stirling" is read]
The rising type is often represented by the Pochhammer symbol, and Stirling's approximation gives a value
for this function, which is equivalent to the gamma function for positive integers. This function appears in
the denominator of each term in the Taylor series, and appears thrice in the binomial coefficient. Used in
calculating combinations and permutations, this function, for a non-negative integer n, is defined as the
product of all positive integers less than or equal to n. FTP name this function that is represented by an
exclamation mark.
ANSWER: factorial
This term is used to describe experiments in which at least two factors are tested at all of their possible
levels. It more commonly refers to a function which for large values can be estimated by the Stirling
approximation. For positive integers, this function shifted to the right by one unit is equal to the gamma
function. Most often it is defined recursively with the initial value at 0 equaling 1 and the ratio of this
function for x divided by this function for the quantity x minus one equaling x. This function is often used in
combinatorics in the formulas for combinations and permutations. Give the name of the function that, for a
natural number n, equals the product of all the numbers from 1 to n.
ANSWER: factorial
The "rising" type of this function is called the Pochhammer symbol. Wilson's theorem states that this
function of a prime minus 1 is one less than a multiple of that prime. The approximation "n ln n minus n"
for this function's natural logarithm is named for Stirling. The coefficients for the "Taylor series of e to the
x" are reciprocals of this function, which is generalized by the gamma function and gives the number of
permutations of n when performed on n. For 10 points, the product of the first n numbers gives what
function of n denoted by an exclamation point?
ANSWER: factorial
For large numbers, it's often estimated by n log n minus n, or by the square root of 2 pi n times quantity n
over e to the n; those approximations are named for Stirling. Its value at one-half is the square root of pi
when extended to complex numbers by the gamma function. It gives the number of permutations, or ways to
order a list of n elements, and its additive analogue is the nth triangular number. For 10 points, name this
function which gives the product of all integers from 1 to a given number, and is symbolized by an
exclamation mark.
ANSWER: n factorial [accept gamma function until "gamma" is read; prompt "exclamation mark" until read; hope that no one attempts to say ! using a palatal click or a surprised expression or something]
Wilson's theorem states that, for a prime number p, this function of the quantity p plus one is
congruent to negative one modulo p, and the Stirling approximation approximates this function for
large values. This function appears in the denominators of terms of the Taylor series and is
generalized by the (*) gamma function. This function gives the number of ways to arrange n distinct
objects. For 10 points, name this function, which for a number n is equal to the product of all of the positive
integers less than or equal to n.
ANSWER: factorial
This operation can be done over a finite field using Berkelamp's algorithm. One method of doing
this operation to a particular type of quartic uses Sophie Germain's identity, and Eisenstein's
criterion gives instances in which this operation cannot be done. An expression involving x minus one
and y minus one shows up in "Simon's favorite" trick for performing this operation. All polynomials
greater than degree one with real coefficients can have this done over the complex numbers (*)
according to the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. Simple identities for this operation are grouping and
difference of two squares. For 10 points, name this operation often used to find roots, the breaking up of a
polynomial into polynomials of lesser degree multiplied together.
ANSWER: factoring [or reducing or expanding out; accept word forms]
Peter Shor developed an algorithm that does activity, which would nullify RSA's usefulness; that algorithm
performs in polynomial time. The Gauss-Jordan method can be used in part to perform the "LU" type of
this. For 10 points, name this activity that can be done on a polynomial with a perfect square discriminant,
which for the number 49 would produce 7 and 7.
ANSWER: factorization (accept word forms)
Because qubits can hold superpositions of multiple states, Shor's algorithm would allow this procedure to
be done in polynomial time. RSA encryption may be intercepted if one is able to perform this procedure
with the public key. The simplest method for performing this is trial division, which tests every integer less
than the square root of the number in question. For 10 points, name this operation which breaks an integer
down into its component primes.
ANSWER: Integer factorization [or word forms; or obvious equivalents like "finding prime factors"]
One algorithm for doing this uses exponent vectors and bitwise adds the values of those vectors mod
2; that algorithm, for some input n, multiplies squares and their remainders mod n together to find a
congruence of squares mod n in a manner that improves upon Dixon's method for doing this. The
periodfinding sub-problem for this task is possible using a superposition of states. The most efficient
classical algorithm for this is the (*) general number field sieve. However, a big-Oh of log n cubed
quantum algorithm for doing this named for Shor is fast enough for very large products of primes, which
would break RSA encryption. For 10 points, name this procedure which, for a number of the form a squared
minus b squared results in a plus b and a minus b.
ANSWER: integer factorization [accept prime factorization]
The logarithm of the probability of these events in a certain bit-array used to test for set membership is
proportional to the quotient of the filter size and the number of elements in the filter. That data structure is
the Bloom filter. Highly specific tests minimize the occurrence of these events. Epidemiological tests for
non-life-threatening conditions that are costly to treat generally seek to minimize their occurrence.
Statistical significance is a measure of the likelihood that one of these events occur, in which a Type I error
is made and rejection of a true null hypothesis occurs. For 10 points, name these events in which a test
incorrectly indicates that a condition is present.
ANSWER: false positives [accept Type I error until it is read]
It's not the Viterbi algorithm, but drawing a data flow diagram of one algorithm to perform this
process creates a butterfly shape. Bluestein developed an algorithm that can efficiently perform this
action for prime sizes, and another method of doing it can be modified into a split-radix version
applicable when the input size is a multiple of four. One algorithm for performing this action splits a
highly composite number N into the product of N1 and N2 and uses complex roots of unity as (*)
twiddle factors. This operation is implemented by the Cooley-Tukey algorithm. For 10 points, name this
operation which quickly takes a function from the time domain to the frequency domain.
ANSWER: fast fourier transform or FFT [prompt on partial answer, prompt on DFT or discrete fourier transform]
This mathematician names the identity that n choose k equals the sum from i equals k to n of i minus
1 choose k minus 1. The statement that local extrema of functions have a vanishing first derivative is
his theorem of stationary points. This mathematician used the method of descent to prove the n
equals 4 case of one of his statements, and also stated that light rays travel to minimize the time
taken, his principle of (*) least time. Another law named for him states that for any a coprime to a prime p,
a to the quantity p minus 1 is congruent to 1 mod p; that is his Little Theorem. For 10 points, identify this
namesake of a theorem proven by Andrew Wiles, stating that for there are no integer solutions to x to the n
plus y to the n equals z to the n for n greater than two-his namesake Last Theorem.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
This man first proved Albert Girard's original observation that a prime p could only be expressed as the
sum of two squares if the prime was congruent to one modulo four. The Taniyama-Shimura conjecture was
used by Andrew Wiles to prove one of his theorems, which states that there are no integers that satisfy a to
the n plus b to the n equals c to the n when n is greater than two. Another statement named for this man is a
to the p is congruent to a mod p, where a is an integer and p is a prime number. For 10 points, name this
French mathematician who has "little" and "last" theorems.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
This man proved that an odd prime can be expressed distinctively as the difference of two squares, and his
principle of least time was used to derive Snell's law. 2-to-the-2-to-the-n plus 1 for any integer n gives his
namesake "numbers." His most famous problem, related to the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture, was scribbled
in a copy of Diophantus- Arithmetica and finally proved by Andrew Wiles. For 10 points, identify this
French mathematician with a namesake "little" theorem and "Last" theorem.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
The Lucas primality test is based on one finding of this man who pioneered the method of infinite descent.
That result is a specific case of a theorem that takes an element to the totient function of n-1, Euler's
theorem. Numbers for which the converse of that theorem do not hold are called Carmichael Numbers.
Another theorem named after this man used the modularity conjecture, also called the Taniyama-Shimura
Conjecture. That theorem stating that for n greater than one there are no solutions to a to the n plus b to the
n equals to c to the n for positive a, b, and c was proved by Andrew Wiles. For 10 points, identify this man
with namesake "little" and "last" theorems.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
He's not Archimedes, but this man is the namesake of the polar graph "r equals the square root of
theta"; that is his namesake parabolic spiral. One statement named for this man is the basis of the
RSA encryption scheme. The Taniyama-Shimura Conjecture was used by Andrew Wiles to prove
another theorem by this man; that theorem states that there are no integers a, b, and c such that (*) a
to the n plus b to the n equals c to the n" when n is an integer greater than two. For 10 points, identify this
Frenchman known for his Little and Last theorems.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
This man names the special case of the Archimedean spiral when n is set to two. Gauss showed that any
number which can be expressed as a power of two times the product of numbers named for this man can be
the number of sides in a constructible polygon. He is also the namesake of the statement that a to the p is
equal to a modulo p if p is prime, and he proposed that light waves travel through the principle of least time.
His most famous idea was proven by Andrew Wiles. For 10 points, name this namesake of a type of primes
and a theorem that states that x^n plus y^n equals z^n has no solution for n greater than 2, his "last
theorem."
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
The Euler totient theorem generalizes a theorem by this man, while another statement by this man can be
proved using the Taniyama conjecture regarding elliptic curves. Snell's law can be derived from his
principle that the path taken by a ray of light is the one which can be traveled in the least amount of time,
while a statement he proposed was only recently proven by Andrew Wiles in the 1990's. For 10 points,
name this French mathematician who stated that there are no integers n greater than 2 which satisfies the
equation a to the n plus b to the n equals c to the n, known as his last theorem.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
His namesake numbers, used in pseudo-random number generators, take the form 2 to the 2-to-the-nth
power plus 1. A result by this man, generalized by Carmichael's theorem and Euler's totient theorem, states
that A raised to the power p, where p is prime, is congruent to A, modulo p. He's not Leibniz, but Newton
acknowledge this man's earlier method of differentiation, and this man noted in the margin of a copy of
Diophantus' Arithmetica that no integer n greater than 2 solves the equation "a to the n plus b to the n equals
c to the n", which Andrew Wiles proved in 1993. For 10 points, name this 17th-century French
mathematician known for his "little" and "last" theorems.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
Numbers that give a false result for a test named for this man satisfy the congruence b raised to the n minus
one power similar to one mod one for all integers b that are relatively prime to n. Those numbers are a type
of Knodel number named for Carmichael, also known as this man's pseudoprimes. The epsilon conjecture
and Taniyama-Shimura conjecture were both useful in proving another theorem named for this man that
stated there are no non-zero solutions to the equation a^n + b^n = c^n, when n is greater than two. For 10
points, name this French mathematician who is the namesake of a famous "last" theorem.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
The theorem that every positive integer is the sum of at most n n-gonal numbers is called this man's
"polygonal number theorem". The set of numbers named for him contains integers of the form 2, to the 2, to
the nth power, plus one. Another of his theorems states that given any prime p and integer a, a to the pth
power is equal to a mod p. In optics, he gives his name to the principle of least time. His best-known
theorem, proven in 1993 using elliptic curves and the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture by Andrew Wiles,
states that there are no solutions for a certain Diophantine equation with exponents greater than 2. For 10
points, name this French mathematician known for his "last theorem".
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
When all of the elements of a phyllotaxis are uniform, they approximate the shape of this man's
spiral. Albert Fleck pointed out a major error in Ferdinand von Lindemann's second attempt to prove
this man's theorem about a certain kind of Diophantine equation. He hypothesized that an integer
taken to the power of a prime minus that integer will be divisible by the prime in his "Little" Theorem.
Andrew Wiles finally proved, for 10 points, the Last Theorem of which French mathematician?
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
This man's Principle of Least Time describes the path a light beam takes. A theorem by this man states
that if p is prime, then for an integer a, a to the p power subtracted by a is divisible by p. This man's most
famous problem was not solved until 1995 by Andrew Wiles. For ten points, name this French
mathematician, who is best known for his Little and Last Theorems.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
One theorem named after this person determines which prime numbers can be expressed as the sum of
squares, and another theorem named after him has the consequence that every number is the sum of three or
fewer triangular numbers. The numbers named after him equal two raised to the two to the nth power plus
one. Another theorem named after him was shown to be implied by the Taniyama-Shimura [tah-nee-yahmah shee-moor-ah] conjecture and was proven 350 years after this person claimed he had done so by
Andrew Wiles [WILES]. Name this 17th century Frenchman whose last theorem uses the equation
an+bn=cn [a to the n power plus b to the n power equals c to the n power].
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
The polar equation r equals the square root of theta forms this man's spiral, while this man's cubic is
satisfies the equation x cubed plus y cubed plus z cubed equals one. His little theorem states that for a prime
p and integer a, a to the pth power minus a is divisible by p, while this man's namesake primes are of the
form 2 to the 2 to the n minus 1, and the result he is most famous for was posed in a copy of Diaphantus-
Arithmetica. For 10 points, name this French mathematician whose Last Theorem was proven by Andrew
Wiles.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
One of this man's results is a generalization of Gauss's "Eureka" Theorem, which proved that every
integer can be written as a sum of three triangular numbers. Numbers like 561 and 1105 give false
positives for his namesake primality test; those numbers are Carmichael numbers. That test is based
on this man's theorem that a to the power of p is congruent to a modulo p. However, he is most
famous for a result the proof of which the (*) "margin [was] too narrow to contain." That theorem claims
there are no non-trivial solutions to the equation a to the n plus b to the n equals c to the n for n greater than
two. For ten points, identify this French mathematician, whose work with primes led to his "little theorem"
and whose "Last Theorem" was finally proven by Andrew Wiles.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat (accept triangular numbers or polygonal number theorem before mentioned)
One result named for this man erroneously holds for Carmichael numbers and claims that "a to the p is
equivalent to a mod p." This man names a type of prime number of the form "one plus two to the power two
to the n." The most famous result named for this man was proved using the Taniyama-Shimura Conjecture
by Andrew Wiles in 1995; that theorem says that "for n greater than two" the equation "a to the n plus b to
the n equals c to the n" has no integer solutions. For 10 points, name this French mathematician, the
namesake of a "little theorem" and a "last theorem."
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
One theorem named for this man, generalized by Euler's totient theorem, states that for an integer a and a
prime number p, a to the p power is congruent to a modulo p. Andrew Wiles proved another theorem
named
for this man, which states that there are no integers a, b, and c such that a to the x plus b to the x equals c to
the x when x is an integer greater than two. For 10 points, name this French mathematician famous for his
little and last theorems.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
One theorem named after this person states which prime numbers can be expressed as the sum of
two perfect squares. A letter from this person to Torricelli explained how to find a point that is a
minimum total distance from three fixed points. Another of his theorems was proven by applying the
epsilon conjecture, now known as Ribet's theorem, which demonstrated that the Taniyama-Shimura
conjecture implied that that theorem was true. Identify this namesake of the theorem that there are no
solutions for an integer n greater than 2 to the equation x to the n plus y to the n equals z to the n, which is
his Last Theorem, proven by Andrew Wiles.
ANSWER: Pierre (de) Fermat [fair-mah]
Fasbender's theorem contains the solution to an optimization problem named for this man, and a figure with
formula r equals a times theta raised to the one-half is his namesake parabolic spiral. For any integer n and
prime p, n raised to the p minus one is congruent to 1 modulo p, according to this man's namesake little
theorem. Regarding another theorem that states x raised to the n plus y raised to the n equals z raised to the
n does not have integer solutions when n is greater than two, this man wrote "I have assuredly found an
admirable proof...but the margin is too narrow to contain it." FTP name this French mathematician, the
namesake of a notable Last Theorem that was eventually proved by Andrew Wiles.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat
Either the name of this mathematician or Toricelli is used to name a point inside a triangle such that
segments from that point to the three vertices form 120-degree angles with each other and the sum of those
three segments is minimized. This person's name is used for a group of numbers that are sometimes called
primes even though all the examples tested beyond the first five are composite. This mathematician is also
the namesake of a theorem that a natural number raised to the p minus one power, minus one, is evenly
divisible by p, where p is any prime number; that is his "little theorem". Identify this namesake of the
theorem that there are no solutions for an integer n greater than 2 to the equation x to the n plus y to the n
equals z to the n, which is his Last Theorem.
ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat (fair-mah)
Lebesgue fixed some errors in a proof of one case of this by Lame in 1840. Miyaoka produced an ultimately
discredited proof of this by linking it to differential geometry. The final proof of this required the
combination of Iwasawa theory and the Kolyvagin-Flach method. This is the most famous conundrum
case of this
associated with the man called the "Prince of Amateurs" by E.T. Bell. Euler proved the
through infinite descent. The final proof of this was completed by Richard Taylor and Andrew Wiles using
the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture. Name this theorem that an + bn is never equal to cn if "a", "b", "c", and
"n" are integers greater than two.
ANSWER: Fermat's Last Theorem
This theorem was linked to another hypothesis by a descendant of Serre's conjecture known as
Ribet's theorem or the epsilon conjecture. This theorem was proven using ring homomorphisms
involving the Galois representations of certain curves. That hypothesis links closely modular forms to
the elliptic curves dealt with in this statement and was known as the (*) Taniyama-Shimura conjecture.
It applies to Diophantine equations whose exponent is above a certain integer and was proven in 1994. For
10 points, name this theorem which states that the equation a to the n plus b to the n equals c to the n has no
integer solutions for n greater than 2 and was proven by Andrew Wiles.
ANSWER: Fermat's last theorem [accept Taniyama-Shimura-Weil Conjecture or Modularity theorem before mentioned; DO NOT ACCEPT Fermat's Little Theorem]
Vandiver's criterion for irregular pairs showed that this conjecture doesn-t hold for irregular primes. That
proof developed from Kummer's proof for this conjecture. Ken Ribet's proof that the Frey curve was not
modular gave a solution to the epsilon conjecture, which allowed another man to prove this conjecture by
proving that every elliptic curve is a modular form. That proof to this statement was given by Andrew
Wiles, and it was originally stated in the margins of a notebook. For 10 points, identify this problem which
suggested that there doesn-t exist any combation of numbers x, y, and z such that for n greater than 2, x to
the n plus y to the n equals z to the n.
ANSWER: Fermat's last theorem
Ernst Kummer's work on this theorem to the development of the theory of ideals, and the smaller of the
irregular pair which satisfies Vandiver's criteria also satisfies this statement. Galois representations were
used to show that every elliptical curve has a modular form proving a special case of the Taniyama-Shimura
conjecture, which implies this statement regarding the solvability of a Diophantine equation involving the
addition of a to the n and b to the n to yield c to the n. Richard Taylor and Andrew Wiles gave the proof of,
for 10 points, what theorem, whose solution did not fit the margin's of its namesake French mathematician's
notebook.
ANSWER: Fermat's last theorem [do not accept "Fermat's little theorem"]
Ernst Kummer proved this theorem for regular prime numbers, while Gerhard Frey discovered that it might
be proven using the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture, which relates to the modularity of elliptic curves. It was
proven in 1994 by Andrew Wiles. For 10 points, name this theorem which states that there are no integer
solutions to a to the n plus b to the n equals c to the n if n is an integer greater than two, proposed but not
proven by its 17th-century French namesake.
ANSWER: Fermat's Last Theorem
This statement holds for exponent p in an irregular pair if the pair satisfies Vandiver's Criteria. Jean-Pierre
Serre asserted the non-modularity of the Frey curve to show that proving the semistable Taniyama-Shimura
Conjecture also implies this statement. This theorem only needed to be proven for odd prime powers after
its namesake proved it for the special case of n = 4, and it was finally proven by Andrew Wiles. For 10
points, name this theorem named for a French mathematician which states that, if n is greater than 2, there
are no integer solutions to the equation "a to the n plus b to the n equals c to the n".
ANSWER: Fermat's last theorem [prompt on just "Fermat's theorem"]
Ken Ribet proved the Epsilon conjecture by proving that it could be translated into a non-modular
elliptical curve, and therefore any counterexample would also serve as such for the Taniyama-Shimura
(taa-nee-YAA-maa she-MOO-rah) Conjecture. This theorem was eventually proven by Andrew Wiles. For
10 points, name this theorem that states that it is impossible to separate any power higher than the second
into two like powers.
ANSWER: Fermat's Last Theorem [or Fermat's Great Theorem; prompt on Fermat's theorem]
This problem's solution was aided by Ken Ribet's proving of the epsilon conjecture, which allowed
mathematicians to restrict their attention to semi-stable elliptic curves. This problem was then
attacked by associating triplets to elliptic curves, and noting that a counterexample would produce a
curve contradicting the (*) Taniyama-Shimura conjecture. It was finally solved in the mid-90s by Andrew
Wiles. For 10 points, name this problem stating that n equals 2 is the largest integer so that there are
non-zero solutions to a to the n plus b to the n equals c to the n.
ANSWER: Fermat's Last Theorem [prompt on Fermat's theorem; or Fermat; accept TaniyamaShimura conjecture until mentioned]
The solution to this problem was originally approached using horizontal Iwasawa theory, and a
weaker version of this result is derived from Falting's theorem. The proof of this theorem relied on
Ribet's work on the epsilon conjecture. It was proven for all primes less than 100 using Sophie
Germain's theorem. Its proof relied on a result that states that any elliptic curve over the rationals
can be obtained from a rational map, known as the (*) Taniyama-Shimura conjecture. The originator of
this result claimed to have a miraculous proof of it that the margin couldn't contain. For 10 points, name
this result proven by Andrew Wiles, which states that for n greater than 2, there are no integers x, y, and z
such that x to the n plus y to the n equals z to the n.
ANSWER: Fermat's Last theorem [prompt on "Fermat"]
The Bogomolov-Miyaoka-Yau inequality implies the truth of this statement, as does a statement relating the
minimal discriminant to a conductor of a certain type of curve called Szpiro's conjecture. One statement that
leads to the proof of this statement is part of the Langlands program. The proof by Ken Ribet of the "epsilon
conjecture," which stated that the Frey curve was not modular, led to a proof of a special case of the
Taniyama-Shimura conjecture, whose truth implies the truth of this theorem. For ten points, identify this
theorem which states that the equation "x to the n plus y to the n equals z to the n" has no nonzero integer
solutions for integer n greater than two, eventually proved by Andrew Wile.
ANSWER: Fermat's Last Theorem
Kolyvagin and Flach's results on Euler systems replaced horizontal Iwasawa theory in the analysis of this
problem. Previously, Jean-Paul Serre had identified the "epsilon conjecture" as fundamental to the solution
of this problem, which is implied by the full modularity theorem. The Taniyama-Shimura conjecture was
equivalent to it, as was the modularity of certain elliptic curves. The original statement of this problem
concerned the solvability of a Diophantine equation and asked whether two nth powers could sum to
another nth power for all integers n. FTP, name this long-standing problem named after a French
mathematician, which was completed by Andrew Wiles.
ANSWER: solving Fermat's Last Theorem
A generalization of this theorem to polynomials is the basis for the Agrawal-Kayal-Saxena algorithm,
and this theorem can be used to prove that the periodicity of the decimal representation of a primedenominator fraction is some multiple of p-1. A combinatorial proof of it considers a bracelet with a
string of symbols, while its more easily proven via group theory using Lagrange's theorem. The RSA
encryption scheme is based on it, and generalizations of it include the defintion of the Carmichael function
and one that uses the totient function. For 10 points, name this theorem that states a to the p is congruent to
a mod p, for p prime.
ANSWER: Fermat's little theorem
The converse of this theorem is the basis of the Pratt certificate. Paul Zeitz' proof of this theorem relies on
considering a bracelet consisting of beads with a fixed number of characters, then removing those with only
one unique character. Another proof of it relies on using Lagrage's theorem on a multiplicative group G.
Also the basis of the RSA encryption scheme, the Carmichael numbers notably foil the test named for this
theorem, which can be generalized using Euler's totient function. Stating that a to the p is congruent to a
modulo p, for ten points, identify this theorem of number theory named after a French mathematician, which
is less famous than its namesake's last one.
ANSWER: Fermat's Little Theorem
A modified version of this theorem's converse is known as Lehmer's theorem, and a Pratt certificate uses a
so-called "witness" in conjunction with Lehmer's theorem. The strict converse of this theorem is disproven
by the first set of Knodel numbers, and Euler's totient theorem is a generalization of it. Wilson's theorem is
a corollary of it, and it follows almost directly from Lagrange's theorem. Carmichael numbers are
counterexamples to this theorem's strict converse, meaning that they are pseudoprime for all integer bases
with which they are coprime. For 10 points, identify this theorem that states that if p is prime, then for any
integer a, a to the quantity p minus one is equivalent to 1, modulo p.
ANSWER: Fermat's little theorem
One way to prove it is to use the invertibility of the natural number group up to its order ensured by
Bezout's identity, and apply Lagrange's theorem. Another proof of it uses induction on the binomial
theorem, and one of its corollaries can be stated in terms of a 2k factorial term in relation to minus one.
One of its consequences is Hannam's lemma, and a generalization of it using the totient function is known as
Euler's theorem. Its converse is Lehmer's theorem, and when a positive integer satisfies it for all choice of
bases, that integer is called a Carmichael number. Directly implying Wilson's theorem, FTP name this
theorem originally stated without proof, which states that a to the p mod p equals a mod p, for prime p, the
result of a French mathematician also known for his "last" theorem.
ANSWER: Fermat's little theorem
This man developed a formula for producing all Pythagorean triples in his Liber Quadratorum. In
another work, he solved a problem of how a population of rabbits would multiply over a year. This man
popularized the use of Arabic numerals in the western world in his Liber Abaci. He names a set of numbers
wherein the ratios between consecutive elements approach the golden ratio. For 10 points, name this Italian
mathematician, whose namesake series begins 1, 1, 2, 3, 5.
ANSWER: Leonardo Fibonacci [or Leonardo Pisano; or Leonardo of Pisa; or Leonardo Pisano Bigollo]
One book by this mathematician introduced the notion of algorithms to Europe. That book also
introduced the Hindu-Arabic numeral system and is his Liber Abaci. The ratio of successive numbers
of a sequence named for this mathematician approaches the (*) golden ratio, phi. That sequence is
generated by considering the growth of a population of rabbits. For 10 points, name this Italian
mathematician who names a sequence that begins 1, 1, 2, 3, 5.
ANSWER: Fibonacci [or Leonardo of Pisa; or Leonardo Pisano; or Leonardo Bigollo]
Crackpot practitioners of the Elliott wave analysis invoke an observation by this man to predict movements
in stock market. A data structure which bears his name is a collection of heap-ordered trees whose siblings
are organized as in a cyclic doubly-linked list, and whose nodes have pointers to both their parents and their
children. The parastichies in spiral phyllotaxis occur in whole numbers corresponding to his namesake
series. The Binet formula finds the nth number of that series by using the golden ratio, and that series is
exemplified by patterns of sunflower seeds and mating bunnies. For 10 points, identify this Italian
mathematician whose namesake series begins 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8.
ANSWER: Leonardo Fibonacci [or Leonardo Pisano Bigollo; or Leonardo of Pisa]
Carmichael's Theorem states that, after the 13th of these numbers, each of these numbers has a
prime divisor that does not divide any smaller one of these numbers. That 13th of these numbers,
144, is one of only three perfect squares in this sequence, the ratio of whose consecutive terms
approaches the (*) golden ratio. Its terms are defined recursively as the sum of the two previous terms. An
Italian mathematician names, for 10 points, what sequence that begins 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8?
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence (accept Fibonacci number(s); accept Fibonacci series)
The nth Lucas number is equal to the n minus oneth number of this type, plus the n plus oneth one of
these. Taking the determinant of a matrix form of these numbers gives Cassini's identity, and the
sum of the first n of these is equal to the n plus second one of these, minus one. The ratio of their (*)
subsequent terms approaches the golden ratio, and the sequence of these was initially used to describe the
number of rabbits in a population. Their namesake sequence defines each term as the sum of the two
previous ones. For 10 points, name these numbers found in a recursive sequence beginning 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers [accept Fibonacci sequence]
This mathematical entity was used in aiding the work of Yuri Matiyasevich in solving Hilbert's tenth
problem through its definition via a Diophantine equation. A notable feature, discovered by
Johannes Kepler, was the convergence of the ratio of adjacent elements of it to a number eventually
shown to be the (*) golden ratio. This fact is also apparent in Binet's formula for them, obtainable via
solving its associated difference equation. For 10 points, name this mathematical sequence often found in
nature where each element is obtained by adding the previous two.
ANSWER: Fibonacci Numbers
Bill Gosper developed an algorithm to determine the sum of the inverse of them, an irrational number equal
to about 3.36. The n-1 through n+1 values in it can be found by taking the matrix 1, 1, 1, 0 to the nth
power. The nth term in this sequence can be approximated a transcendental number to the n, while the ratio
of them approaches that golden ratio, phi, approximately 1.618. This sequence was theorized when
studying the mating patterns of rabbits, when its namesake showed that every pair of rabbits produced
another pair each month after the second. FTP, name this sequence of numbers beginning 1, 1, 2, 3, 5,
whose next digit is the sum of the previous 2.
ANSWER: Fibonacci Sequence
Every integer can be represented as a unique sum of one or more distinct, nonconsecutive numbers in this
series, according to Zeckendorf's theorem. An integer x is in this series if one or both of "five x squared
plus four" or "five x squared minus four" is a perfect square, a consequence of Binet's formula. The shallow
diagonals in Pascal's triangle sum to these numbers, which were used by their namesake to describe the
population of a group of rabbits. As this series gets larger, the ratio of consecutive numbers in this series
approaches the golden ratio. For 10 points, name this set of numbers with terms generated by adding the
two preceding numbers, which begins 1, 1, 2, 3, 5.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers [or Fibonacci sequence; or Fibonacci series]
One method of testing whether a number n is one of these involves asking whether 5n squared
minus 4 or 5n squared plus 4 is a perfect square. One method of generating these numbers is to
repeatedly take powers of the two-by-two matrix one-one-one-zero, and the Wall-Sun-Sun primes are
defined using these numbers. The generating function x divided by the quantity 1 minus x minus x
squared creates these numbers. Taken modulo some integer n these numbers gives rise to (*) Pisano
periods. The ratio between successive members of these numbers approaches 1 plus the square root of 5 all
over 2, which is known as the golden ratio. For 10 points, name this sequence of numbers, a given member
of which is a sum of the previous two entries.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers
Donald Knuth claims Indian prosodists discovered this object while counting all 1 and 2 beat
sequences with a fixed number of beats and he also used it in his polyphase sort. Zeckendorf's
theorem represents the integers as a unique sum from its elements. Its generating function has closed
form "x over 1 minus x minus x squared" for "magnitude x less than 1 over phi" and Binet's formula
gives a more explicit link to the Golden Ratio. Phyllotaxis, or plant leaf arrangement, follows ratios
occurring in, for 10 points, what integer sequence which begins 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8.
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence
The sum of the first n squares of these numbers is a product of two consecutive ones, and the
generating function for these numbers is x over the quantity one minus x minus x-squared. These
numbers are given by Binet's formula. This sequence satisfies the same pattern as the Lucas
Sequence, and the ratio of successive terms in this sequence approaches (*) phi, the golden ratio. Many
of these numbers appear in nature and this sequence was originally used by Leonardo of Pisa to model the
reproduction of bunnies. For ten points, identify this sequence beginning one, one, two, three, five, in which
each term is the sum of the prior two.
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence
The period of these numbers modulo m is equal to m if and only if 24 times 5 to the lambda where lambda
is an integer greater than or equal to zero. Cassini's Identity is on these numbers. The Euclidean Algorithm's
worst case occurs when finding the greatest common denominator of two of these numbers according to
Lame's Theorem. The closed form solution is called Binet's formula, and as n goes to infinity, the nth one
of these numbers divided by the previous one approaches the golden ratio. They were used by their
namesake to solve a problem about the population of breeding rabbits. For 10 points, name this sequence of
numbers that start with 1, 1, 2, 3, and 5.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers [or Fibonacci sequence]
A formula that generates these numbers subtracts one exponential term from another and divides the result
by root five. Binet's formula gives a closed-form expression for these numbers, which were first
conceptualized to calculate the number of rabbits produced each month given an initial pair. Considered
successively, the limit of the ratio of these numbers is equal to phi, the golden ratio. For 10 points, name
these numbers formed by summing the previous two terms in a namesake sequence that starts 1, 1, 2, 3, 5.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers
The closed-form expression for these numbers is known as Binet's formula. The sum of the first n minus 2
of these numbers is equal to the nth of them minus one. One example of their application involves mating
rabbits, while the ratio between consecutive numbers of this type approaches the golden ratio. For 10 points,
identify this series of numbers which take their value from the sum of the two preceding numbers, beginning
with the terms 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers [ accept Fibonacci sequence]
The shallow diagonals of Pascal's triangle sum to these numbers, which are expressed in closed form
by Binet's [bi-NAY-z] formula. The ratio between this sequence's consecutive terms approaches the
(*) golden ratio. Originally used to model breeding rabbits, it is defined recursively with the nth term equal
to the sum of the n-minus-first and n-minus-second terms. For 10 points, name this sequence of numbers
that begins 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8...
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence or Fibonacci numbers (accept Fibonacci series)
Binet's formula is one method of finding numbers of this type. The ratio between consecutive numbers of
this type in this sequence is close to those in the Golden Ratio, and it also occurs in the sums of "shallow"
diagonals in Pascal's Triangle. A similarly named spiral can be formed when this sequence is tiled and the
opposite corners of the squares are connected via circular arcs. For 10 points, name this sequence where the
first numbers are 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, where each subsequent number is the sum of the previous two.
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence
One theorem about these numbers states that every natural number can be represented uniquely as
the sum of nonconsecutive ones of them; that statement is named for Zeckendorf. This sequence
appears on the outer edges of Hosoya's triangle, and its nth element gives the number of ways for
dominoes to cover a two-by-(n minus one) checkerboard. This sequence is generated by a formula
named for (*) Binet, as well as by the function x over the quantity one minus x minus x-squared. It is a
specific type of Lucas sequence, and the ratio of consecutive elements of this sequence approaches the
golden ratio. First proposed in Liber Abaci, for 10 points, name this recursively-defined sequence whose
elements are the sum of the previous two elements, beginning 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8.
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence/numbers/series [prompt on Lucas sequence before it is mentioned; prompt on pine cone sequence/numbers/series; do not prompt on "Lucas numbers"]
These numbers can be obtained by the generating function "x" over quantity "1-x-x2", and a closed form
expression of them is obtained from Binet's formula. The first two of these numbers are different from the
first two Lucas numbers, but both sets satisfy the same recursion relation. Named for the author of the Book
of the Abacus, these numbers- successive ratios approach 1.618, the golden ratio. They occur in the sums of
diagonals in Pascal's Triangle and various places in nature such as the multiplication of rabbits. The nth of
these is equal to the n minus 1st plus the n minus 2nd of them. For 10 points, name this sequence whose
initial entries are 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers or sequence
Two identities involving this type of number are named for Cassini and Catalan, and these numbers were
used to prove that no general formula exists to solve Diophantine equations. The ratio of successive terms
of this sequence of numbers approaches one plus root five divided by two, or the golden ratio, and it was
first studied as a model of the population growth of rabbits. For 10 points, name this sequence of numbers
in which each number is equal to the sum of the previous two, beginning one, one, two, three.
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence [or Fibonacci numbers]
These entities were first described in their namesake's book Liber Abaci. These entities were used to solve
Hilbert's tenth problem by proving that no general solution for Diophantine sequences exist. These entities
are used to model the number of ways a two by n rectangle can be covered by two by one blocks. As these
numbers increase, the ratio of successive terms approaches the golden ratio. These numbers are studied as a
model of rabbit population growth. For 10 points, name these numbers named after an Italian
mathematician, where each number is the sum of the previous two, and whose first four terms are one, one,
two, and three.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers
One method of calculating values in this set involves using Binet's (BIN-ay's) Formula. The values in
this set can also be found by summing up the numbers in the shallow diagonals of Pascal's Triangle.
Dividing a term in this set with the previous term will give an approximate value for the golden mean. Each
term in this sequence is equal to the addition of the two previous terms. For 10 points, what is this series of
numbers, named for an Italian mathematician, that starts out "one, one, two, three, five?"
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence [or Fibonacci numbers]
Any natural number can be written uniquely as a sum of nonconsecutive ones of these numbers by
Zeckendorf's theorem. The worst-case runtime of the Euclidean algorithm is for a consecutive pair of these.
Three of these numbers cannot form a Pythagorean triplet, and neither can the similar Lucas numbers. The
ratio of each number to the previous one in this sequence approaches one plus the square root of five over
two, or the golden ratio. For 10 points, give this sequence of numbers named after an Italian mathematician
in which each term is the sum of the previous two terms, beginning one, one, two, three, five.
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence [accept word forms]
Zeckendorf's theorem relates every positive integer to these numbers, which are used in a lagged pseudorandom number generator. These numbers can be used to search sorted arrays in data structures more
flexible than binomial heaps. Binet's formula can be used to find terms in this series, and Lucas is the
namesake of a sequence that has its same recursion relation. The ratio between its successive terms
approaches the golden ratio, and each term in this series is the sum of its two predecessors. For 10 points,
name these numbers named after an Italian mathematician.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers [or Fibonacci series; or Fibonacci sequence]
The generating function for these numbers is "z over the quantity 1 minus z minus z squared." The ratio
between successive elements in this sequence converges to a continued fraction with all ones, which is equal
to the golden ratio. The shallow diagonals of Pascal's triangle sum to these numbers, and these numbers
were first proposed in a problem involving reproducing rabbits. For 10 points, name this sequence
beginning "one, one, two, three, five," where each element is the sum of the previous two elements.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers or sequence
Zeckendorf representation describes integers as the sum of these, and they can be found by Binet's
formula. "z over the quantity 1 minus z minus z squared" is their generating function, and they are a
case of the Lucas sequence. Euclid's algorithm is slowest for these since their ratio is given by a
continued fraction with all 1s, which converges to the golden ratio at infinity. They give the number of
ways to tile a 2 by n strip and model reproducing rabbits. For 10 points, name these numbers equal to
the sum of the two previous ones, beginning 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, etc.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers or sequence
The fact that the n-th element of this is divisible by the square of the i-th element of this if and only if
n is divisible by the i-th element of this gave a solution to the Julia Robinson Hypothesis. The
divisibility properties of this allowed the proof that recursively enumerable sets are equivalent to
Diophantine sets by Yuri Matiyasevich and thus solve Hilbert's tenth problem. When modular
arithmetic is applied to it, (*) Pisano periods can be observed. Its closed-form solution is known as
Binet's formula, and it was introduced in the West in the book Liber Abaci. The numbers comprising this
sequence, which is a type of Lucas sequence, are the sums of successive "shallow" diagonals of Pascal's
Triangle. Originally devised to study the growth of an hypothetical rabbit population, for 10 points, name
this sequence, beginning 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, in which each term is the sum of the two before it.
ANSWER: Fibonacci sequence
Wedderburn's little theorem says that all finite skew ones are finite ones. The primitive element
theorem states that a primitive element exists if there are a finite number of intermediate ones of
these structures between one of these and a given extension. Zorn's lemma states that all of these
have an algebraic closure. The spectrum of these objects contains exactly (*) one point, and extensions
of these objects are the subject of Galois theory. Finite ones necessarily have a number of elements equal to
a power of a prime. The rational numbers make up one of these, but not the integers, since the latter does
not have multiplicative inverses. For 10 points, identify these algebraic structures, which consist of a set of
numbers that is closed and has inverses under both addition and multiplication.
ANSWER: field
The category of these objects has the property that every morphism is a monomorphism. The spectrum of
one of these objects contains one point, and the p-adic numbers for a given p form one of these. These
objects necessarily have zero Krull dimension. Those with a finite number of elements have order equal to a
power of a prime. Their extensions have a one-to-one correspondence with their intermediates according to
the fundamental theorem of Galois theory. A division algebra is one of these without multiplicative
commutativity, and can be defined as a ring with multiplicative identity, inverse, and commutativity. For 10
points, name these algebriac structures that include the rationals and reals.
ANSWER: field [accept rational domain until mentioned, prompt on commutative division algebra until mentioned]
If the generating set of an abelian group has this property, the group can be decomposed into a
direct sum of invariant factors. Fields with this property feature polynomials that are irreducible
when the coefficients of the polynomial are elements of said fields, and the order of said fields is a
power of a prime. State machines that are named after this property can only accept regular
languages. Sets whose cardinality have this property have no (*) one-to-one mapping from a proper
subset of the set to the set itself. A set with this property will have a cardinality that is a natural number.
This property is not possessed by the set of primes according to proofs by both Euclid and Euler. For 10
points, name this property of not being infinite.
ANSWER: finite [do NOT accept "countable" at any point]
The best known algorithm for minimizing these things uses partition refinement and is
named for John Hopcroft. Two types of these things, which are differentiated on the basis of
whether an output is a function of the input, are named for Mealy and Moore. Lexical analyzer
generators work by converting a regular expression into one of these things. Using the powerset
construction, one can convert them from a nondeterministic form to a deterministic form. Simple
examples of these things can have their structure defined by transition diagrams or transition
tables. The set of strings that allow these things to progress from a starting state to the accepting
state is the language they accept. For 10 points, name these computational models without an
infinite number of states.
ANSWER: finite state machines [or finite state automata; or FSM; or FSA; or deterministic finite automata; or DFA; or nondeterministic finite automata; or NFA]
Two of the broad classes of these objects can be converted between using so-called powerset
construction, which constructs one of these with regular transition numbers from a generally smaller
one with irregular transition numbers. Another classification of these constructs splits ones using
only entry actions and only exit actions. Those two classifications split these mathematical objects
into (*) Moore and Mealy types and deterministic and non-deterministic types. Each of these corresponds
to a regular formal language as its acceptor. The addition of a memory stack to one of these constructs
results in a similar construct described with the adjective pushdown, while the addition of an infinite
memory tape results in a Turing machine. For 10 points, name these abstract computing devices with
limited numbers of states.
ANSWER: finite-state automata [or finite-state automatons or finite-state machines; accept finite-state automata or finite-state automatons; prompt on automata or automatons or machines]
One class of these are circuit gateways and they can be used to make a DMZ. An example of a stateful
one is iptables and NAT can be configured to act like a very basic one. Application-Layer ones use
knowledge about the content to make decisions. They protect against things like denial of service attacks.
Common techniques include port blocking and packet filtering. Usually they must be configured to allow
new trusted programs and services to access the internet. For 10 points, name these pieces of software or
hardware that protect computers from network based attacks.
ANSWER: firewalls
For auto mechanics, this term refers to the barrier between the passenger and engine compartments
of a vehicle. For architects, it is the side of a building containing no windows and reinforced with
thicker material for safety considerations. In computer science, this term refers to any software or hardware
used in a network environment to restrict or control communication between computers. Name this term
also used as part of a nickname to describe China's censoring of the internet instead of the Golden Shield
Project.
ANSWER: Firewall (Great Firewall of China)
This number is believed to be the only odd untouchable number. Along with six, this number makes up the
first Ruth-Aaron pair, in which the sums of the prime factors of each number in the pair are equal.. Niels
Henrik Abel showed that there is no general algebraic solution to find the roots of polynomials of this
degree or higher. This is also the first safe prime and the second Fermat prime. Additionally, this is the
number of Platonic solids that exist. Along with one, this is the only number to be for which the nth term of
the Fibonacci sequence is equal to n. Name this number, the base of the quinary number system and the
number of sides of a pentagon.
ANSWER: five
In Euclidean geometry, this is the number of points required to completely define a conic. This is the
number of sides on the convex polygon with the same number of sides as diagonals. This is the only number
which is included in two pairs of twin primes. According to the Abel-Ruffini theorem, general polynomials
of this degree and higher cannot be solved analytically. The square root of this number appears in the
definition of the golden ratio. Euclid proposed this many postulates of geometry in the Elements. This is the
number of Platonic solids. For 10 points, give this number of sides on a pentagon.
ANSWER: five
The complete graph on this many vertices is the smallest which cannot be drawn without edge
crossings, and the cosine of pi divided by this number is equal to one-half the golden ratio. This is the
only number that is part of two twin prime pairs, and the Abel-Ruffini theorem states that there is no
general solution to (*) polynomials of this degree or higher. Polygons with this many sides have an
average interior degree measure of 108. This number is in a Pythagorean triple with three and four, because
three-squared plus four-squared is equal to twenty-five, the square of this number. For ten points, give this
number of sides in a pentagon.
ANSWER: five
This is the number of solutions to the three-question problem when one of the bodies is assumed to be much
smaller than the others. This is number under the radical when finding the ratio between successively higher
Fibonacci numbers. The Abel-Ruffini theorem states that polynomials of this degree cannot be solved, and
this number is the second Fermat Prime and the third Sophie Germain Prime. This number is the When
arranging this many unique objects in a circle, there are 24 possible ways to do so, while arranging this
many objects in a straight line there are 120 ways. FTP, identify this number, which is also the cube root of
125 and the square root of 25.
ANSWER: five (5)
This is the first "untouchable number," and it is the number of "exceptional" Lie groups. The
complete graph with this many vertices is not planar according to Kuratowski's theorem. The AbelRuffini theorem states that this is the smallest degree of radicals in a polynomial with no general
solution. This is the second Fermat prime, the number of Platonic solids, and the fifth number of the
Fibonacci sequence. For 10 points, name this number, which is written one-zero-one in binary, and
equal to the square root of 25.
ANSWER: five
The diagonal lemma used to prove Godel's incompleteness theorems guarantees the existence of a selfreferential sentence which is one of these objects. The weak Kleene recursion theorem also guarantees the
existence of an index which is one of these, and the Y combinator is a function which returns one of these
objects. According to a result named for Knaster and Tarski in lattice theory, the set of these objects form a
complete lattice. Permutations for which these do not exist are called derangements. They always exist for
contraction mappings and continuous functions from a disk to itself according to theorems named for
Banach and Brouwer respectively. For 10 points, name these points such that f of x equals x which are
mapped to themselves by a given function.
ANSWER: Fixed Point
According to the Knaster-Tarski theorem, for an automorphism on a complete lattice L, the set of these will
also form a complete lattice. Isometries in Euclidean space must be the identity or a reflection if they have
more than one of these, and these objects are hyperbolic when the stability matrix has at least one positive
and one negative eigenvalue. One theorem about them depends on the function in question having a
Lipschitz constant of strictly less than one, and its proof shows that the x value is a Cauchy sequence and
converges as fast as that constant to the n, making the function a contraction mapping. Another theorem
states that any continuous mapping from the closed disk or ball to itself has one of these objects. Cosine has
one of these at about 0.73. For 10 points, name this type of point that maps to itself for given functions,
which are the subject of theorems named for Brouwer and Banach.
ANSWER: fixed points [accept equilibrium point; prompt on "critical points"]
The power-delay-product of one of these devices can be decreased using Aezinia and Lucas- genetic
algorithm. Pulse transition detectors are often used to implement edge triggering in these devices,
which overcome a caching problem that their master-slave counterparts often have. Shift registers
contain a series of these elements chained to the same clock. A simple one of these is created by
connecting two NAND gates together. These circuit elements, which come in JK, SR, D, and T varieties,
enter a period of metastability before settling into one of two states. For 10 points, identify this basic circuit
element which is used to store a single stable bit.
ANSWER: Flip-flop
An algorithm for designing finite state machines based on these elements involves taking the logical AND
of the memory input logic value with the corresponding branch condition and entering the result into a
Karnaugh map. In one type of this device, the switching logic is controlled by the truth table of its two data
inputs. Another type of this device lacks any data inputs at all. Another implementation of another type of
this device solves the "transparency" problem by connecting two latches in a master-slave configuration.
Used for implementing shift registers, the output of these devices is controlled by the rising or falling edge
timing signal. Coming in T, D, and JK varieties, for 10 points, identify these basic control elements in
digital logic which change between discrete states based on their clock input.
ANSWER: flip-flop [prompt on "logic gates" until the mention of "logic"]
Rounding errors mean that testing for safe division with these numbers requires care to avoid an overload.
The standard formats must comprise two kinds of "Not a number" values, two infinites, and finite numbers
for these numbers, whose currently accepted standard is IEEE 754. A common measure of computer
performance is the number of operations using these numbers that can be performed in a second, a measure
known as FLOPS. For 10 points, name these numbers that are represented using significant digits and an
exponent.
ANSWER: floating point numbers [accept floating point operations or floats; do not accept "FLOPS"]
One representation of this data type stores them as a mantissa, or significand, and exponent. That
representation is defined by the IEEE 754 standard. One measure of computing performance is the
number of operations that can be performed with this data type per second. The Pentium (*) FDIV
bug occurred in the unit that performed calculations with this data type. For 10 points, identify this data
type used to represent real numbers of computers, which is distinct from the integer data type.
ANSWER: floating point
The most common representation of these numbers always normalizes the first bit to one, negating the
need to store it and providing an extra bit of precision. That representation allows these numbers to be
represented with a sign, exponent and mantissa, comes in single, double and quad-precision formats and is
the IEEE 754 standard. Missing entries in the lookup table of the Pentium 5 FPU caused division of these
numbers to produce incorrect results. For 10 points, identify this representation of real numbers on
computers, whose data type is commonly "float."
ANSWER: floating-point numbers [or floats before "float" is read]
The machine epsilon is the smallest number this representation can have. In the most common standard
for them addition is not associative and there is a negative zero. In that standard it is also possible for a
value to be infinite or Not a Number. That standard is IEEE (Eye triple-E) 754. The 64-bit versions of these
are often called doubles. For 10 points, name this computer representation of numbers with decimal points.
ANSWER: floating point number [or float; or double before mentioned; or IEEE 754 before mentioned]
This number is the smallest composite Motzkin number, and a theorem based on this number was
proven in 1976 by Wolfgang Haken and Kenneth Appel. This is the smallest number of elements in a
non-cyclic group, and a tesseract, or hypercube, has this many (*) dimensions. It is the maximum
number of colors needed to color a plane, and is the smallest positive non-Fibonacci number. For ten points,
what number, the number of faces of a tetrahedron, is equal to two squared?
ANSWER: Four
The smallest noncyclic group has this many elements and is named for Felix Klein. Fermat proved his Last
Theorem in the case with the exponent equal to this value. Lagrange proved that all nonnegative integers are
a sum of this many squares. This is the maximum number of intersection points for two conic sections. This
is the period of the function i raised to the k power, since this number is the smallest positive power of i
equal to 1. The x- and y-axes split the plane into, for ten points, this many regions, called quadrants.
ANSWER: four
Frobenius's Theorem states that a real division algebra has a maximum of this many dimensions, and
William Hamilton first described such a division algebra with this many total dimensions, which
contains imaginary numbers represented as i, j, and k. The Heawood conjecture was proven for
segmented planes to show that this many colors are sufficient to shade a map so that no same-colored
regions bound each other. For 10 points, name this smallest composite number, which is the square of
the only even prime.
ANSWER: four
This is the only dimension for which there exist differential manifolds which are homeomorphic but
not diffeomorphic to Euclidean space. This is the smallest number such that there are two
nonisomoprhic groups of this order, since the Klein group has this order but is not cyclic. A theorem
of Lagrange states that any natural number can be written as a sum of this many (*) squares of
integers. This number is the order of the largest complete planar graph, and Appel and Haken proved that
this number is the maximum chromatic number for a planar graph. The Abel-Ruffini theorem states that this
is the highest order of a polynomial equation that can be solved by radicals. For 10 points, a famous
theorem states that any map coloring needs only how many colors?
ANSWER: four
Lagrange proved that any integer can be represented as the sum of at most this many squares, and
this is the largest integer such that polynomials of this degree have general solutions. Any map can be
colored with at most this many different colors, according to the "[BLANK] (*) color theorem." The
discriminant of a standard quadratic is equal to b squared minus this number multiplied by a times c. The
simplest Platonic solid, the tetrahedron, has this many faces. For 10 points, name this smallest composite
number.
ANSWER: four
This number is the minimum number of perfect squares that are needed to sum to any positive
integer. Both Abel and Ruffini proved that this number is the maximum degree polynomial for which
there is a general algebraic solution. This number is the chromatic number of the sphere and is also
the maximum number of colors needed to color a plane map such that no two regions sharing an edge
have the same color. For 10 points, name this minimum number of faces of a regular polyhedron, the
number of sides in a quadrilateral.
ANSWER: four
Casey's Theorem applies to this number of circles who are all tangent to another circle. Only primes
that leave a remainder of 1 when divided by this number can be expressed as the sum of two perfect
squares, and all natural numbers can be expressed as the sum of at most this many perfect squares.
In a cyclic polygon with this many sides, opposite angles sum to (*) one hundred eighty degrees. A twoelement set has this many subsets, and this is the fewest number of faces possessed by a Platonic solid. For
ten points, name this smallest composite number, the number of sides in a quadrilateral.
ANSWER: four
This number is the period, in pi units, of e to the quantity i x over two. Any number can be expressed
as the sum of this many integer squares. This number is the highest degree polynomial generally
solvable by an algebraic equation. The only Platonic solid with an equal number of vertices and faces
has this many of each. If the last two digits of a number are (*) divisible by this number, then that
number is divisible by this number. It is the smallest non-prime number and the only one whose prime
factors are equal both when multiplied and when added. For 10 points, identify this number of vertices of a
tetrahedron and the number of sides of a square.
ANSWER: four
This is the smallest number of which it can be said that every natural number can be written as
the sum of this many perfect squares, which is based on a theorem named for Lagrange. This
is also the largest number such that all polynomials with this degree can always be solved using
radicals. Wolfgang Haken and Kenneth Appel proved that any planar map with contiguous regions
and bordering regions with different colors can be drawn with this number of colors. This is also the
number of faces of a tetrahedron. Name this number equal to the number of sides of a trapezoid,
parallelogram, or square.
ANSWER: four
The smallest non-cyclic group has this numerical order. There are nine different ways of drawing non-
intersecting chords between this number of points on a circle's circumference. Every positive integer can be
expressed as the sum of this number of square numbers. Polynomials of this numerical degree can be solved
by Ferrari's method, and are the largest with general solutions. One theorem states any planar map can be
colored using at most this number of colors so that no two adjacent regions are the same color. The simplest
Platonic solid has this number of faces. For 10 points, name this smallest composite number and number of
sides on a rhombus.
ANSWER: four
One person managed to prove the Snark theorem while working on this problem, and one generalization is
stated in terms of edge contractions and is named for Hadwiger. Robertson, Sanders, and Seymour
improved on the original proof of this problem, while Ringel and Youngs proved a generalized version
which relies on the floor function of an expression involving the genus of the surface. Its proof used the
method of discharging and defined unavoidable sets and reducible configurations, and it is sometimes called
Guthrie's problem. It is a specific case of the Heawood conjecture and was proved by Appel and Hankin
using a computer. FTP, name this theorem that gives the number of shades needed to draw a map.
ANSWER: Four color theorem
A generalization of this result involves edge contractions and is named after Hugo Hadwiger. Kittel, Errera,
and Soifer showed that Kempe chains can be tangled, disproving one erroneous proof of this. Its
generalization, called the Heawood conjecture, contains the floor function and could not be proven
necessary and sufficient for cases of genus 0, necessitating a separate proof of this. A crossed-prism graph
can show that it does not hold for a torus. Its proof, demonstrated by Appel and Hakan, involved 1,936
configurations, each reduced to a smaller graph, then checked with a computer. For 10 points, name this
theorem stating the chromatic number needed to draw a map.
ANSWER: four-color (map) theorem or Guthrie's problem
One false proof of this statement was published in 1879 by Alfred Bray Kempe, and an early
correspondence about it consists of a letter sent from De Morgan to Hamilton. Francis and Frederick
Guthrie originated this problem. Heinrich Heesch's work on this problem led him to originate the
method of discharging. The eventual proof of this statement was simplified by Robertson and
Seymour, and was derisively compared to a (*) telephone directory by one critic. That proof was done by
Appel and Hankin using 1200 hours of computer time to check every case. For 10 points, name this
statement which gives the minimum number of shades needed to color a map.
ANSWER: four color theorem
It is a special case of a conjecture that one half times the smallest integer less than the quantity seven plus
the square root of 48 times the genus of an orientable space plus 1, close quantity, is equal to a certain
number associated with the space. Originally known as Gurthrie's conjecture, a fallacious counter example
was published as an April Fools day joke. This theorem showed that except in the case of the Klein bottle,
the Heawood conjecture holds. Originally solved by reducing the problem to 1,936 cases that were checked
by computer, for 10 points, identify this theorem, which states that any map in a plane can be filled in with a
certain number of colors.
ANSWER: The Four-Color map Theorem
Generalizations of this problem include the Hadwiger Conjecture, and Apollonian networks have a
unique solution to this problem. The 15-node Poussin graph exhibited a flaw in a supposed proof of
this statement by "tangling" Kempe chains, but Heawood used Kempe's work to prove a 25%
weaker bound on this problem. The proof of this conjecture required verifying (*) 1,936 separate
cases. It was finally proven in 1976 by Wolfgang Haken and Kenneth Appel with the aid of a computer. For
ten points, identify this mathematical problem, which states that any map with contiguous regions can be
colored with less than five colors.
ANSWER: Four Color Theorem
Vizing's theorem proves the swapping property of Kempe Chains holds, constructs often used in
solving this problem. Gonthier recently verified an earlier solution of this problem that ran in
quadratic time by Robertson et al, while Birkhoff and Franklin were able to prove that it held when
the number of (*) nodes was less than 25, a problem originally put forth by Guthrie. It was first solved by
Appel and Haken who used a computer to prove all 1,936 cases in this special case of the Heawood
Conjecture. For 10 points, name this theorem stating that any two regions sharing a common boundary on a
2D map can have dissimilar markings with less than a certain number of colors.
ANSWER: The Four-Color (Map) Theorem [or Guthrie Conjecture before read]
One unproven generalization of this theorem is equivalent to the statement that chi of G is equal to or
greater than the Hadwiger number of G. It is equivalent to the statement that no snark is planar. Another
generalization of this theorem was proven by Ringel and Youngs and depends on the floor of an expression
involving the square root of 1 plus 48g. It was proven by finding an unavoidable set of reducible
configurations, using the method of discharging; a later proof improved on the quartic time algorithm used.
It is a special case of the Heawood conjecture. For 10 points, name this theorem proved by Appel and
Hankin via computer, which gives the minimum number of shades necessary to produce a map.
ANSWER: four-color theorem [or Guthrie's problem]
The most recent proof of this theorem was provided by Georges Gonthier using the Coq assistant, while P.
G. Tait showed that it is equivalent to the statement that no snark is planar. The crucial concepts of
reducibility and unavoidability were introduced in Kempe's incorrect proof of this theorem, which can be
extended to polyhedra by the Heawood conjecture. This theorem does not apply when exclaves are present,
and neighbors that share only a single point do not meet this theorem's definition of adjacency. Proven by
Appel and Haken using a computer to test 1,936 distinct cases, name this theorem which gives an upper
bound on the maximum number of colors required to label a contiguous map.
ANSWER: four-color theorem
This idea was thought to be first suggested by Francis Guthrie, giving it an alternative name, though Arthur
Cayley may have been the first to address it. An attempt to prove this theorem was the Kempe algorithm,
and the Heawood conjecture degenerates into it when the genus of the space is zero. It was eventually
proven by Haken and Appel in 1976 using computer-generated configurations. For 10 points, identify this
theorem stating that a map may be filled with a certain sufficient number of colors such that adjacent
regions are different colors.
ANSWER: four color map theorem
Roberson, Sanders, Seymour, and Thomas proved this statement by showing that every snark has the
Petersen graph as a minor. This was first proposed by Francis Guthrie in 1852, and Kempe and Tait's
purported proofs for this were later shown to be incorrect after being unchallenged for eleven years. Appel
and Haken's proof of this theorem involved 1936 configurations. This was the first major theorem to be
proved using a computer. Name this theorem which states that no more than the eponymous number of
colors is needed to color a map so no adjacent regions are the same color.
ANSWER: Four-Color Map Theorem
This statement is the special case of a conjecture involving the floor function of the expression seven
plus the square root of one plus forty-eight times the genus, all over two. That conjecture was proven
by Ringel and Youngs. An unsolved generalization of this statement is known as the (*) Hadwiger
conjecture. An early false proof of it by Kempe was shown to be incorrect by Heawood. Its 1976 proof by
Appel and Haken created controversy because it was done with computer assistance. For 10 points, name
this theorem about the number of colors needed to color a map.
ANSWER: four color theorem
This theorem could be proved in a new way if Grunbaum's conjecture was proven. Attempts to prove this
theorem led to the development of Kempe chains and to snarks, the latter of which is a type of graph.
Heinrich Heesch's work on reducibility and discharging was used in the proof by Wolfgang Haken [HAHken] and Kenneth Appel, which used a computer to consider 1,936 cases. Name this theorem which,
assuming that regions are contiguous, provides a limit to the number of hues needed to fill in a map.
ANSWER: four-color map theorem
A dimensionless quantity named for him is the product of the thermal diffusivity and the timescale
divided by the square of the characteristic dimension, and he is also the namesake of a relation that
gives the heat flux as negatively proportional to the local temperature gradient. One operation
developed by this man exhibits an error called the Gibbs phenomenon. He is best known for his
contributions in approximating periodic functions as a infinite series of sines and cosines. For 10 points,
identify this French thinker who developed a law of thermal conductivity and whose namesake series are
used to decompose periodic functions.
ANSWER: Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier
Multiplying one of these by itself, integrating from negative L to L and multiplying by one over L
gives a useful identity involving the sum of the squares of their coefficients; that identity is used
alongside one of these in order to solve the Basel problem. They can be smoothened by applying an
expression involving the Lanczos sigma factor; that method is used to eliminate the (*) Gibbs
phenomenon, which occurs when they are calculated around discontinuities. One commonly-derived
example of these constructs has a coefficient of four over n pi when n is odd, and zero when even; that one
evaluates to a square wave. They are generally an infinite sum of sine and cosine functions. For 10 points,
name these series, which are decompositions of complex oscillating functions into an infinite series of
simpler ones.
ANSWER: Fourier series [do NOT accept "Fourier transform", but DO accept Fourier expansion o Fourier decomposition; just the word "Fourier" is acceptable after "series", but should be prompted before]
The convergence of these entities is determined by the Dini Test. One way to find this series is to integrate
the product of a function with e raised to negative two i times pi times x, though the coefficients can also be
found by integrating the product of a function with sine and cosine functions of various wavelengths. The
result allows any wave to be broken down into a sum of sinusoidal waves. Name this approximation of
periodic functions using trig functions.
ANSWER: Fourier series or transform
Taking this function on a member of a finite abelian group returns a member of the group
that is the Pontryagin dual of the original group. The space of all functions whose derivatives are
rapidly decreasing has the property that this operation is an automorphism; that space is named
for Schwartz. The integral from negative infinity to infinity of the square of a function is equal to
that same integral of this operation of that function, squared, according to Parseval's theorem.
Like a related operation named for Laplace, it takes convolutions to products and takes inputs
from the time domain to the frequency domain. For 10 points, name this operation which takes
an input and resolves it into a series of frequencies, a transform named for a French
mathematician.
ANSWER: Fourier transform
Over the space of Schwartz functions, this operation is an endomorphism. This operation taken on the
extension of a function is the subject of the Poisson summation formula, and Hankel generalized this
operation to radial functions. This operation is unitary by Parseval's theorem, and the Cooley-Tukey
algorithm is used to implement a "fast" version of this operation. Along with the Laplace transform, it is
often used to analyze differential equations. Also useful in analog signal processing, FTP, name this
transform that takes a function to its frequency domain, which is useful in decomposing waves and is named
for a French mathematician.
ANSWER: Fourier Transform
The box count method of a type of dimension analysis named after these objects is being researched as a
possible tool for the prognosis of cancer. The Menger sponge, in addition to being a super-object for all
compact one-dimensional objects, is a three-dimensional one of these. Another one of these has a Hausdorff
dimension of 3 and is known as the dragon curve. The Pythagoras tree is a shape-replacement example of
these. More famous examples include the Julia sets, which occur in the one of these known as the
Mandelbrot set. Name these infinitely self-similar patterns, exemplified by the Sierpinski triangle and the
Koch snowflake.
ANSWER: fractals
The Hutchinson operator of an iterated function system corresponds to one of these, while the escape-time
ones are defined by a recurrence relation at each point in space. One of these is a curve whose range
contains the entire unit square and is called the Peano curve, while another one is created by repeatedly
deleting the middle thirds of an interval and is called the Cantor set. All of them are self-similar, and they
are quantified by Hausdorff dimensions. For 10 points, name these geometrical objects that can be split into
parts that are reduced-size copies of the whole, a famous example of which is the Mandelbrot set.
ANSWER: fractals
Misiurewicz points are found on the boundaries of one of these shapes, which is seen after marking
all numbers c on the complex plane for which, starting with 0, infinite application of z-squared plus c
doesn-t diverge. Removing 7/27 ("seven twenty-sevenths") of a cube is the first step of constructing
one of these shapes named after Menger. Objects of this type can have non-integer (*) Hausdorff
dimension, and one can be found by coloring odd numbers on Pascal's triangle; that one is named for
Sierpinski. For ten points, identify these generally self-similar, space-filling figures like the Koch Snowflake
and Mandelbrot Set.
ANSWER: fractals
Some techniques that can generate these mathematical objects include the L-system and strange
attractors. Many of these entities can be created via infinite iterations of a recursive equation.
Famous examples of these figures include the Menger sponge, (*) Cantor set, and the Koch snowflake.
For 10 points, name these self-similar geometric figures, developed by Benoit Mandelbrot [ben-wah mahndel-broh], that contain infinitely many smaller copies of themselves.
ANSWER: fractals
The Hausdorff dimensions of these objects are greater than their topological dimensions. Examples of
these objects include the Menger sponge and the Sierpinski triangle, and types of them, such as the Cantor
set, can be created by infinitely iterating a recursive equation. These objects exhibit self-similarity on very
small scales, and resemble natural features like coastline and snowflakes. For 10 points, identify these
geometric spaces named by Benoit Mandelbrot, which contain infinitely smaller copies of themselves.
ANSWER: fractals
These objects can be generated by Hutchinson operators such as iterated function systems. A plot of the
convergence of Newton's method in the complex plane is one of these objects which were introduced in the
paper "How Long is The Coastline of Britain?" Many of these objects can be imaged using the escape-time
algorithm. Almost all Julia sets are these objects which have non-integral dimension, and examples of these
objects include the Koch snowflake and Sierpinski's triangle. For 10 points, name these geometrical objects
which are self-similar, such as the Mandlebrot set.
ANSWER: fractals
These objects were used by Pietronero and his team in 1987 to attempt to model distributions of
galaxies. The creation of these objects can be achieved by using an L-System, although Iterated
Function Systems are much more common. Trajectories of Brownian motion and Levy Flight can be
modeled using these entities, and the earliest discoverer of these objects used them to map the (*)
coastline of Britain. Many of these patterns are defined recursively, and have a finite area and an infinite
perimeter. The Menger Sponge, the Sierpinski Triangle, and the Koch Snowflake are all, for ten points,
what geometric figures first created by Benoit Mandelbrot.
ANSWER: fractals
One example of this construct is Gosper Island, which tessellates the plane, and the multi- type of this
construct is used to describe systems which require a spectrum of exponents to model their scaling rather
than a constant. One of the standard types can be generated by repeatedly moving halfway towards a
randomly selected vertex of a triangle or by shading the even numbers in an infinite Pascal's Triangle. Any
standard type of this is linear when a log-log graph is made of repetitions vs scale. Examples include the
Cantor Set, Sierpinski sieve, and Koch Snowflake. Identify these self-similar constructs with fractional
dimension described by Benoit Mandelbrot.
ANSWER: fractals
Daniel White and Paul Nylander constructed a three dimensional variety of one of these entities using
spherical coordinates called a "bulb." A type of derivative named for these entities can be used to model
Fick's second law in an alternative manner. One of these entities named for Newton is a boundary set in the
complex plane derived from his root finding method. Examples of these entities include the Koch
Snowflake, the Sierpinski Triangle, and the Mandelbrot Set. For 10 points, name these mathematical
constructs which consist of self-similar patterns.
ANSWER: Fractals
Examples of these figures with non-integer Hausdorff dimensions include Barnsley's fern and the
Gosper island. One type of this figure is the boundary between the prisoner set and escape set of a
sequence of iterations, of a function of a complex number; that type of this entity is the Julia set.
Benoit Mandelbrot is considered the founder of the study of these things. The (*) Koch snowflake and
Sierpinski triangle are examples of these figures, whose perimeter is addressed by the "shoreline paradox."
For 10 points, name these self-similar figures.
ANSWER: fractal
The L-system can generate these entities, as it is capable of describing many iterated function
systems. The most famous example of these is defined in terms of whether points on the complex
plane, when iteratively squared, are bounded. The Hilbert curve is a (*) space-filling one of these.
Examples of these include the Menger sponge, the Sierpinski carpet, and the Koch snowflake. For 10
points, name these self-similar geometric structures exemplified by the Mandelbrot set.
ANSWER: fractal
A coastline shares these shapes' property of having increasingly longer lengths when measured with
shorter and shorter rulers. Because of that property, when these shapes have a depth of infinity, they have
both an infinite perimeter and a finite area. Examples of these shapes include the Sierpinski gasket, the
Koch Snowflake, which is created by successively adding triangles to each side of an equilateral triangle,
and the Mandelbrot set. For 10 points, name these shapes which exhibit self-similarity on large scales.
ANSWER: fractals
Graphing one of these objects versus scale on a log-log plot yields a straight line with the slope equalling
this object's namesake dimension. A related quantity that characterizes these objects is the topological
dimension, which is always smaller than the Hausdorff dimension. In addition to space-filling curves and
Julia sets, the most famous example of these objects is named for a mathematician who studied the coastline
of Britain. They include the Sierpinski gasket, the Koch snowflake, and the Mandelbrot set. For 10 points,
name these self-similar patterns that, at every scale, contain smaller copies of themselves.
ANSWER: fractals
One method of developing a landscape named for these objects is to employ the random midpoint
displacement algorithm. One of their original developers applied them to modeling the coastline of Britain.
They are characterized by having a topological dimension less than their Hausdorff dimension, and some of
them are named for Moore, Julia, and Koch. They exhibit some form of self-similarity. One of the most
famous examples of these involves removing the central equilateral triangle from each equilateral triangle
in a figure repeatedly, named the Serpinski triangle. For 10 points, name these repeating geometric figures
developed by Benoit Mandelbrot.
ANSWER: fractals
These figures can be obtained by the diamond-square algorithm or the Hutchinson operator. One of the
escape-time types of these figures is named after a burning ship, and one of the random types is created by a
self-avoiding walk. Strange attractors named for Henon and Lorenz are examples of these figures, which
have a Hausdorff dimension larger than their topological dimension. The author of How Long Is the Coast
of Britain? coined the term for these figures. FTP name these self-similar figures exemplified by the Koch
snowflake and Sierpinski triangle.
ANSWER: fractals
Distances measured on this class of shapes are often in ratios given by one of the Feigenbaum [FIE-genbaum] constants, and these can often be defined by affine [ah-FINE] transformations, as is done for a
Barnsley's fern. One common method of generation involves applying random numbers to an iterated
function system, while another involves quadratic recurrence equations in the complex plane such as z
squared plus c. Examples include the dragon curve, Koch snowflake, and several shapes named after
Waclaw [VAHTS-wahf] Sierpinski [sir-PINS-kee]. Their dimension generally is not an integer, and these
shapes exhibit self-similarity. Name these shapes that visualize a Julia set or Mandelbrot set.
ANSWER: fractal
The "dangerous bend" symbol was used in a textbook from this country to warn students of
upcoming difficult passages. A man from this country attacked logicism by arguing induction could
not be derived from logical axioms in his book Science and Hypothesis and called the idea of
transfinite numbers a "disease" which mathematicians need to be cured of. A group here wrote a
series of books under a single (*) pseudonym that attempted to rigorously ground all mathematics in set
theory. In 1900 this country hosted the congress where Bertrand Russell was introduced to the work of
Georg Cantor via Giuseppe Peano. The same year, a man who was not from this country delivering a
speech here that said in mathematics "there is no ignorabimus" and listed twenty-three problems for
twentieth century mathematicians. For 10 points, name this country home to the group Nicolas Bourbaki
and Henri Poincare.
ANSWER: France
The Towers of Hanoi was formulate by a scientist from this country, and a different scientist from this
country names a theorem that provides the basis for RSA. A "twister" that generates random numbers is
named for a man from here, and he names numbers that are the target of the GIMPS program. Those
numbers are special primes. For 10 points, name this country home to Marin Mersenne and the namesake of
the program Pascal.
ANSWER: France
This concept is central to an interpretation of statistics that becomes necessary when situations do not have
a natural probability that can be exactly calculated based on the setup of a problem. In an experiment, the
expected value equals the sum of the quantity of all the products of the relative type of this, multiplied by
their associated values. This term is used as an adjective for the polygon that is a line graph equivalent to a
histogram. The relative type of this is calculated by dividing the absolute type by the total number of trials
in an experiment. Name this quantity equal to the number of occurrences of a particular outcome in an
experiment, which in another context is the reciprocal of period.
ANSWER: frequency
When invoking these structures in x86 (x-eighty-six), one must first back up registers like EBX onto the
stack and then use the call instruction. A common technique inlines them and it is common in some
languages to "overload" them. When lacking in a bound type they are known as "void," while normally they
take in a arguments or parameters and have a return value. For 10 points, name this programming construct
that has inputs and outputs.
ANSWER: function [or procedure; or method; or subroutine]
When these entities are paired with free variables bound in their environment, they are known as
closures. Evaluation strategies for them include call-by-need and call-by-reference. Many languages require
you to declare their prototype, which includes their argument and return types. Variables created inside of
them have a local scope. For 10 points, name these entities in computer programming that consist of a
block of code that performs a specific task.
ANSWER: functions [or methods; or subroutines; or procedures; or subprograms]
At the assembly level, invoking these entities pushes the old frame pointer onto the stack. Side effects occur
when these entities modify the value of a global variable. Scheme and Lisp are examples of programming
languages named for these entities. Many languages support ad hoc polymorphism by allowing you to
create many of these entities with the same name in a process called overloading. When these entities refer
to themselves, recursion ensues. For 10 points, name these entities that accept parameters and have return
values.
ANSWER: functions [or methods or subroutines or procedures or routines or callable units]
An important division of these idenfities those that are primitive recursive. Transcendental ones
are not expressible in a finite number of simple operations. Famous ones include those of Lame
(lah-MAY) and (*) Bessel. Currying refers to reducing their arguments. They can be surjective and
injective. These relations are partial if some items in the domain don't map into the codomain. For 10
points, name this mathematical object that for a given input x has an output y.
ANSWER: function
Mathematicians using the name Nicolas Bourbaki classified these entities into surjections, bijections, and
injections, and these entities can be combined by using the output of one as the input of another in a process
called composition. Injections are also called the one-to-one type of these, and whether an inverse one of
these exists can be determined using the horizontal line test. For 10 points, identify this type of relation
which can be classified using the vertical line test in which each element of the domain corresponds to
exactly one element in the range.
ANSWER: functions
In C# (c sharp), delegates act as references to these things. Their contents are duplicated for
increased performance at the cost of size when they are inlined. Closures are examples of these that
can be treated like objects. Virtual ones can be overridden in object oriented programming. These
have a (*) return type which can be void. For 10 points, name these sections of code that are called to
accomplish a task, such as System dot out dot println in Java.
ANSWER: function [or method; or procedure; or subroutine]
Pathological examples of these include the Blancmange and the Weierstrass [VY-ur-shtrass] ones. When
these can be expressed as an algorithm they are called computable, and when these can always be expressed
locally as power series they are classified as analytic. Other ways to classify these mathematical objects are
based on whether or not their image includes their entire codomain and whether any element in their image
is used more than once; those classifications are surjective and injective, respectively, which are also called
"onto" and "one-to-one". Name these mappings more specific than relations, which have the restriction that
each member of the domain can correspond to at most one member of the range.
ANSWER: functions [accept map(ping)s before "mappings"; prompt on relations before "relations"]
One way of denoting these mathematical objects is the name of the object colon a set right arrow
another set. Combining several of these entities to form a new one is known as (*) "composition" and
they are sometimes called a map. These entities can be surjective if their image equals their co-domain and
they are bijective under more stringent conditions. Since these entities can only have one output for each
input, one simple way of testing for them is the vertical line test. For 10 points, name this type of
mathematical entity typically written in the form f(x) ("f of x").
ANSWER: function [prompt on map before mentioned]
In C# (c sharp), delegates act as references to these things. Their contents are duplicated for increased
performance at the cost of size when they are inlined. Closures are examples of these that can be treated
like objects. Virtual ones can be overridden in object oriented programming. These have a return type
which can be void. For 10 points, name these sections of code that are called to accomplish a task, an
example of which is the "main" one seen in Java and C.
ANSWER: function [or method; or procedure; or subroutine]
According to complex analysis, if these entities are holomorphic, then they are also analytic. An
example of this type of entity that exhibits fractal properties is named the Minkowski question mark,
which is also known as the slippery devil's staircase. If one of these entities has an image equivalent
to its codomain, then it is classified as onto, or surjective. When they involve one variable going to
one other variable, their graphs always pass the vertical line test, and if their graphs also pass the
horizontal line test then they are called one-to-one. Name these relations in which each input taken
from the domain corresponds to exactly one output taken from the range.
ANSWER: functions
The z transform of the impulse response yields a representation of linear, time-invariant systems as a
transfer one of these things. Maps and operators are other terms used to refer to these things. The set of
values for which these things are defined is there domain; those that have only one element in their range
for every element in their domain are known as one-to-one. The negative of the input is equal to the
negative of the output for odd examples of these things. For 10 points, identify these things that relate
inputs and outputs.
ANSWER: function
These things are defined by being left-total and right-unique. A set of these things is denoted by "raising"
one set to the power of another set. They are typically denoted by a name followed by a colon, a set, an
arrow, and another set. The arity of one of these things is the number of arguments it accepts. These things
are said to be "partial" rather than "total" if they are not defined on their entire domain. A circle-symbol
between two of these things denotes composition. These relations are single-valued, and thus pass the
vertical line test. For 10 points, name these relations that map each input to exactly one output, examples of
which are "sine" and "logarithm".
ANSWER: functions [or operations; or total functions; prompt on "binary relations"; prompt on "relations"]
Typing in this paradigm may be accomplished by the Hindley-Milner algorithm, and the Curry-Howard
isomorphism connects well-typed programs in this paradigm to proofs. One procedure in this paradigm is
called currying. This paradigm is inspired by the lambda calculus and must implement instances of iteration
as forward recursion. Pure forms of this paradigm ban side effects; instead, state is simulated using monads.
For 10 points, name this programming paradigm that contrasts with imperative programming, named for its
choice of first-order objects, languages employing which include ML and Lisp.
ANSWER: functional programming
These frameworks commonly use a form of lazy evaluation known as graph reduction, and deforestation is
commonly applied to programs written in them. Intuitionist type theory is useful in understanding these
languages, which are corresponded to proofs via the Curry-Howard isomorphism. Side effects are
completely avoided in the pure form of these languages, which are based heavily in extensions of lambda
calculus. Monads are used to store states in this programming paradigm, which replaces iterative structures
with forward recursion. For 10 points, identify this programming paradigm exemplified by Haskell and
Lisp, which is often contrasted with imperative programming.
ANSWER: functional programming languages
The Hindley-Milner algorithm has caused most new ones to use a typed lambda calculus, and one of these,
APL, uses a non-standard character set and is known for extremely concise expressions. In these, a monad
is an abstract data type used to represent computations, and one of these relies on s-expressions, has a
Scheme dialect, and is called LISP. For 10 points, name this class of programming languages that avoid
mutable data and treat computation as the evaluation of their namesake entities.
ANSWER: functional programming languages
The group of this name is the set of all loop equivalence classes on a surface. This word names Fisher's
theorem that the rate of increase in fitness is proportional to the genetic variation. This word refers to the
lowest resonance frequency of an oscillating system. One theorem of this type states that definite integral of
a function over an interval a to b is equal to the value of the function's antiderivative at b minus the value at
a. For 10 points, give this word that names an important theorems from calculus, arithmetic, and algebra,
the later of which implies that every polynomial of degree n has n complex roots.
ANSWER: fundamental
Proofs of this result sometimes make use of Liouville's Theorem that a bounded entire complex function
must be constant. An early proof of this by Argand was based on earlier work by D-Alembert, while the
most famous proof of it was actually faulty because it assumed the Jordan curve theorem. Early arguments
over it were faulty because they did not use complex numbers or, in Leibniz's case, did not realize that the
square root of i could be expressed in the form a + b i, and thus failing in the case of x to the fourth power
plus one. Nearly proven in Gauss's dissertation, name this theorem that states that every polynomial of
degree n with complex coefficients has n complex roots.
ANSWER: Fundamental Theorem of Algebra [prompt on partial answer]
One proof of this theorem takes the normal closure of a finite extension and then considers a 2-Sylow
subgroup of that extension's Galois group. This theorem follows from continuity and Picard's little
theorem. Another proof considers the function 1-over-f, which is entire and bounded, and thus must
be constant by Liouville's theorem. Since algebraic extensions have finite subextensions, this theorem
is equivalent to there being no (*) nontrivial finite extension of the complex numbers. This theorem
implies that irreducible complex polynomials are linear, and thus non-constant complex polynomials are a
product of linear factors. For 10 points, name this theorem stating that nth degree polynomials have n
complex roots.
ANSWER: fundamental theorem of algebra
A topological proof for this statement relies on the contradiction that two curves with different winding
numbers would have a homotopy if this statement were not true. Since Liouville's theorem implies that
bounded, analytic functions are constant, it can be used to prove this statement. An early proof for it came
from Gauss' doctoral dissertation, and it can be equivalently stated as "the field of complex numbers is
closed." It states that for a polynomial of degree m with complex coefficients, the polynomial has at most m
roots and at least one complex root. For 10 points, identify this statement which implies that a polynomial
can be written as a product of linear factors.
ANSWER: fundamental theorem of algebra [prompt on fta or other such lazy attempts]
Peter Rothe first introduced this statement in his Arithmetica Philosophica, and d-Alembert's proof
of this statement was declared incomplete without the Weierstrauss extreme value theorem. One
proof of it by Argand was the first to use complex coefficients, and a corollary of this statement is
that the field of complex numbers is the closure to the field of real numbers. Its most famous proof
was incomplete because of a faulty assumption of the Jordan curve theorem. This theorem can be
used to show that all cubic polynomials have an (*) x-intercept. For ten points, name this theorem which
states that every polynomial of n degrees has n complex roots.
ANSWER: fundamental theorem of algebra
One proof of this theorem uses Liouville's theorem, that any bounded function differentiable on the
complex plane is constant. An attempt to prove this theorem by d-Alembert was incomplete, and it was
eventually proven by Gauss. It implies that every algebraic extension of the real numbers is isomorphic to
the field of either real or complex numbers. In 1806 Argand stated this theorem for complex coefficients. A
corollary of this theorem is that the field of complex numbers is closed. For 10 points, name this theorem
that states that a polynomial of degree n has n roots in the complex plane.
ANSWER: fundamental theorem of algebra
The so-called lemma of d'Alembert [DAH-lum-ber] is an incomplete proof of this statement that can be
completed using the Weierstrass extreme value theorem. A more direct proof of it uses Rouche's theorem to
show that a function with a known number of the values in question has the same number as the function of
interest. One corollary of this statement is that every polynomial with only real roots can be written a linear
combination of linear and quadratic terms. For 10 points, name this theorem that states that every
polynomial over the complex numbers has at least one root, the basic result in an important branch of
mathematics.
ANSWER: the fundamental theorem of algebra [prompt on FTA]
One proof of this theorem exploits the fact that there cannot exist two homotopic curves that don-t
cross zero with different winding numbers. This theorem can be proven with a theorem stating that a
bounded function over the complex plane is a consta nt, named for Liouville. D-Alembert's proof of it
is incomplete, [*] Gauss tried proving this theorem geometrically, and Argand's proof was the first to
account for non-real coefficients. Implying that the field of complex numbers is closed, for 10 points, name
this theorem stating that every single-variable polynomial with complex coefficients has a number of
complex roots equal to its degree.
ANSWER: the fundamental theorem of algebra [prompt on "FTA"]
This theorem implies that the field of complex numbers is the algebraic closure of the field of real numbers.
Gauss's 1799 geometric proof of this theorem had a topological gap, and Cauchy wrote the first textbook
containing the proof for this theorem in 1821. Multiplicity needed to be taken into account when counting
roots for this theorem, which guarantees at least one complex root for a non-constant single-variable
polynomial with complex coefficients. For 10 points, identify this theorem which states that a complex
polynomial of degree n has n complex roots.
ANSWER: Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
This theorem can be proven by applying the Jordan-Holder theorem to Z-sub-n. Domains where an
analogue of this theorem holds for ideals are named for Dedekind. An example where an analogous
theorem to this one fails to hold is Z adjoined root -5. It can be proven by noting that all PIDs are
UFDs and the integers are a PID. This theorem guarantees the existence of (*) LCMs and GCDs and
gives a simple way to find them. A proof of the existence claim in this theorem first writes n as a nontrivial
product if n is not prime, and then inductively factors that. For 10 points, name this theorem stating that
every integer greater than 1 has a unique factorization into primes.
ANSWER: fundamental theorem of arithmetic [prompt on any part of unique-prime factorization theorem; prompt on fundamental theorem]
This figure is formed by graphing y=(1/x) with a domain restriction to avoid the asymptote, then
rotating it in 3 dimensions around the x axis. Integrating under the curve shows that the volume
approaches pi, while the surface area is greater than two pi times the natural log of the upper bound
of integration. This is sometimes called the painter's paradox (*) as painting an infinite area requires an
infinite amount of paint, but filling the figure requires a finite volume of paint. FTP, name this figure with
infinite surface area, but finite volume.
ANSWER: Gabriel's horn or Torricelli's trumpet (accept "painter's paradox" early)
Given two posets with two monotone functions between them, the posets correspond according to a
connection theorem due to this person. An unsolved problem arising in a framework this scientist
proposed asks whether every finite group corresponds to one of the quotients of the rationals that
this mathematician discovered. The fundamental theorem of the aforementioned framework states
that there exists a correspondence between the subextensions of a finite, normal, separable field
extension and the extension's automorphisms; both normal, separable field extensions and their
automorphism (*) groups are named for him. For 10 points, name this mathematician whose namesake
theory can be used to prove that quintic equations are not solvable by radicals because his namesake group
corresponding to the quintic isn-t solvable.
ANSWER: Evariste Galois
They are classified as symmetric or asymmetric if the identities of people involved do not matter.
John Maynard Smith applied the principles behind these entities into the Evolution of Sex, while
John Von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern studied them. Another way to classify them is based on the
net gain of participants, zero sum or not, and one example is a Mexican Standoff. For ten points, John Nash
won a Nobel Prize in Economics for advancements in the theory of what field that involves strategic
situations?
ANSWER: game (theory)
In this field of mathematics, a certain class of "perfect equilibria" is commonly derived using the technique
of backwards induction. "Tit-for-tat" has proven surprisingly effective as a solution to "iterated" objects
studied in this field, which was originated by von Neumann. Objects of study in this field that have only
Pareto-optimal solutions are called "zero-sum". A famous object of study in this field involves two agents
who may choose to cooperate with one another or to defect; that situation features one Nash equilibrium.
For 10 points, name this mathematical field that studies decision-making in namesake situations, using
situations like the prisoner's dilemma as a model.
ANSWER: game theory [accept decision theory until "decision-making"; prompt on "economics"; prompt on "mathematics"]
The RAND Corporation pursued studies into this due to application to nuclear strategy, and Merrill Flood
and Melvin Dresher developed a famous problem within this while at RAND. In this, a "stag hunt" is a
situation where one must choose between safety and cooperation. The types of namesake entities include
symmetric and zero-sum. Oskar Morgenstern and John von Neumann founded this field of mathematics.
One solution concept in this field sees all players making the best choice while accounting for other players;
that solution is called Nash equilibrium. Identify this study of strategic decision making, of which the most
famous example is the Prisoner's Dilemma.
ANSWER: game theory
John Von Neumann's work in this field includes backward induction. John Maynard Smith
developed the Evolutionarily Stable Strategy using work in this field. This field was initially
developed to analyze situations in which one party does better at another's expense, called [*] zerosum. In this field, a "stag hunt" is a situation that has a conflict between safety and cooperation and the idea
that each player's strategy is the best response to the strategies played by his rivals is central to this field and
is known as Nash equilibrium. For 10 points, identify this branch of applied mathematics, whose most well
known problem is the Prisoner's Dilemma.
ANSWER: game theory
One aspect of this concept concerns a type of evolutionary advance posited by John Maynard Smith which,
once established, cannot be ousted by any alternative which begins in a weaker position. That aspect of it is
related to a type of equilibrium in which both participants will not gain from a unilateral change in strategy.
Another branch of this deals with situations in which one person gains at another's expense, the zero-sum.
John Nash was one proponent of this field, which includes such problems as the Mexican Standoff, Stag
Hunt, and Chicken. FTP, name this field of applied mathematics dealing with strategic behaviors, such as in
the Prisoner's Dilemma.
ANSWER: Game Theory
One value from this field was named after Lloyd Shapley. This field was used in conjunction with biology
by John Maynard Smith to develop the concept of the ESS. The "stag hunt" is one problem from this field,
while the minimax theorem from this field was developed by one of its founders, John (*) von Neumann. In
one problem from this field, a Nash equilibrium is reached when all involved decide to defect. A Mexican
standoff and zero-sum are examples of the title situation from this field. The prisoner's dilemna is a situation
from, for 10 points, what field in which strategies may be undertaken by players?
ANSWER: game theory
This branch of mathematics has been used by Alvin Roth to design aspects of school systems. Roth built
upon a system designed by David Gale and Lloyd Shapley, who in turn built upon the work of Oskar
Morgenstern and John von Neumann. One of the concepts in this field is the correlated equilibrium, which
is based on its Nash equilibrium. Some of the problems studied in this field are referred to as cake cutting,
traveler's dilemma, and prisoner's dilemma. Name this branch of mathematics that deals with situations
when people have conflicting interests.
ANSWER: game theory
The "extensive" version of this field includes the "move by nature," in which individuals do not affect
the outcome. Other types of this study where the people involved do not matter are called symmetric
and asymmetric. Founded by Oskar Morgenstern and John (*) von Neumann, some of its situations
include the "Stag Hunt." Its concept of zero-sum describes the benefit one group receives at the cost of
another group. Situations in which the ones involved receive zero benefit by altering their strategies possess
Nash equilibrium. For 10 points, name this field of mathematical study which includes the "prisoner's
dilemma" and attempts to find strategic situations.
ANSWER: game theory
This field's contributions to evolutionary biology include formalizing a situation in which no mutant can
invade a population, "evolutionary stability." A thought experiment in this field hinges on two suspects
who can either "defect" to police or "cooperate;" that is the "prisoner's dilemma." Developed by von
Neumann and Morgenstern, it has found applications in economics, like the Nash Equilibrium. For 10
points, name this field of mathematics used to optimize strategies for situations like poker and chess.
ANSWER: game theory
Garrett Hardin described a problem in this field, which John Maynard Smith used to solve problems
related to evolution. Nash equilibria are states reached in problems in this field such as the stag hunt or
prisoner's dilemma. For 10 points, identify this field used to model nuclear war scenarios, which seeks to
describe decisions made by opposing players in a contest.
ANSWER: game theory
Thomas Schelling used this methodology to show how de-facto segregation happened in the north, as
well as to develop U.S. air power strategy in the Vietnam War. John Harsanyi won a Nobel Prize for
studying types of selection in this field. One exercise in this field, which can be shown in normal or
extensive form, is known as the "Stag Hunt," while another is termed "chicken." Important concepts in
this field include Nash Equilibrium. For 10 points, name this branch of applied math used to analyze
strategic behavior, such as the Prisoner's Dilemma.
ANSWER: game theory
The Lanczos method provides a good approximation of this construct due to the convergence of one
of its terms and zero value of its error as n approaches infinity in certain limiting cases. That
property distinguishes that method from the Spouge and Stirling methods for approximating this
function. The Legendre duplication formula allows its argument for 2x to be calculated in terms of
smaller arguments of x, while its argument on half-integers is proportional to the square root of pi.
(*) Integration by parts allows one to see this function of x plus 1 is equal to x times this function on x. It is
commonly given as the integral over t from 0 to infinity of t to the quantity z minus 1 times e to the minus t.
Legendre set it equal to n minus 1 factorial for positive integers n. FTP, identify this mathematical function
that generalizes the factorial to complex numbers, named for a greek letter..
ANSWER: gamma function
It can be expressed as an infinite product in Knar's formula, estimated in the right half-plane with the
Lanczos approximation, and it is characterized by the Bohr-Mollerup Theorem. It satisfies the Gauss
multiplication formula, a generalization of its Legendre duplication formula. It has poles at the negative
integers and thus is used in the functional equation of the zeta function to form the completed zeta function.
With value at one half given by the square root of pi, for ten points, name this special function, described in
an infinite product by Weierstrass, which agrees with the factorial function for positive integers.
ANSWER: Gamma function
The reciprocal of this function is represented by Hankel's contour integral. A function must be this
function if it meets certain criteria, including being logarithmically convex, according to the Bohr-Mollerup
theorem. The logarithmic derivatives of this function are represented with the letter psi. This function
applied to z and multiplied by this function applied to one minus x gives the result pi over sin of pi x. The
square root of pi appears when this function is applied to half-integers. This function has a value of one at
one, and, at x plus one it equals x times itself at x. This function is defined as the Euler integral of the
second kind, which is the integral from zero to infinity of t to the z minus one times e to the negative t dt.
For 10 points, name this extension of the factorial function to complex numbers.
ANSWER: gamma function [do not accept or prompt on "factorial"]
At large values, this function can be approximated with the Lanczos approximation, an alternative
for the Stirling approximation. This function, equal to the square root of pi at one half*, is defined as
the integral from zero to infinity of t to the power of z minus one times e to the negative t. This
function is not defined for non-positive integers and is noted for the fact that this function's value at z
plus one is equal to z times this functions value at z, allowing it to be defined recursively. For 10 points,
name this function that provides an extension of the factorial function.
ANSWER: gamma function (prompt on "factorial" until *)
Rodriguez-Rivera et al created one algorithm for doing this for Geodesic's Great Circle which is both non-
moving and reduces fragmentation. Another method for doing this portions off half of the target at any one
time and is known as Cheney's Algorithm. The generational type of this process relies on the infant
mortality principle to focus on recently created objects. Incremental forms of this process have fewer
performance repercussions than stop-the-world techniques, and several implementations use reference
counting. A feature of managed languages, they help prevent bugs related to dangling pointers and can be
implemented with a mark-and-sweep algorithm. For 10 points, name this process in computer science in
which data no longer being used is reclaimed in memory.
ANSWER: garbage collection
Seligmann and Garup fixed an algorithm by Hudson and Moss used for accomplishing this in the Mjolner
BETA System.. Different approaches to this task make use of DRC and ZCT data structures. The train
algorithm is used to carry out this technique, which may be classified as moving or non-moving. A common
modern approach is tri-color marking. Approaches to this task may be compared on the basis of pause time;
a generational implementation of it is used in Java. Broad classes of algorithms to do this task include mark
and sweep and reference counting methods. This process helps prevent dangling pointers and double free
bugs; it is used to reclaim un-needed memory. For 10 points, name this automatic memory management
technique.
ANSWER: Garbage collection [prompt on "automatic memory management" before it is read]
The concurrent type of this process is contrasted with the incremental type, both of which stop a program in
question for shorter times than "stop the world." This process prevents segmentation faults because it stops
dangling pointers. For 10 points, name this process wherein a program creates more space by destroying
objects that aren't in use anymore.
ANSWER: garbage collection
The Deutsch-Bobrow algorithm implements a "deferred" variety of one technique used to perform this
action in run-time, and one problem with that algorithm is the issue of zero count table overflow.
Christopher's algorithm was created to perform this function for FORTRAN, while Lins' algorithm is a lazy
algorithm which peforms this function using a control set. The Deutsch-Schorr-Waite algorithm is an
example of a pointer-reversal algorithm for doing it. A two-phase algorithm to perform this action was
developed by McCarthy and is known as mark-and-sweep, while Unix-based systems employ the referencecounting method. For ten points, identify this action in which memory that is no longer in use is returned to
the heap.
ANSWER: garbage collection
This man proved the Fermat polygonal number theorem for triangular numbers. A theorem stating that a
constructible regular n-gon must have "n" equal to a power of two, a Fermat prime, or a product of powers
of two and Fermat primes is named for this man and Wantzel. This man produced a proof of the
fundamental theorem of algebra as his doctorate. This man made a large contribution to applied
mathematics by creating the method of least squares, and was able to determine a shortcut method for
summing the integers from one to one hundred on the spot at age ten. Identify this man for whom the
normal distribution is named.
ANSWER: Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss
A method of solving systems of linear equations in matrix form is known as this man's namesake
"elimination," and that method was extended for putting a matrix into reduced row echelon form by Jordan.
Another object named for this man follows the curve "e to the quantity negative x squared over two, all over
the square root of two pi." All distributions of repeated events converge to a form of that distribution
according to the Central Limit Theorem, so it is also referred to as the Normal Distribution. For 10 points,
name this German who also names two of Maxwell's equations.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
Together with a Russian, this man names a theorem in which the best linear unbiased estimator is given by
the ordinary least squares estimator. Together with a Frenchman, this man names a theorem that relates a
manifold's curvature to its Euler [OI-ler] characteristic. This man published the first proof of a theorem used
to determine if a quadratic equation modulo a prime number is solvable. This man is the namesake of a
method for solving systems of linear equations along with a distribution that resembles a bell-shaped curve.
For 10 points, name this German mathematician.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
A formula named for this man and Bonnet (bahn-ay) states that the surface integral for a namesake
curvature over a Riemannian manifold is equal to 2 pi times the Euler characteristic, while an algorithm
named for him and Legendre is used to compute the digits of pi. Complex numbers whose real and
imaginary parts are both integers are known as this man's integers. A certain error function closely related
to the normal distribution is also named after him, and he proved that an n-gon is constructible when n is
divisible by a Fermat prime, but he is better known for a law which states that the net electric flux is
proportional to the charge enclosed by the surface. For 10 points, identify this German mathematician who
is the namesake of a unit of flux density.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This mathematician proved the law of quadratic reciprocity and showed that a straightedge-andcompass construction of a 17-gon is possible. As a child, he supposedly found a way to quickly add
the integers from 1 to 100, and he names a (*) row-reduction method for solving systems of linear
equations via matrices, called his namesake "elimination.". For 10 points, identify this mathematician who
gives his name to the normal distribution, or bell curve.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man was the first to represent complex numbers as points on a plane, and complex numbers
whose real and imaginary parts are both integers are named for him. Ten thousand of a unit named
for him equal one tesla, which measures magnetic field strength. He discovered a way to construct a
(*) seventeen-sided regular polygon with compass-and-straightedge, and allegedly discovered a quick way
to add the first hundred numbers while a child. For 10 points, name this mathematician whose name is
sometimes given to the normal distribution.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man names a problem which asks how many integer pairs are contained within a circle of radius r.
A function equal to the integral of e to the negative x squared is his namesake error function. He also names
one of Maxwell's equations that shows that magnetic monopoles do not exist. A method of getting a matrix
in reduced row echelon form was developed by both Wilhelm Jordan and this man. This scientist developed
a law which relates the electric flux to the enclosed charge. For 10 points, what German scientist names a
type of statistical distribution known as the bell curve?
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
A theorem named for Lucas and this man states that the roots of the derivate of a complex polynomial lie in
a convex hull containing the roots of that polynomial. Along with Jordan, he is the namesake of a procedure
that converts a matrix to its reduced row-echelon form. One of his laws states the impossibility of the
existence of magnetic monopoles. For 10 points, identify this mathematician, whose law gives the charge
enclosed by an object as the surface integral of the electric flux.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
Due this man's reliance on the then-unproven Jordan Curve Theorem, he wasn-t technically the first to
prove the fundamental theorem of algebra. In order to predict the location of Ceres, this scientist created the
method of least squares approximation, and he probably beat Bolyai to inventing non-Euclidean geometries.
The differential form of a law named for him says rho over epsilon-nought equals del dot E. This man, who
proved quadratic reciprocity, requested a 17-sided polygon inscribed on his gravestone after he proved it
could be constructed. For 10 points, name this mathematician, who is also the namesake of two of
Maxwell's equations.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
The theorem named after this person and Andrey Markov [MAR-kawf] assumes normally distributed errors
to prove the validity of the method of least squares for linear regression. The integer lattice of the complex
plane, or in other words the complex numbers whose real and imaginary parts are both integers, are called
his namesake "integers". He developed a mapping from surfaces to the unit sphere, and surface integrals are
often taken on the surfaces named for him. He is also the namesake of the method to put matrices into row
echelon form, and Jordan's [YAWR-dahn-z] name is added to his when going to reduced row echelon form.
Identify this mathematician and physicist who is sometimes used as the namesake of the bell curve.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man and Kuzmin name the distribution of digits in a continued fraction, and he proved the triangular
case of the Fermat polygonal number theorem. His theorema egregium states that the product of a surface's
principal curvatures is invariant under local isometry, while his constant equals 1 over the arithmeticgeometric mean of 1 and the square root of 2 and comes up in the algorithm for approximating pi named for
him and Legendre. He first suggested the logarithmic integral as an approximation for the prime-counting
function, and it takes O(n3) [big O of n cubed] operations to perform the matrix inversion algorithm named
for him and Jordan. For 10 points, identify this prolific mathematician who shot to fame by predicting the
orbit of Ceres using the method of least squares.
ANSWER: (Johann) Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man's namesake elimination method is useful in solving matrices. In physics, the law that states that
electric flux through a closed surface is equal to the charge enclosed divided by epsilon naught is his
namesake law, and he proved the law of quadratic reciprocity as well as the Fundamental Theorem of
Algebra. For 10 points, name this mathematician who legendarily summed up the first 100 integers in his
head.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man proved the theorem of quadratic reciprocity. He used his formulation of least squares to
accurately predict the orbit of Ceres. This mathematician discovered a compass and ruler construction for
the heptadecagon. This man devised an improved proof of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
According to a popular legend, while still in school he devised a simple formula for the sum of one through
n. His name is also attached to a statistical distribution about a mean, also called the normal distribution or
bell curve. For 10 points, name this German mathematician.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man names the set of complex numbers a + b i such that a and b are both integers, his namesake
integers. A law that relates the flux to the volume, often called the divergence theorem, is typically named
for this man. With a French mathematician, he names a method of using arithmetic on rows to reduce a
matrix to reduced row echelon (EH-sheh-lon) form. That method is a form of elimination with Jordan. For
10 points, name this German mathematician who names the normal distribution.
ANSWER: Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss
One result due to this mathematician uses the fact that the geometry of a surface is only dependent
on its first fundamental form and implies that geometry is independent on a space's embedding. That
is his theorema egregium. This man proved a theorem about the solubility about pairs of
congruences; that is his law of (*) quadratic reciprocity. The product of the two principal curvatures is his
namesake curvature. He names an equation that relates the electric flux through one of his namesake
surfaces to the charge enclosed. For 10 points, name this German mathematician who names the normal
distribution.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
When the optical resonator of a laser operates in its TEM00 mode, it emits a profile that is called this man's
namesake beam. He showed that a set of cardinal points can be used to describe an optical system. One
distribution that takes his namesake form is the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. He's not Ampere, but his
law for magnetism states that the divergence of the magnetic field is zero. His namesake law for electricity
relates enclosed charge to electric field, and both of those laws are part of Maxwell's equations. Identify
this German polymath who is the namesake of the normal distribution.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man names one quantity that is equal to the determinant of the shape operator on a point. A pillbox is
one type of this man's namesake surfaces. This man used those surfaces to prove a law, which states that the
flux integral of the electric field dotted with dA equals the enclosed charge over the permittivity of free
space. This man's namesake law of magnetism prohibits the existence of magnetic monopoles and is one of
Maxwell's equations. An event has a 68.3% chance of being found within one standard deviation on this
man's distribution. For 10 points, name this German mathematician who lends his name to the normal
distribution.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This mathematician developed a way to find the date of Easter on any given year in order to find his
date of birth. He discovered that all positive integers are representable as the sum of at most three
triangular numbers. He published a proof of the theorem of quadratic reciprocity, which he called
his "golden theorem", in his Disquistiones Arithmeticae. This mathematician proved the (*)
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra for his doctoral dissertation and supposedly found the sum of the
numbers 1 through 100 as a child. The "magnetic" form of one law named for this man claims that magnetic
monopoles do not exist. For 10 points, name this "prince of mathematics" after whom the bell curve is
named.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This person is associated with the solution of the integral of dx over the square root of the quantity one
minus x to the fourth, and he is the namesake of a mapping from every point on an oriented surface to points
on a unit sphere based on unit normal vectors. He is also the namesake of imaginary surfaces used to
calculate flux, and depending on how far the process is carried out, this mathematician's name can stand
alone or be combined with Wilhelm Jordan to describe the process of putting a matrix into row echelon
form. Name this German mathematician whose name is sometimes used for bell curves.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man first proved what he referred to as the "fundamental theorem," which is the law of
quadratic reciprocity. With Wilhelm Jordan, he names a method for putting (+) matrices in reduced
row echelon form, and in physics, he names a law which states that the total electric (*) flux though
any closed surface is proportional to the enclosed electric charge. For 10 points, identify this German
scientist who is also the namesake of the bell curve, or normal distribution.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This person proposed the prime number conjecture, although he later changed it to a logarithmic
integral. He also proved the n equals three case of Fermat's polygonal number theorem. This man
created the least squares fitting method, which allowed him to predict the orbit of Ceres. He also
found a straightedge and compass (*) construction for a heptadecagon. His namesake error function is 2
over root pi times the integral of e to the negative t squared and comes from integrating a normal
distribution. For ten points, name this German mathematician whose namesake elimination method is used
to solve systems of linear equations.
ANSWER: Carl Frederic Gauss
This mathematician names an integral to compute the number of times a knot may be mapped onto
the sphere, giving the linking number. A formula that sets the integral over a manifold's boundary of
the geodesic curvature plus the integral over the manifold of his curvature equal to two pi times the
Euler characteristic is named for him and for Bonnet. He is the namesake of a probability distribution
which maximizes entropy for a given mean and variance; that distribution is followed by the sums of
random variables according to the central limit theorem and has the general form e to negative x squared.
For 10 points, name this namesake of the normal distribution.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
This man's namesake integers are complex numbers with integral real and imaginary parts. The process of
row reduction is a form of "elimination" named for him and Jordan. He published six proofs of the
quadratic reciprocity law, an important result in the field of modular arithmetic, which he created. This man
developed the ruler-and-straightedge construction of a seventeen-sided polygon. The namesake of the
normal distribution and a law about the enclosed charge of an electric field, for 10 points, name this
German mathematician.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss
Kenneth De Jong introduced crowding methods to deal with one problem in these algorithms, of
which Goldberg et. Al developed a "messy" variant. Their inventor proved their effectiveness by
finding an approximation for a function xi of s comma t + 1 in terms of xi of s comma t while proving
the Schema Theorem. These algorithms should be used instead of hill climbing when applied to a (*)
surface with many hills and valleys. These algorithms take an initial set of candidate programs, then
eliminate the weakest based on a fitness function and create a new set via crossover and mutation. For 10
points, name this type of algorithm that finds an optimal solution to a problem using techniques inspired by
natural selection.
ANSWER: genetic algorithms
Variance in the "building blocks" of these algorithms gives rise to collateral noise, which usually
dominates motion among schemata. In a "simple" case considered by Vose, the contraction-mapping
theorem is replaced by a variant of the Lyapunov stability criterion to describe the convergence of
these algorithms when a certain function is linear. To guarantee that they converge, an "elitist"
operator must often be used, so as not to preserve the distance function. DeJong proposed
deterministic crowding to prevent premature convergence; this can also be achieved via a (*)
replacement phase with a selection rule based on simulated annealing. These algorithms see use to solve
problems with an analytically-insoluble fitness landscape, like the traveling salesman problem. For 10
points, name these algorithms that optimize a fitness function to arrive at a local optimum in a biomimetic
manner.
ANSWER: genetic algorithms [prompt on "evolutionary (algorithms)"]
The underlying success of these algorithms was proven in a theorem by John Holland. One
technique used in these algorithms can be implemented with a uniform or half-uniform operation, the
latter of which swaps half the (*) Hamming distance. Tournament and roulette wheel are two common
implementations of another of their components, and "two-point" is a type of crossover used in these
algorithms. Selection functions weigh bit sequences by their fitness in, for 10 points, what class of
algorithms used to find local or absolute solutions to optimization problems, a class of evolutionary
algorithms employing "chromosomes..
ANSWER: Genetic Algorithm [prompt on GA]
A curious one of these entities, which can be said to be equal to 1 or 0, is named for Grandi.
Archimedes used one of these objects to calculate the area of the title conic section in his treatise The
Quadrature of the Parabola. The St. Ives riddle can be restated as solving a finite one of these. The (*)
"hyper-" form of these entities involves summing rational functions of k; that is, the quotient of polynomials
P(k) and Q(k). These converge if the absolute value of the power of each term is less than 1, in which case
they are equal at infinity to 1 over the quantity 1 minus the first term. For 10 points, name these series which
consist of terms r to the k summed over k, which are often contrasted with arithmetic series.
ANSWER: geometric series [prompt on "geometric"; do not accept or prompt on "geometric sequence"]
A curious one of these entities, which can be said to be equal to 1 or 0, is named for Grandi.
Archimedes used one of these objects to calculate the area of the title conic section in his treatise The
Quadrature of the Parabola. The St. Ives riddle can be restated as solving a finite one of these. The (*)
"hyper-" form of these entities involves summing rational functions of k; that is, the quotient of polynomials
P(k) and Q(k). These converge if the absolute value of the power of each term is less than 1, in which case
they are equal at infinity to 1 over the quantity 1 minus the first term. For 10 points, name these series which
consist of terms r to the k summed over k, which are often contrasted with arithmetic series.
ANSWER: geometric series [prompt on "geometric"; do not accept or prompt on "geometric sequence"]
Alexander Grothendieck is known for his work in the "algebraic" variety of this discipline. David Hilbert
and Alfred Tarski each put forth axioms from which this field can be derived. Desargues and Pascal both
proved theorems involving its projective type and, in the nineteenth century, Bolyai and Lobachevsky
developed a hyperbolic generalization of it. For 10 points, identify this field of mathematics discussed in
Euclid's Elements, in which one can use the Pythagorean Theorem.
ANSWER: geometry [or any specific types, such as Euclidean geometry or algebraic geometry; or topology until "axioms" is read; prompt on topology after "axioms" is read]
This value can be calculated using the relative mean difference and was first described in the article
"Variability and Mutability". Another way to calculate it is to integrate the difference between the Lorenz
curve representing the cumulative distribution function and the line of equality. A value of one can only be
achieved if all values in the distribution are zero with one exception, while a value of zero can only be
achieved if all values in the distribution are equal. Name this quantity used to measure income disparity or
wealth inequality within a society.
ANSWER: Gini coefficient
This man presented his paper Rotating Universes in General Relativity Theory at the 1950 International
Congress of Mathematicians. This man's dissertation, completed under Hans Hahn, proved that first-order
logic was complete. This man proved that the axioms of set theory were consistent with the Axiom of
Choice. His paper On Formally Undecidable Propositions in Principia Mathematica and Related Systems
showed that there were true statements which could not be proven. For ten points, name this Austrian
logician who proved a namesake Incompleteness Theorem.
ANSWER: Kurt Godel
This mathematician provided a no-counterexample interpretation of Gentzen's result, leading to their
namesake negative translation. The numbering named after him assigns a natural number to each formula
and was used to answer Hilbert's Second Question and critique Russell and Whitehead's Principia
Mathematica. Name this mathematician who in 1931 proved that the axioms of a system cannot be proven
within the system and that any consistent system had to be incomplete.
ANSWER: Kurt Godel
Specific cases of this theorem are much easier to prove if the theory satisfies three conditions named
for Hilbert, Bernays, and Lob. One lemma used in the proof of this statement claims that for any
function, there exists a sentence that implies that function taken on the number of the sentence; that
is the diagonalization lemma. The proof of this theorem involves uniquely encoding all statements in
a theory in its formulator's namesake numbers, and then constructing a (*) self-referential statement.
This theorem states that any sufficiently strong theory will have statements that are true but unprovable. For
10 points, name this pair of theorems about the limitations of the foundations of mathematics, proven by
Kurt Godel.
ANSWER: Godel's incompleteness theorems (accept "first" or "second" before "incompleteness theorem")
Porgozelski claimed to have proven this statement in 1977, though his method was not considered valid.
Schrinelmann verified the conjecture for n = three hundred thousand, though the upper bound has since
been lowered to seven primes. Its modern form differs from it's initial conception, when the number one
was considered prime and thus odd numbers were also investigated. It's weaker from differs in that odd
numbers greater than nine are considered, and a stronger form of that is Levy's conjecture. For 10 points,
name this conjecture named after a Prussian mathematician which states that all even numbers greater than
four are the sum of at most two primes.
ANSWER: Goldbach Conjecture
Utilizing the circle method, Hardy and Littlewood proved the weaker version of this statement, though their
proof required the grand Riemann hypothesis to be true. Vinogradov provided a direct proof of its weak
version, a result similar to Levy's statement. Chen Jing Run used a weighted sieve method that improved on
the work of Brun and Selberg to give a new upper bound for this problem. This statement is equivalent to
the claim that for every positive integer m, there exist primes p and q such that phi of p plus phi of q equals
two times m, where phi is the totient function. The aforementioned weak version states that every odd
number greater than 7 can be written as the sum of three odd primes. For 10 points, identify this unproven
statement whose strong version states that every even number greater than 2 can be written as the sum of
two primes.
ANSWER: Goldbach's Strong Conjecture
A paper by Bamberg relates this theorem to the crystallographic restriction theorem, and it is classified as a
Schinzel hypothesis H-sub-n in analytic number theory. Major steps in solving it may be Chen's theorem,
which uses the Selberg Sieve, and a result by Schnirelmann that uses a Brun sieve. Hardy and Littlewood
showed that its weak form holds true if the Riemann Hypothesis is true, and Vinogradov determined a
sufficiently large odd number for its weak form to hold true. Its simplicity has led cranks such as G.
Spencer-Brown and H.A. Pogorzelski to claim proofs of it. Its current formulation was stated by Euler,
though it is still named for a teacher of his. FTP, identify this unproven mathematical theorem which states
that every even integer greater than 2 can be written as the sum of two prime numbers.
ANSWER: Goldbach conjecture
This is the ratio of the hypotenuse length to the length of the shorter leg in the only right triangle whose side
lengths form a geometric progression, often called the Kepler triangle. This number's continued fraction
expansion consists entirely of ones, and the ratio of successive Fibonacci numbers approaches this. A
rectangle with a spiral in it is often used to show this concept visually, the positive solution to the equation x
squared minus x minus one equals zero. It is equal to the quantity 1 plus the square root of 5, close quantity,
over 2. Name this number about equal to 1.618, often considered aesthetically pleasing.
ANSWER: golden ratio [or phi or golden section or golden mean; accept extreme and mean ratio or medial section or divine proportion or divine section or golden proportion or golden cut or golden number or mean of Phidias; prompt on (1 + Sqrt[5])/2 or mathematical equivalents]
This quantity raised to the n is equal to this quantity raised to the n - 1 plus this quantity raised to the n - 2,
which is a recurrence relation useful in deriving the Binet formula. This quantity's expression as a
continued fraction involves only ones. One plus the reciprocal of this value is equal to this value. One way
to calculate this quantity is to divide the length of the diagonal of a regular pentagon by the length of one of
its sides. It is defined such that its square is equal to it plus 1. For 10 points, name this number commonly
symbolized phi, equal to 1 plus the square root of 5 all over 2 or approximately 1.618.
ANSWER: golden ratio [accept mean/number/section/proportion in place of ratio, accept divine in place of golden, accept phi before mention]
This number gives the ratio of the side lengths of Penrose tile kites and darts. The Fibonacci [fih-boe-NAHchee] sequence can be expressed using powers of this number and its reciprocal, and the limiting ratio of
successive terms of the Fibonacci sequence equals this number. Removing a square sharing a side with a
rectangle whose side lengths are in this ratio leaves another rectangle whose side lengths are in this ratio.
Name this solution of x2-x-1=0, an irrational number that approximately equals 1.618.
ANSWER: golden ratio (or golden mean or golden section or golden cut or mean of Phidias, accept divine in place of golden, prompt on "phi")
Conway weighted squares on a grid with powers of this number to show that a half-plane of
adjacently jumping checkers can never advance five rows over. This number's continued fraction
consists entirely of ones, and it is equal to 2 times the cosine of pi-fifths. This is the ratio of the
diagonal of a regular pentagon to the length of its side, and an isosceles triangle with base angle (*)
72 degrees has side-ratio equal to it. The ratio of successive terms in the Fibonacci sequence approaches
this number, whose square is one larger than itself. For ten points, identify this constant symbolized by the
Greek letter phi and equal to about 1.618, named for its aesthetically pleasing properties.
ANSWER: golden ratio/mean/section/proportion (or divine in place of golden, accept mean of Phidias, accept (1+Sqrt[5])/2 , accept phi before mentioned, prompt on decimal approximations which are the first few digits of 1.61803...)
John Conway used negative powers of this number to solve the game of Desert
Solitaire. The difference between powers of this number and its reciprocal is divided
by the square root of five in Binet's Formula. This is the ratio of the longest to
shortest side in a 36-72-72 triangle and it is the quotient of the length of a diagonal to
the side length in a regular(*) pentagon. This number, which is one more than its reciprocal,
is the ratio of a line segment to its longer section when cut in extreme and mean ratio. For ten
points, identify this number often called phi and equal to half of the quantity of one plus the
square root of five.
ANSWER: golden ratio (accept golden mean or golden proportion, accept phi or (the quantity) one plus the square root of five (end quantity) all over two before mention)
This number is divided by one to find the solution for the smallest radius possible in the Five Disks
Problem, while its inverse is used to identify Noble Numbers. This quantity for a regular pentagon is
found with Ptolemy's Theorem. If a plus b all over a is equal to a divided by b, the (*) quotient of
those equations is referred to as this number. It equals one plus the square root of 5 all over 2 and is what
the ratios between consecutive integers in the Fibonacci sequence approach. For 10 points, name this
number represented by phi that is approximately 1.618.
ANSWER: the golden ratio [accept mean of Phidias, golden mean, golden number, golden proportion, divine proportion, golden section; accept phi before mentioned; accept 1.618 before mentioned]
This number is equal to the square root of the quantity of one plus its own square root, and it can be
represented as a standard continued fraction using only the number one. It is also equal to two times the
cosine of the quantity pi over five, which is why it can be used to compare distances within a pentagon. It
solves the quadratic x squared minus x minus one equals zero, and it gives the limit of the
ratio of a term to its previous term in the Fibonacci sequence. This number also is used to construct a
rectangle which can be broken down into a square and a similar version of itself. Give this irrational
value equal to about 1.618 often represented by the Greek letter phi.
ANSWER: Golden Ratio (or golden proportion, divine proportion, golden mean, golden section, or mean of Phidias, accept phi before it is mentioned)
Defined as a continued fraction, this number can be represented as 1 plus [pause] 1 over [pause] 1 plus
[pause] 1 over 1, and so on. Ptolemy's theorem can be used to calculate this number, and this number is the
limit of the ratios of successive terms of the Fibonacci sequence. If a over b is equal to a+b all over a, that
quotient is known as this number, and it can be approximated using the golden spiral. For 10 points, identify
this number prominent in arts and architecture, equal to 1 plus the square root of 5 all over 2, approximately
1.618 and symbolized phi.
ANSWER: golden ratio [accept golden number, golden proportion, golden mean, mean of Phidias; accept phi before mentioned]
In Java, the two reserved but unused keywords are const and this keyword. In C languages, its action is
performed non-locally by the setjmp keyword. A 1968 letter by E. W. Dijkstra stated that this statement
"should be abolished from all 'higher level- programming languages." The title of that article was "[this
keyword] considered harmful." Usage of this statement can lead to disorganized "spaghetti code." For 10
points, name this programming keyword that performs an unconditional jump to a specific label or line of
code and whose inverse is the rarely-used parody, the "comefrom" statement.
ANSWER: goto statement [accept unconditional jump before it is read; prompt jump before it is read]
The Bohm-Jacopini Theorem states that this statement is unnecessary in a language with sequence,
conditional, and while statements. It is often used to move out of a loop to an error handler, and tail calls
are an alternative to them. In Java it is an unusable reserved keyword. A paper that argued that this
statement made code unclear was written by Dijkstra [DYKE-straw] and was called this "Considered
Harmful." For 10 points, name this statement which uses labels to jump to a given line in a program.
ANSWER: GOTO
Edsger Dijkstra famously wrote a letter in which this operation was "Considered Harmful", advocating
structured programming instead. When dealing with finite state machines, switch/case structure is generally
considered preferable to the use of this command, but exception handling often has to use this operation.
Over-reliance on this command results in "spaghetti code". For 10 points, name this command which is
used to transfer control, usually by telling the program at what label it should continue running, a parody of
which is INTERCAL's "COME FROM".
ANSWER: Goto
In physics, the opposite of this operation performed on the potential difference function gives the electric
field. In analysis, the LaPlacian is the divergence of this operation, whose del operator symbol is used with
the dot product for divergence and with the cross product for curl notation. In vector calculus, the dot
product of a function under this operation, the vector sum of the partial derivatives of a scalar function, with
a unit vector gives the directional derivative. FTP, name this term along whose concentration type occurs in
simple diffusion.
ANSWER: Gradient Accept del until mentioned
At every point P in the domain of a function f of x comma y, this function is normal to the level curve
through P. This function is orthogonal to a surface at any point. The dot product of this function and a
vector is known as a directional derivative. When applied to scalar functions, this operation yields a vector
field. This operator gives the direction of greatest change. In two dimensions, this operator is defined as the
partial of f with respect to x of x-hat plus the partial of f with respect to y of y-hat. For 10 points, identify
this operator symbolized del.
ANSWER: gradient [prompt on del]
On Riemannian manifolds, this operator gives a field equivalent to the musical isomorphism sharp of the
function's differential. Fourier's Law gives the rate of heat transfer through a material as proportional to the
negative result of this operator applied to a temperature field. The Jacobian of this operator is the Hessian,
and the Jacobian is itself formed of transposes of this operator. The curl of the result of this operator is
always zero, and it's divergence is equal to zero for harmonic functions and known as the Laplacian, which
is sometimes symbolized by this operator squared. FTP, name this operator which points in the direction of
steepest ascent for a scalar field and returns a vector consisting of a function's partial derivatives, generally
symbolized with a nabla, a down-pointing triangle.
ANSWER: Gradient (prompt on "del" or "nabla")
When the dot product is taken between this and any unit vector, the directional derivative is obtained. Line
integrals through it are path independent, as shown by its namesake theorem, which is also known as the
fundamental theorem of calculus for line integrals. The tangent plane to any level surface is defined with
this as the normal vector. The maximum value of the directional derivative at a point is its magnitude and is
in the same direction as its vector. For 10 points, name this vector field denoted by nabla f and defined as
the vector field whose components are the partial derivatives of f.
ANSWER: Gradient
One class of them correspond to irreducible root systems; that class has extended and affine varieties, the
latter sort of which can describe Cartan matrices. The Hadwiger conjecture concerns these objects, as does
the Robertson-Seymour theorem. Some functors have these objects as domains, and in that situation they
are called quivers. The clique number of one of these objects is denoted by omega, and one class of them
define a Weiner polynomial and may be represented by an adjacency matrix. One kind, called a forest,
disallows cycles, while in quivers, loops are allowed. Forests are so called because they could be considered
collections of trees, which are, for 10 points, a subset of what mathematical constructs composed of edges
and vertices?
ANSWER: graphs
Fractal examples of these structures include those named for Cayley describing free groups. The
Ford-Fulkerson algorithm solves the max-flow problem, which is defined on these objects. These
objects can be described by adjacency matrices, and the Floyd-Warshall algorithm solves the allpairs (*) shortest path problem on these objects, which were introduced in the Seven Bridges of
Konigsberg problem. The four color theorem is typically stated in terms of these mathematical objects,
whose special cases include trees. For 10 points, name these mathematical objects that consist of a set of
vertices and the edges that connect them.
ANSWER: graphs
One type of these entities cannot contain K-sub-3,3 or K-sub-5 as a minor according to Kuratowski's
theorem, and the spectrum of one of these is the set of eigenvalues of its adjacency matrix. Barnette's
conjecture concerns the existence of a Hamiltonian cycle for one of these, and "pseudo" ones allow the
presence of loops. A network is an example of a directed one, and one of these is undirected if it lacks
arrows on the edges connecting its nodes. For 10 points, name these mathematical constructs which share a
name with statistical diagrams coming in "line" and "bar" varieties.
ANSWER: Graphs
The Havel-Hakimi theorem gives the conditions for a sequence to correspond to one of these. Ramsey's
theorem deals with the coloring of complete ones. They can occur in undirected and directed forms, the
latter of which gives a direction to one of their components. Hamilton and Euler (OY-ler) name cycles in
these; Euler's is used in the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg Problem, which launched the study of them. For
10 points, name these mathematical objects made of vertices and edges.
ANSWER: graphs
The Erdos-Stone theorem is a gneralization of Turan's theorem to non-complete types of these objects. One
of these objects whose binary adjacency matrix has zeros on the diagonal is known as a simple directed
type, and an NP-complete problem involves finding the size of a clique for a given one of these objects.
One of these objects built from the elements of a subgroup of a group is named after Cayley and is
connected if and only if the subgroup generates the group. Kuratowski's theorem gives the conditions
necessary for one of these objects to be planar, and the Bellman-Ford algorithm is one way of finding the
shortest path on them. For ten points, identify these mathematical objects consisting of vertices joined by
edges.
ANSWER: graph
The Havel-Hakimi theorem gives the conditions for a sequence to correspond to one of these. Ramsey's
theorem deals with the coloring of complete ones. They can occur in undirected and directed forms, the
latter of which gives a direction to one of their components. Hamilton and Euler (OY-ler) name cycles in
these; Euler's is used in the Seven Bridges of Konigsberg Problem, which launched the study of them. For
10 points, name these mathematical objects made of vertices and edges.
ANSWER: graphs
Mathematically, these entities have a chromatic number, and they are operated on by the Floyd-Warshall
algorithm. The recursive "flood fill" algorithm can be used to determine the number of their connected
components, and if they are connected and acyclic, they are called trees. The shortest path along one can be
determined using (*) Djikstra's [jike-struh-s] algorithm, and they can be represented using adjacency
matrices or adjacency lists, which list for each vertex the vertices they are connected to. For 10 points, give
these constructs, sets of points with edges between them, which some people may draw with x or y axes.
ANSWER: graphs
One equation central to this discipline is an integral equation that relates a BRDF to the total
spectral radiance and was proposed by James Kajiya. The marching cubes algorithm, which outputs
a mesh, was proposed at a conference for this discipline. While teaching at the University of Utah,
Martin Newall created a teapot that has become the standard reference object for this discipline.
Though it is not signal processing, this discipline seeks to create efficient spatial (*) anti-aliasing
algorithms to reduce artifacts called "jaggies." Algorithms of interest in this discipline may convert vector
files into raster files, or perform the task of ray tracing. For 10 points, name this subfield of computer
science which focuses on synthesizing images.
ANSWER: computer graphics [accept "image synthesis" before "For 10 points"; DO NOT ACCEPT making video games, which is wrong]
These can be treated as a collection of stream processors. They often use z-buffers and they make use of
framebuffers. These devices must deal with transformations, clipping, and shaders. Two popular ways of
writing software that use them are OpenGL and DirectX. These devices use many small computing units to
operate on vertices and pixels. For 10 points, name these components of a computer that accelerate the
rendering and display of visual output.
ANSWER: GPU [or graphics processing unit; or video card; or graphics card]
A 2003 paper by Moreland and Angel showed how to efficiently implement the Fast Fourier
Transform using these components. The language Cg, like the identical HLSL and similar GLSL, is
only used with programming paradigms that make use of them. Frameworks for making use of these
devices include Microsoft's DirectCompute, OpenCL, and CUDA. A recent trend in computer
information processing is to solve easily (*) parallelizable problems using these electronic circuits for a
general purpose. These devices typically output to a frame buffer. These circuits are sold as part of the
GeForce and Radeon product lines. For 10 points, name these electronic circuits that are found in "cards"
made by AMD and NVIDIA.
ANSWER: Graphics Processing Units [accept "graphics cards" UNTIL "electronic circuits."]
This mathematical operation can be expressed as a linear combination using Bezout's [bay-zoo-s] identity.
This equals the number of lattice points crossed by a line from the origin to the coordinates of the two input
values. If this value is one, then its inputs are called relatively prime. This value found by the Euclidean
[yoo-KLIH-dee-un] algorithm equals the product of two numbers divided by their least common multiple.
This operation can also be evaluated by multiplying the shared prime factors of a set of numbers. Name this
largest value that goes into all of a set of numbers.
ANSWER: greatest common factor (accept gcf, greatest common divisor, or gcd; accept highest or largest in place of greatest)
The natural numbers form a complete distributive lattice with this operation corresponding to meet.
In a principal ideal domain, this operation corresponds to finding the generator of the ideal
generated by two elements. For integers x and y, this is the smallest positive integer that can be
written as "a-x plus b-y", according to Bezout's identity. Performing this operation on two integers is
equivalent to performing it on the smaller of the two integers and the (*) difference between them. That
fact is the basis for the Euclidean algorithm, which computes this quantity more efficiently than first
computing the prime factorization of both inputs. For a natural number n and zero, this value is n, while for
two relatively prime numbers, this value is one. For 10 points, name this value which is the largest positive
integer that divides two given numbers.
ANSWER: greatest common divisor [or GCD; or greatest common factor; or highest common factor; or GCF; or HCF]
One algorithm for computing this number takes two numbers and calls itself with the second number and
an expression involving the floor of their quotient. Besides Euclid's algorithm, a way of computing it
involves factoring two numbers and multiplying the terms that appear in both factorizations. It is equal to
the product of two numbers divided by their least common multiple. For two prime numbers, it equals one.
For 10 points, name this largest number which evenly divides two integers.
ANSWER: greatest common divisor [or GCD; or greatest common factor; or GCF]
One method for finding this quantity is through an algorithm whose worst-case is when the inputs
are Fibonacci numbers. Bezout's lemma states that this value is the smallest positive integer which
can be written as a linear combination of this function's inputs. The value of this function over two
variables can be found with the (*) Euclidean Algorithm, and two numbers are relatively prime if this
function of them returns the value of one. For two integers x and y, this function equals xy divided by the
LCM of x and y. For ten points, identify this function, which gives the largest integer that divides a
collection of numbers.
ANSWER: greatest common divisor (or greatest common factor, also accept highest for greatest)
Bezout's Identity means that for integers a and b, there exist integers u and v such that au plus bv
equals this value for a and b. It can be computed using an algorithm that is based on the fact that this
of a and b is equal to that of b and the (*) remainder of a divided by b. That algorithm is named for
Euclid. If two integers are relatively prime, then this value for those two integers is one. For 10 points,
name this value that is the largest factor shared by two numbers, which for the example of 12 and 18 is 6.
ANSWER: greatest common divisor [or GCD; or greatest common denominator; or greatest common factor; or GCF]
The existence of this function for two elements of a ring ensures that the ring is a principal ideal domain.
This value can be found by beginning a sequence with the two given numbers with the larger one first and
repeatedly adding to the sequence with the difference between the second to last number and the largest
multiple of the last number that will leave a positive result. That process is known as the Euclidean
algorithm, and if this value is one for two numbers, then the numbers are said to be relatively prime. It can
also be calculated by dividing the product of two numbers by their least common multiple. Given the prime
factorization of two numbers, this value can be found by multiplying together the set of their common prime
factors. Name this value which is the largest value that divides two numbers.
ANSWER: greatest common factor [or greatest common divisor; or GCF; or GCD]
Stein's Algorithm computes this value recursively and runs slightly faster than another recursive algorithm
that iteratively subtracts the largest possible multiple of the smaller number that is less than or equal to the
larger; that latter algorithm is named for Euclid. A slower approach to computing this value is to multiply
all shared prime factors with multiplicity. A fraction is in lowest terms if this value for its numerator and
denominator is one. This value is equal to the product of two numbers divided by their least common
multiple. For ten points, identify this largest integer by which two numbers can be evenly divided.
ANSWER: greatest common divisor or greatest common factor (accept gcd or gcf, accept equivalents like "highest" or "largest" in place of "greatest")
This operation can be defined as the sum of the Euler totient functions for each natural number that is a
factor of both inputs. For two integers a and b, there exists a linear combination of a and b that is equal this
operation applied to a and b according to Bezout's identity. If this operation applied to two integers yields
one, then they are coprime to each other. A recursive algorithm to perform this operation involves dividing
each remainder by the divisor, and was formulated by Euclid. The product of the least common multiple and
this operation yields the product of the two inputs. For 10 points, name this operation which finds the
largest number that divides both inputs.
ANSWER: greatest common factor [or greatest common divisor; or GCF; or GCD]
Hassler Whitney created an ordered pair called a matroid to show that these methods are correct if
they feature an underlying exchange argument. Typically, one may prove that these procedures are
correct by considering a dynamic programming solution to a problem, then showing that there need
be only one choice in each instance of a subproblem. These kinds of methods are exemplified by (*)
Prim's algorithm and Kruskal's algorithm, both of which make minimum spanning trees. They are most
often illustrated with a change-making algorithm. For 10 points, name these algorithms that always take the
locally optimal step.
ANSWER: greedy algorithm
Equivalent descriptions of these objects can be passed between by a finite number of Tietze
transformations. The set of all continuous deformation congruence classes of paths in a manifold is one type
of these objects. The largest prime power that divides the order of one of these objects is also the order of
one of its subsets according to one of Sylow's theorems, which is a partial converse of Lagrange's theorem.
Every finite one is isomorphic to a subset of the symmetric one according to Cayley's theorem. Sometimes
defined as a monoid with an inverse element, these objects are a set with an identity element and an inverse
for every element that is closed under a binary operation which is associative. For 10 points, name these
objects that, when their operation possesses commutativity, are known as "abelian," and which are studied
in abstract algebra along with rings and fields.
ANSWER: groups
To apply the cohomology theory of these objects to the study of finite-dimensional central division
algebras over a field, one studies the Brauer type of them. The free product is the coproduct in the
category of these objects. The Burnside problem asks about finitely generated types of them. P-types
of them are of interest in their structure theory, where (*) Sylow's theorem is a key result. The
fundamental type of them is an important algebraic topological invariant. One can always embed one of
these in a symmetric one of these, a result named for Cayley. A divisibility result for their order is named
Lagrange's theorem. For 10 points, name this basic algebraic structure consisting of a set closed and
containing an inverse and identity under an associative operation.
ANSWER: groups
Novikov proved that the word problem for these objects is sometimes undecidable. Special types of these
are called periodic or torsion ones, which are the subject of Burnside's problem. The Cayley graph is a
method of representing these, and another one of these can be represented as a 194-by-194 character table,
the Fischer-Greiss Monster. They may act on a set, usually as what may be called "symmetries" of that set,
and functions from one to another that preserve their structure are called homomorphisms. Characterized by
closure, associativity, and inverses, those that are commutative are also called abelian. FTP, name these
algebraic structures, distinct from rings and fields.
ANSWER: Groups
HNN extensions can be used to prove that every constructible one of these structures can be defined
using a finite presentation. A homomorphism from one of these structures to a general linear one of
them on a vector space is one of their namesake representations. If one of these structures possesses a
single element in its generating set it is said to be (*) cyclic. These structures are equivalent to monoids
which possess an inverse. The integers are one of these structures under addition, but not under
multiplication. For 10 points, name these algebraic structures characterized by a set and an operation which
together possess closure, associativity, an inverse element, and an identity element, whose commutative
varieties are named for Abel.
ANSWER: groups
One of these constructs is called perfect if it is equal to its own commutator. The purpose of the Holder
program was to classify a certain type of these. Those of odd order are solvable according to the FeitThompson theorem. Any one of these of prime order is also cyclic. Symmetric types of this algebraic
structure consist of permutations of a given number of elements. Examples of these include one that has a
194 by 194 character table created by Fisher and Greiss. One of these of order six is the smallest one of
these that is non-commutative. They must be associative and have an identity, inverses and a zero element,
and Abelian ones are commutative. For 10 points, name these algebraic structures that consist of a set and a
binary operation performed on that set.
ANSWER: groups
The Novikov-Boone-Britton Theorem proves the undecidability of the word problem for these
mathematical objects. The number of subsets fixed by their elements is proportional to the number
of orbits according to Burnside's Lemma. If "p to the n" is the largest power of prime p that divides
the order of one of these objects, then it contains a sub-object of size "p to the n" according to (*)
Sylow's Theorem. A sub-object of one of these objects must have an order that divides the order of the
original object according to Lagrange's Theorem. These objects are defined as monoids which include
inverse elements, and their namesake axioms include closure and the presence of an identity element. These
objects consist of a set and a single binary operation, and are called Abelian when they commute. For 10
points, name these mathematical objects studied in abstract algebra that are more general than a ring.
ANSWER: groups
The finite quotient types of these are isomorphic [eye-soe-MOR-fik] according to the Jordan-Holder
Theorem. The attempt to classify the finite simple examples of these left 26 exceptional ones known as
sporadic, and the ones containing all permutations of n symbols along with the composition operation are
classified as symmetric. In order to be classified as this, a system has to follow four given properties,
including having an identity and each element having an inverse, and the examples which are also
commutative are called abelian [uh-BEEL-yun]. Name these structures, some of which are cyclic, that are
defined by a set and a single operation.
ANSWER: groups
One type of these objects consists of all finite words built from a set; that is the free variety. They are
partitioned by their orbits under an action, and these mathematical structures can be represented by Cayley
graphs or Cayley tables. The types of these objects that represent the symmetries of a regular polygon are
known as dihedral ones, and those that can be generated by products of a single element are called cyclic. If
they are commutative, they are known as abelian. Name these mathematical structures that consist of a set
closed under a binary operation that is associative and possesses inverses and an identity.
ANSWER: groups
The Yoneda lemma in category theory generalizes a statement about these objects that suggests that
every one of these objects X is isomorphic to a subset of the symmetry one of these on X, a theorem
named for Cayley. Point ones are used to classify inorganic compounds for MO analysis. These
objects are called normal if they are self-conjugate. Those that look locally like a manifold, such as the
general linear one, are named for Sophus Lie. The center of one of these objects is a subset of it where
commutativity holds, so the center of one of these is Abelian. For 10 points, name these algebraic structures
with an invertible, associative binary operation.
ANSWER: groups
Locally compact examples of these algebraic structures can be assigned Haar measures. All possible
composition series of one of these objects are equivalent by the Jordan-Holder theorem. One class of these
has locally Euclidean structure and is named for Lie [LEE]. Another class of this type of object dictates the
solvability of polynomials and is named for Galois [gal-WAH]. As with many algebraic structures, the set
of commuting values in one of these is its center and one equal to its own center is Abelian. For 10 points,
name these mathematical structures, each of which consists of a set endowed an associated operation for
which there exist an identity and inverses.
ANSWER: groups
A relation between covering and the number of generators for a specific type of this object containing
cosets is Abhyankar's Conjecture. Sometimes defined as invertible monids, these structures are called
topological if they have the Hausdorff topology and are continuous. Their character, sometimes known as
the trace, is equal for ones in the same conjugacy class. The order of one contained in another must divide
the order of the containing one according to Lagrange's lemma. These are named for Lie [LEE] when their
operation is smooth. They're not rings, but when they commute, they are called Abelian. FTP, name these
mathematical structures, sets of elements and operations that are closed and associative and have an identity
and inverses.
ANSWER: groups
Components of this type developed in Ruby often make use of the Shoes toolkit. XAML is used to
create these parts of a program in WPF for .NET applications; WPF replaced the older WinForms
paradigm for creating these parts of programs. This part of a program comprises the "V" portion of
the MVP design pattern. Libraries to create these parts of applications in Java include (*) AWT and
Swing. Most libraries for these entities include widgets like labels, radio buttons and text boxes.
Command-line applications do not have these. For 10 points, name these parts of programs that use images
rather than text to handle user interaction.
ANSWER: Graphical User Interface Programs [or GUI ("gooey"); prompt on partial answers like "Use Interface" or "UI"]
Time constructible functions are functions whose output describe the time for this to occur. Sums of
two to the negative probability of this occurrence make up the transcendental omega numbers. Tibor Rado
devised a problem looking for setups responsible for the maximum number of ones before this happens.
That is the busy beaver problem. For linear bounded automata, this occurrence can be computed. A
diagonal proof showed that there is no general procedure for predicting if this will happen. That was shown
in a paper on the Entscheidungs problem by Alan Turing. If this does not happen, a machine will runs
forever. For 10 points, name this termination of a computation by a Turing machine.
ANSWER: halting [accept equivalents]
A corollary of this makes virus detection difficult, because it is impossible to tell if a program outputs its
own source code, and another corollary establishes that it is impossible to statically parse Perl. Its proof
usually makes use of the fact that a program can be its own input, and quantum computers cannot solve this
problem. Chaitin's constant gives the solution to this problem for a universal Turing Machine, but it is
uncomputable and effectively random. If this problem could be solved, all mathematical statements could
be proven or disproven, given sufficient time. Sometimes considered the computer version of Godel's
incompleteness theorem, for 10 points, name this undecidable problem formulated by Turning that asks for
a given input whether a particular algorithm will ever stop.
ANSWER: Halting Problem [Accept word forms that include halt]
Rice's theorem generalizes one result about this property to any non-trivial property about the
language recognized by a Turing machine. One number denoted capital omega determines the
probability of a program having this property; that is Chaitin's constant. In 1936, Turing
independently proved that there exists no (*) algorithm to determine if a program will do this, making the
problem of this property undecidable. For 10 points, name this property of programs which means that they
stop instead of running forever.
ANSWER: halting problem
Some proofs of this statement rely on the same contradiction inherent in the barber paradox. The first
proof of this statement adapted Cantor's diagonalization proof. Chaitin's omega constant gives a probability
for this statement. If this statement were true, then every recursively enumerable language would be
recursive. This statement can be used to prove, by reduction, Rice's theorem. This statement is required to
be true for busy beavers. Because this statement is usually cumbersome to work with, it is typically reduced
to Post's correspondence problem instead. For 10 points, name this undecidable decision problem that asks
if a given program will finish running.
ANSWER: halting problem [or halting theorem; or obvious equivalents, such as whether a program will halt or not before "will finish running" is read]
When the type of matrix named for this person is left multiplied by a skew-symmetric matrix, the
result is Hermitian. This mathematician's name comes second in the name of the theorem stating that
each square matrix satisfies its own characteristic equation. This person is credited for the icosian
game, which involves finding a cycle on a dodecahedron that visits each vertex once, which is why
graph cycles which visit each node exactly once are named for him. He carved one of his equations
into Brougham Bridge in Dublin after being inspired to discover it by a walk over the bridge. Name
this Irish mathematician and physicist who developed the concepts of tensors and quaternions.
ANSWER: Sir William Rowan Hamilton
This man carved the equation i squared equals j squared equals k squared equal i j k equals negative 1 on
the side of a Dublin bridge after he found a solution to his quest to quantify an extension of complex
numbers to three dimensions. The reformulation of Newtonian mechanics named after this man studies the
evolution of a system in generalized coordinates through his namesake differential equations, and with
Cayley, he names a theorem about the characteristic polynomials of matrices. For ten points, name this Irish
mathematician, the discoverer of quaternions, who also gives his name to the quantum mechanical operator
corresponding to the total energy of a system.
ANSWER: William Rowan Hamilton
With Jacobi and Bellman, this man names an equation central to optimal control problems, and he names a
theorem which implies that a square matrix A satisfies its own characteristic polynomial, along with Cayley.
He names a cycle on a graph such that the path visits each vertex exactly once, and he is also the namesake
of an operator which is the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian operator and gives the total energy of a
system. Better known for the creation of a division ring where i squared, j squared, and k squared equal
negative one, for 10 points, identify this Irish mathematician who developed the mathematics of
quaternions.
ANSWER: William Rowan Hamilton
These devices contain parallel concentric, or spiral, tracks, which are divided into blocks. The time it
takes the actuator arm to move the head to a track is the seek time of these devices. One type of failure in
these devices occurs when that read/write head comes into contact with a rotating platter, which is coated
with a magnetic oxide. For 10 points, name these secondary, or non-volatile, storage devices devices that
commonly come in sizes of two point five and three point five inches.
ANSWER: hard disk drive [or HDD; or disk drive; or computer disk]
These devices are susceptible to a superparamagnetic limit. An important statistic of these devices is
their areal density. They come in 3.5 and 2.5 inch form factors. Their contents are divided into tracks,
cylinders, and sectors. A major component of their access time is seek time. These consist of platters over
which read/write heads move. Recently, some of these have been replaced by Solid-state drives which use
flash memory. For 10 points, name these devices that store files on a computer and have capacities
measured in gigabytes and terabytes.
ANSWER: hard drive [or hard disk]
Recent improvements in these devices include perpendicular recording and native command queuing. An
important metric in their performance is seek time and they have multiple rotating platters which are
manipulated by heads. Concentric circles on the platters are known as tracks, which have smaller parts
called sectors that can store 512 bytes. For 10 points, name this piece of hardware which stores the files on
a computer, which generally has more storage space than the no longer as common floppy disk.
ANSWER: hard drive [or hard disk drive; or HDD; or hard disk]
Central to this type of device is an actuator, also called a voice coil. On Windows machines, these
hardware pieces use FAT32 or NTFS file systems. Virtual memory allows the computer to store pages on
these as opposed to RAM. The use of multiple ones is allowed via RAID technology, and most modern ones
use the Serial ATA interface. For 10 points, name this piece of computer hardware, which consists of a
read-write head and a series of platters and has a capacity typically measured in gigabytes.
ANSWER: hard drive [or hard disk drive; or HDD]
This British mathematician co-names a theorem stating that the normal order of the number of distinct
prime factors of "n" is approximately "log of log of n." This mathematician recounted a story in which he
complained that 1729 was a boring number, and he claimed that math is a "young man's game" in his A
Mathematician's Apology. He is the first namesake of a biological equation stating p-squared plus 2pq plus
q-squared equals 1. For ten points, identify this mathematician who "discovered" Ramanujan and formulated
a genetic principle independent of Wilhelm Weinberg.
ANSWER: Godfrey Harold Hardy
This adjective describes a type of division that adds two points, one on a segment and one on the extension
of that segment, in a way that creates two proportions. It also describes functions f that satisfy del squared f
equals zero. This word names a diverging series equivalent to the quantity one minus x to the nth power
divided by the quantity one minus x. That series adds the reciprocals of the positive integers. To find the
type of mean described by this term, one takes the sum of the number's reciprocals and divides the number
of data points by that value. Give this adjective often used with mathematics concerning the study of sound
waves because of its connection to music.
ANSWER: harmonic [accept harmonic division or harmonic functions or harmonic series or harmonic sequence or harmonic mean]
This sort of range is formed from points ABCD if AC over CB equals AD over DB. This term is given to
any function that has continuous second partial derivatives and satisfies Laplace's equation. The angular
part of the solutions of Laplace's equation in spherical coordinates are called spherical this. This term
describes the series that is the sum of one over n for one to infinity. This type of mean is the reciprocal of
the mean of the reciprocals. For 10 points, name this term that in acoustics refers to frequencies that are
integer multiples of the fundamental and thus names the analysis of additively combined waves.
ANSWER: harmonics
The geometric type of this kind of function was originally developed for computer vision but is now used
in, among other applications, fingerprint recognition. A function of this type is used by the Rabin-Karp
algorithm to efficiently search for examples of plagiarism. Rainbow tables list pre-calculated outputs of
these functions, which in most practical examples have pairs of values that map to the same output, called a
collision. Algorithms to generate them include SHA-1 and MD5, which output an index based on the input,
called a "key"; those indices, which are also known by this term, can be listed in a map or table named for
them. Give this term associated with the tagging of objects using a pound sign.
ANSWER: hash(ing) function [accept hash table; accept hash tag]
The cuckoo type of this structure can be implemented using bipartite matching algorithms. To improve the
expected bounds into a worst case bound, its universal formulation can use randomization over a series of
2-way independent functions to reduce collisions with high probability. Having no collisions results in a
perfect type of this data structure. Knuth and others credit H.P. Luhn with its creation, though Open
Addressing and other related techniques were already known at the time. Though Knuth conducted a
famous analysis of the linear probing version, the chaining version has more practical bounds on adversarial
input, but the double version can improve upon linear probing. For 10 points, what is this symbol table data
structure that achieves O(1) operations using a function to map keys to memory addresses?
ANSWER: hashing [accept hash map, hash table and equivalents]
Bloom filters require a set of different functions that do this. In cryptography, algorithms that perform this
task should have a strong avalanche effect and include WHIRLPOOL, MD5, and the SHA family. Data
structures that use open addressing can perform this action several times to locate elements. For ten points,
name the action that turns any large element or piece of data into a single integer, often used in sets and
maps.
ANSWER: Hashing
These algorithms should be designed to be preimage resistant. They can be designed using the MerkleDamgard construction. When these algorithms are selected at random from a family, they are said to be
universal. To mathematically analyze these algorithms, one often makes the assumption abbreviated SUHA.
The modulo operator is used in the class of them based on the division method. A rolling one of these
algorithms is used in the Rabin-Karp string searching algorithm. They can be used to construct errordetecting codes called checksums, such as the cyclic redundancy check. Separate chaining and linear
probing can be used to resolve collisions in them. An example of these algorithms is MD5. For 10 points,
identify these functions that map a set of keys to a set of indexes and are used to sort unordered data for
easy lookup in a namesake table.
ANSWER: collision-resistant cryptographic hashing functions
Cater and Wegman introduced the notion of a class of these whose important property comes from
choosing one at random. Blake and Skein are two examples of these. Merkle-Damgard construction
creates these through compression schemes. Karp and Rabin introduced a (*) rolling example. One
technique chains them together. Examples used for cryptographic purposes include SHA-1 and MD5.
Ideally, these should have low collision rates and these are the basis for average time O(1) storage and
retrieval. They are used to make checksums which can be used to verify the integrity of a file. A common
use of these in programming is for storing data in their namesake tables. For 10 points, name these functions
that map data to a smaller key.
ANSWER: hash function [or cryptographic hash function]
One implementation of these data structures moves only items with a certain longer sequence, the
"Robin Hood" method of its key step. Overlay Networks are often used to manage a variant of these,
distributed structures which allow some (*) BitTorrent clients to operate without a tracker. These data
structures, which can be implemented with open addressing, are prone to secondary clustering when
quadratic probing is used in their key step. Bucketing and chaining are two approaches to handling
collisions in these structures. For 10 points, name these data structures which can give Big O of 1 access
time by using a namesake code for each entry.
ANSWER: Hash Table [or Hash Map; prompt on Hash Function; do not accept "Hash Code"]
The paradox named for this man is a result that follows from the axiom of choice, that there is a countable
subset of the sphere that, upon its removal, the remainder can be divided into three congruent subsets also
congruent to the union of any two subsets. This man also names a measure of dimensionality applied to
fractals.
ANSWER: Felix Hausdorff
This term is used in an alternate name for dynamic memory allocation. A minimum spanning tree is found
more efficiently by Prim's algorithm when it uses the binary or Fibonacci type of this structure. This term is
used to describe the property of some trees in which each node has a key more extreme than its parent. This
term also describes a type of sorting which, like quicksort, is big O n log n. Name this tree-based data
structure.
ANSWER: heap
Because a Young Tableau consists of rows and columns of numbers that are sorted, functions
that search and extract the minimum value from these data structures are easily extended to such.
Implementing a priority queue using this data structure provides good performance for Dijkstra's
algorithm, especially when its Fibonacci type is used. An in-place sorting algorithm named for
these data structures has an average runtime of big O of n log n, combining the best properties of
insertion and merge sort, respectively. The binary type of these data structures must be complete
binary trees. For 10 points, name these data structures whose order property dictates that data
stored in a node must be less than or equal to all the node's descendants, so the smallest value is
the root node.
ANSWER: binary heaps [prompt on trees]
The bi-parental type of these objects allows for sublinear search. One type of these objects is composed of
several binomial substructures, while another that improves on that kind's runtime is named after Fibonacci.
Its minimum or maximum can generally be found in constant time, though most operations on it take log n
time. This structure can be used to implement a priority queue, and a process which involves repeatedly
removing the root element and then rearranging the structure is the sort named after this structure. For 10
points, name this type of tree that has the property that every child node is either greater or less than its
parent.
ANSWER: heaps
Fredman and Tarjan developed one type of this object that improves asymptotic running time for
algorithms, and allows for "lazy" evaluation of operations. Another variety of these objects increase
operational speed by introducing "corruptions". These structures are used in a sorting algorithm which
removes the maximal element from one of these structures, puts it at the end of the sorted list, and rebuilds
one of these structures; that algorithm has a better worst-case run time than quicksort. These structures are
trees which satisfy a namesake ordering property. For 10 points, name this data structure in which the key of
a child node is either greater than or equal to the key of its parent node.
ANSWER: heap
Carefully corrupting the keys of at most a certain number of values in this data structure allows for
five operations to have a constant amortized runtime in its soft variant. When implementing
smoothsort, the elements are stored in this kind of data structure based on Leonardo numbers. By
using these as internal traversal data structures along with adjacency lists instead of using adjacency
matrices, (*) Prim's algorithm can be run in O of E log V instead of O of V-squared. Fredman and Tarjan
developed a form of this data structure that inserts, decreases keys, and merges in amortized constant time;
that variant of this data structure is a collection of trees; that is the Fibonacci type. For 10 points, name this
data structure whose min type satisfies the property that the key of a child is always greater than or equal to
the key of a parent.
ANSWER: heap
In 1964, Robert W. Floyd developed an algorithm that converts a list into this type of data structure
in "big-O-of n" time by building them with from bottom up. One type of them performs unions in
constant time due to the fact that there is always a pointer to the minimum value and siblings are
organized in doubly-linked cyclic lists. One algorithm named for these objects improved the
efficiency of a sorting algorithm that was further improved by (*) smoothsort and runs in "big O of nlog-n" time. Priority queues often utilize the Fibonacci variety of these data structures when running
Dijkstra's algorithm. For 10 points, name this type of tree-based data structure in which children nodes have
lower key values than their parent's key value.
ANSWER: heaps [prompt on trees before read]
The most efficient implementation of Dijkstra is done using a Fibonacci one of these structures. Priority
queues are typically implemented using a binary of them. A n log n sorting algorithm that uses these data
structures adds elements to one, maintaining their namesake property, and then removes the elements while
again maintaining that property. For 15 points, identify this data structure similar to a tree except parent
nodes must either always be less than or always greater than their children.
ANSWER: heaps
Munro and Suwanda advocate using a bi-parental one in some cases, allowing for square root n
search times. Their "soft" variety introduces "corruptions" to increase operation speed. Crane
introduced one that uses an S-value and is unbalanced, the "leftist" type. Better amortized runtime
than allowed by binomial ones is achieved by lazy evaluation made possible in a specially defined
forest, their "Fibonacci" type. The namesake of an n log n-time sorting algorithm, it is implemented as a
tree for which all children are less in value than their parents. For 10 points, name this range of allocatable
memory named for its indeterminate shape and size.
ANSWER: heap [do not accept "tree" at any point; bi-parental trees do not make sense]
The Hopf-Rinow theorem can generalize this theorem to complete Riemann manifolds. Its first proof
utilized a Lebesgue chain, and one of its namesakes originally linked it to uniform continuity. Veblen noted
its logical equivalence to the statement that every cut on an ordered field F goes through some element, the
Dedekind Cut Axiom. The Weierstrauss property provides equivalence to this statement if every sequence
in the set has a convergent subsequence, though this is commonly stated as every cover having a finite
subcover when applied to metric spaces, where this theorem holds for completeness and total boundedness.
FTP, identify this doubly eponymous theorem which states that a subset of a Euclidean space is closed and
bounded if and only if it is compact.
ANSWER: Heine-Borel-Lebesgue theorem or property [prompt on partial answer]
The nth element in this mathematical sequence can be expressed in terms of the (n+1)th derivative of the
error function. The first derivative of the nth element is equal to 2n times the (n-1)th element. Not to be
confused with the functions that share its name, this sequence has two definitions, namely the probabilists'
and the physicists', that are trivially dissimilar and can be represented by the Rodrigues Formula. They can
be expressed as a special case of the sequence of Laguerre polynomials. In physics they describe spatial
modes in waveguides and lasers. For 10 points name these mathematical sequences which are used to find
the different eigenstates of the quantum harmonic oscillator.
ANSWER: Hermite polynomials
Among his inventions were a coin-operated machine that dispensed water for ritual cleansing and a
thrysus that whistled when thrust underwater. Before Fermat, he stated the (*) principle of the
shortest path of light, and other notable inventions include steam-powered fire engines and water organs,
which were described in his Pneumatica. His namesake mean is a weighted average of the arithmetic and
geometric means, though a more famous contribution was proven in his Metrica. For 10 points, name this
Alexandrian whose eponymous formula allows one to find the area of a triangle utilizing its semiperimeter
given the lengths of its sides.
ANSWER: Heron of Alexandria
A generalized form of this statement is named for Brahmagupta, and this statement's namesake
proved it in Proposition 1.8 of his Metrica. To use it, calculate half of the sum of the side lengths,
known as the (*) semiperimeter, to find the difference between the semiperimeter and each side
length, then multiply the semiperimeter by the product of those differences, and take the square root.
For 10 points, identify this geometric theorem, named for a Greek mathematician, which gives the area
of a triangle in terms of side lengths.
ANSWER: Heron's formula [accept Hero's formula]
The Bailey-Borwein-Plou e Formula uses this computational system to compute isolated digits of pi. An
encoding scheme for HD-DVDs and Blu-Ray created by the AACS is formatted in this system and is known
as the 09 F9 code. In Unix and Java, this system is indicated with a prefix of 0x. HTML uses strings of six
numbers in this system to represent colors. In this system, each numeral takes four bits to store. The letters
A through F represent digits larger than nine in this system. For ten points, name this number system with a
base of sixteen.
ANSWER: hexadecimal (accept hexcode, accept base sixteen before mention)
This is the most commonly used system in which there are no cyclic numbers. Vim is
distributed with xxd so it can work with files in this system. The smallest unit of this system is
equivalent to a "nibble". The printf format "percent a" prints a floating-point number in this
system. This system is identifiable by the prefix zero x. Eight groups of four numbers in this
system are used to represent an IPv6 address. A "dump" in this system is commonly assessed
when debugging. Because each digit in this system maps to four bits, it is more readable than,
and very easy to convert to and from, binary. This system uses the digits 0 through 9 and A
through F. For 10 points, name this base 16 numeral system.
ANSWER: hexadecimal [or base 16 until it is read]
Several of these shapes appear in a lattice problem, developed in Korea, that is similar to magic
squares and is named for tortoises. Each face of a truncated tetrahedron is either a triangle or this
shape. This is the fewest-sided regular polygon that is not a face of any Platonic solid, and this
is also the fewest-sided polygon with more diagonals than sides. The interior angles of this regular
shape each measure 120 degrees, and its diameters divide this shape into equilateral triangles. Name
this polygon whose central angles are each sixty degrees, the shape used to make honeycombs.
ANSWER: regular hexagons [accept regular 6-gons]
Pappus's Theorem deals with collinearity in this polygon, and the regular variety of this polygon is
an orthogonal projection of a 5-simplex. The nth number of this type is equal to two times n squared
minus n, and it has the most sides of any regular polygon which can (*) tile the plane. For regular
polygons of this type, the longest diagonal is twice as long as a side, and the exterior angle is 60 degrees,
meaning that each interior angle is 120 degrees. For ten points, give the general name for a six-sided
polygon.
ANSWER: Hexagon
If these figures are cyclic, their diagonals are all concurrent if the products of alternating sides are equal. A
plane passing through midpoints of half the edges of a cube has a cross-section of one of these polygons.
When regular, these polygons have the greatest number of sides of any that can tessellate the plane. When
they have side-length one, the regular variety of these figures has area 3 root 3 all over 2. The sum of their
interior angles is 720, so, when regular, each angle is 120 degrees. For 10 points, identify these polygons
which have six sides.
ANSWER: hexagons
Truncated icosahedrons (iy-kah-sah-HEE-druns), like a buckyball, are composed of pentagons and this
polygon. The area of a regular type of this polygon can be calculated as three-halves radical three
multiplied by the side length squared. The interior angles of a regular type of this polygon are each one
hundred twenty degrees. The total sum of the interior angles of it is seven hundred twenty degrees. For 10
points, name this polygon with six vertices and six edges.
ANSWER: hexagon
If segments are added connecting consecutive midpoints of the sides of one of these regular polygons, the
new similar polygon has three-fourths the area of the original. These shapes together with pentagons make
up the sides of a truncated icosahedron [ie-KOE-suh-hee-dron], and this shape, triangles, and squares are
the only regular figures that can tessellate a plane. The length of this shape's apothem [ah-POTH-um]
equals its side length times one-half times the square root of three. Name these polygons with six sides.
ANSWER: hexagon (prompt on "6-gon")
A theorem named for this shape concerns three sets of points on two lines, whether the intersection of
certain lines connecting them are collinear and is named for Pappus. A persistent cloud pattern on the North
Pole of Saturn is in this shape. Pascal's theorem involves inscribing one of these shapes in a conic section.
A "close-packed" lattice named for this shape gives the most efficient packing of spheres. In terms of
number of sides, this is the largest regular polygon that can be used to tessellate a plane. The carbons in the
compound benzene take this shape. For 10 points, identify this polygon with six sides.
ANSWER: hexagon
Like a quadrilateral, this shape can be used to divide a cube into two congruent parts, and though it is not
used for the face of any Platonic solids, it is used for some of the faces of several Archimedean solids, such
as the truncated tetrahedron. Uniquely for regular shapes, its circumradius is equal to its side length, and, as
with triangles and squares, the regular version of this shape can tessellate the plane alone. The regular
polygon of this shape has nine diagonals and interior angles of one hundred twenty degrees. Name this
polygon with six sides.
ANSWER: Hexagon (accept 6-gon before six is mentioned)
This shape inscribed in a circle can be used to produce three collinear points by Pascal's theorem.
The closest packing of spheres requires either face-centered cubic or a packing named for this shape.
These shapes have a circumradius equal to their side length. Each vertex is surrounded by three of
these shapes when they tessellate the plane, the fewest for any regular polygon. There are 12 (*)
pentagons and 20 of these in a truncated icosahedron. When regular, these shapes have 120 degree interior
angles. For 10 points, name these polygons with six sides.
ANSWER: hexagons [or regular hexagons]
The "Tucker" one of these objects is inscribed within a reference triangle. A regular one can be constructed
by starting with two congruent circles with the center of one on the circumference of the other, then
repeatedly drawing circles centered at the intersection points. Regular polygons of this type are the most
perimeter-efficient way to tile the plane, and the circumradius of one of them equals the side length. The
area of a regular one with side length x is 3 halves radical 3 x squared. Name this shape with internal angles
summing to 720 degrees and-in the regular case- external angles that are each 60 degrees, defined by
having 6 sides.
ANSWER: hexagons [accept 6-gon until "6"]
He provided a solution to Waring's problem and demonstrated the basis theorem in invariant theory. His
work dealing with Euclidian geometry culminated in a set of 21 axioms for that field. A thought experiment
about countable infinity is known as this man's Grand hotel and both infinite dimensional spaces and vector
spaces in which an inner product can be defined bear his name. Godel's incompleteness theorem frustrated
his attempts at a proof that all mathematics derives from a finite set of consistent axioms, his namesake
program. For 10 points, identify this German mathematician, the leader of the formalist school, who at a
conference in Paris in 1900 proposed a series of 23 namesake problems.
ANSWER: David Hilbert
This mathematician names the theorem that Noetherian [nur-THAIR-ee-un] rings have Noetherian
polynomial rings, and provided the first solution to Waring's problem. With Richard Courant, he wrote the
textbook Methods of Mathematical Physics, and on his own, wrote Foundations of Geometry. Like Peano,
this mathematician names a square plane-filling curve, and he used an analogy to explain infinite cardinal
numbers with his paradox of the Grand Hotel. His namesake spaces, generalized by Hadamard spaces, are
complete inner product spaces. Name this mathematician who challenged the 1900 International Congress
of Mathematicians with a list of 23 unsolved problems.
ANSWER: David Hilbert
A tensor product of two objects named for this man is isometrically isomorphic to a space of
operators named for him and Schmidt. Wrightman's axioms suggest that a construct named for
this man exists that is acted upon by the Poincare group in a unitary manner. A result named for
this man states that a polynomial ring over a Noetherian ring is itself Noetherian. A finite- orinfinite
dimensional space in which an inner product is defined is named for this man. A problem
in this man's program was shown to be impossible by Godel's incompleteness theorem, and he
included the continuum hypothesis and the Riemann hypothesis in another outline of work for
the next century. For 10 points, name this German mathematician who laid out a list of 23
difficult-to-solve problems at the beginning of the 20th century.
ANSWER: David Hilbert
This person's namesake function is a generalization of length to integer-graded modules over graded rings.
This thinker's namesake symbol returns 1 if a three-variable quadratic equation is solvable with its two padic inputs as coefficients. This is the first namesake of a type of operator useful in the study of Fredholm
integral equations with symmetric kernels; the study of such equations is known as his and Schmidt's
namesake theory and those operators are also bounded in his and Schmidt's namesake norm. Like Peano,
this mathematician has a namesake curve of limiting Hausdorf dimension 2 which is his namesake squarefilling curve. This mathematician names complete inner product spaces equipped with complete L-2 norms,
all of which are Banach spaces. For 10 points, name this mathematician perhaps better known for posing
twenty-three important problems in mathematics.
ANSWER: David Hilbert
This man convinced the editorial board of Mathematische Annalen to dissolve and start over in order
to remove L.E.J. Brouwer, who attacked this man's basis theorem for being non-constructive. Kurt Godel's
incompleteness proofs showed the impossibility for this man's research program to find a provably
consistent and finite set of axioms for all mathematics. He claimed that "in mathematics there is no
'ignorabimus'" at a 1900 conference where he discussed the continuum hypothesis and Riemann
hypothesis. For ten points, name this German mathematician who presented 23 namesake unsolved
problems.
ANSWER: David Hilbert
The GNS construction validates the use of these spaces because it derives them as representations of
positive forms on a C-star algebra. Symmetric or antisymmetric tensor products of these spaces yield
a Fock space. A function from one of them to itself need only be surjective and norm-preserving to be
a linear unitary operator, by Wigner's theorem; such operators represent a symmetry. These spaces
can be infinite-dimensional, have (*) an inner product, and are complete with respect to the norm induced
by the inner product. They include the space of all square-integrable functions, big L 2. The observables of
a quantum system, like spin and angular momentum, are represented by linear operators on them. For 10
points, identify these spaces named for the person who compiled a list of 23 unsolved problems in
mathematics in 1900.
ANSWER: Hilbert spaces [prompt on "Banach (spaces)"]
The person who solved this problem went on to propose an algorithm to solve the word problem for
groups, and also showed that if an ordered pair on a plane is selected from the hyperreal numbers,
the parallel postulate doesn-t hold. Dupont and Sah used the central relation of this problem to
derive a few results in K-theory, and algebraic K-theory was partly developed due to this problem's
solution. The solution of this problem relied on the lemma that if the cosine of alpha is equal to onethird, then alpha divided by pi is irrational. Sydler's theorem gives cases in which the answer to this
problem is "yes", and the Bolyai-Gerwin theorem solves the equivalent problem in two dimensions.
An important quantity used to solve this problem is an element of the tensor product of R with the quotient
space R divided by Q pi. That quantity is the Dehn invariant, which is equal for two figures if and only if
they are scissors-congruent and have the same volume. For 10 points, name this problem, which asks
whether a polyhedron can be cut up and reassembled into any other polyhedron of equal volume.
ANSWER: Hilbert's Third Problem (accept anything involving cutting up a polyhedron and reassembling it into another one)
Recent changes proposed to this by Whatwg include canvas and article elements. It comes in strict,
traditional, and frameset versions. Common attributes include name, id, and href. Based on work done by
Tim Berners-Lee, official specifications are published by the W3C. Components created from this can be
manipulated by DOM, styles are applied via CSS, and dynamic interaction through javascript. For ten
points identify this markup language used to write web pages.
ANSWER: HTML [or Hypertext Markup Language; prompt on web pages]
Versions of this language are set by prefacing files with a DOCTYPE declaration. Some programs read this
language in "quirks mode" but the "standard mode" is more common. Objects in this language are managed
by the Document Object Model, or DOM. Invented by Tim Berners-Lee and maintained by the (*) W3C,
this language uses angled brackets called tags for defining elements such as headers and bodies. The
appearance of constructs made using this language can be controlled using CSS, while interactive elements
for use with this language can be made with Javascript. The 5th standard was recently released for, for 10
points, what markup language used to design web pages?
ANSWER: HTML or HyperText Markup Language
One project attempting to replace this protocol is SPDY (speedy). Comet is set of techniques to allow
pushing over this protocol. Version 1.1 added pipelining. Two less commonly used verbs are TRACE and
HEAD, while the two most important methods are POST and GET. The secure version uses TLS and SSL
for encryption. This usually operates over port 80. For 10 points, name this protocol used to request HTML
documents and other items on the web, and whose name is seen before the colon slash slash in a web
address.
ANSWER: HTTP [or Hypertext Transfer Protocol]
One definition of this curve is the locus of all points whose distances to a fixed point and to a vertical line
are in the same ratio of r greater than one. A more common definition of this curve the locus of points the
difference whose distances to two fixed points are the same positive constant. The eccentricity of this curve
is greater than one. Resulting from the intersection of the double-sided right circular cone with a plane
parallel to the axis of the cone, name this conic section.
ANSWER: hyperbola
An operator possessing real and distinct eigenvalues is referred to as "strictly" this. At this kind of
point, the principal curvatures have opposite signs and the Gaussian curvature is negative. The wave
equation is the prototypical example of this kind of PDE. The degenerate form of one object with this
name consists of (*) two intersecting lines. The function "e to the x minus e to the minus x all over 2" is
called this type of sine. The equation "x squared over a squared minus y squared over b squared" is an
example of an object with this name. An eccentricity greater than one characterizes, for 10 points, what
conic section which has two non-connected curves?
ANSWER: hyperbolae [or hyperbolic, or word forms]
Poincare's disk and half-plane models describe this kind of space. This type of partial differential
equation includes the one-dimensional wave function, and the shape of a catenary is modeled by this
type of [*] cosine. Lobachevsky developed its type of geometry, which allows for infinite parallel lines
between a line and a point. The reciprocal function is an example of this object defined by two oblique
asymptotes and an eccentricity greater than one. For 10 points, give this term for a conic section, the set of
all points a constant difference away from two foci.
ANSWER: hyperbola [accept hyperbolic space, hyperbolic cosine, etc. when appropriate]
The graph of x to a negative power is known as one of these "of Fermat". This curve is the circular inverse
of a lemniscate of Bernoulli. When this curve is revolved about an axis, the resulting surface can have one
sheet or two depending on whether it was rotated around the conjugate or transverse axis. The degenerate
version of this shape consists of two intersecting lines, which in the non-degenerate case form its
asymptotes. This curve is the locus of points whose distances to two fixed points have a constant difference.
For ten points, identify this conic section with eccentricity greater than one, exemplified by the graph of x
squared minus y squared equals one.
ANSWER: hyperbola
The Poincare Disk models this type of geometry for which a triangle's angles sum to less than 180 degrees.
The cosine function named for this is equivalent to the traditional analog of the quantity x over the square
root of negative one and is pronounced cosh [kawsh]. For 10 points, give this term that refers to the locus
of all points with a constant ratio between the distances from the directrix and the focus in algebra or the
conic section through both nappes of a cone in geometry, a degenerate form of which is two intersecting
lines.
ANSWER: Hyperbola [Accept word forms including Hyperbolic Geometry Prompt on NonEuclidean or Lobachevskian]
A pair function partially named for this geometric object is defined as e to the x plus or minus e to the
negative x, all over 2. Its degenerate form is a pair of intersecting lines, which occurs when its discriminant
is zero. It can be produced by the intersection of a plane with both halves of a double cone. This figure has
an eccentricity greater than one and possesses two asymptotes and two foci. For 10 points, name this conic
section which can be produced by the equation y = 1/x ("y equals one over x").
ANSWER: hyperbola
The Lemniscate of Bernoulli is the inverse transform of these figures that, when centered at the
origin, have the parametric equations "x equals a secant t" and "y equals b tangent t." They can be
defined with a line called the transverse axis, and they are the shape of the orbit of an (*) unbound
object. It is defined as the set of all points on a plane such that the difference between the two focal points is
constant. For 10 points, name this conic section that has an eccentricity greater than one, exemplified by the
graph of y equals one over x.
ANSWER: hyperbola
One partial differential equation of this type is the wave equation, which can be written "u sub x x minus u
sub t t equals zero". Since it has a signature with three pluses and one minus, Minkowski space is a space of
this type, in which rotations are performed by the Lorentz transformation. One function that is a mean of a
positive and negative exponential is named for this geometric figure. Any open Keplerian orbit with
positive specific energy and positive kinetic energy at infinity must have this form, which is characterized
by an eccentricity greater than one. For 10 points, the figure produced by "y equals one over x" is what type
of conic section?
ANSWER: hyperbola
This shape shows where a sonic boom can be heard on the ground at any given time, its three dimensional
analog gives the shape of a nuclear reactor cooling tower, and it gives the path of an object that exceeds
escape velocity if that path is not a ray. It can be graphed parametrically by setting one variable equal to a
secant function and the other equal to a tangent function, and it can be used to create an alternative
trigonometry which gives rise to a catenary curve. When every point on this curve is compared to two fixed
points, the distances are a constant difference. Name this conic section with an eccentricity greater than one
which contains two branches.
ANSWER: hyperbola
On most of the Earth, the shadow of a sundial traces out a path of this shape. This shape is
generated by a parametric graph with one coordinate equal to the tangent function and the other
equal to the secant function. A group of functions is based on doubling the area between one of these
shapes, a segment connecting this shape to the origin, and the x-axis. One of those functions has a 
catenary-shaped graph, and those functions are analogues of the trigonometric functions. One of
these shapes is created by graphing y = 1/x ["y equals one over x"]. Name these conic sections with
eccentricities greater than one that consist of two asymptotic branches.
ANSWER: hyperbolas
This type of knot has a complement with constant curvature -1, while the map of this type has no
eigenvalues with absolute value 1. The Poincare disk and the Klein-Beltrami model are models for
the geometry of this type, which is sometimes named for Lobachevsky and states that there is more
than one straight line through a given point P that does not (*) intersect a given line l. Functions
described by this adjective are defined as e to the z plus or minus e to the negative z and are named for
corresponding trigonometric functions. For 10 points, give this adjective which also describes a curve with
asymptotes defined as the locus of points, one example of which is represented by x times y equals 1.
ANSWER: hyperbolic [accept word forms]
Properties in this geometric system conclude that two of its namesake lines perpendicular to the same
namesake line are non-intersecting, that the sum of the measures of the angles in its namesake triangle is
less than 180 degrees, that namesake triangles with the same angle sum have the same area, that similar
namesake triangles are congruent, and that there is an upper bound for the area of one of these namesake
triangles. Henri Poincare modeled this form of geometry as the geometry of circles orthogonal to a fixed
circle on the plane through the center of a sphere representing physical space. In Fundamental Concepts of
Geometry, Bruce Meserve defines this form of geometry as "the subgeometry of real projective geometry
that leaves the ideal conic invariant." For 10 points, identify this branch of non-Euclidean planar geometry
named for the central conic section with two distinct real ideal points, initially named by Apollonius.
ANSWER: hyperbolic plane geometry [DO NOT ACCEPT hyperbola.]
This mathematical system can be modeled in the conformal disk model, or for the two-dimensional case by
the half-plane model, both of which are named for Poincare (poin-kar-AY). This system incorporates the
ultraparallel theorem and possesses negative curvature, allowing Saccheri (suh-CAIR-ee) quadrilaterals in it
to have acute summit angles. That is a consequence of allowing multiple lines through a particular point to
be parallel to a given line, which also means that triangles in this type of system have degree sum less than
one hundred eighty degrees. Developed by Janos (YAH-noash) Bolyai and Nikolai Lobachevsky, name this
type of geometric system that violates Euclid's (YOO-klid-s) fifth postulate, contrasted with Euclidean and
elliptical geometries.
ANSWER: hyperbolic geometry [prompt on non-Euclidean geometry/ies; accept Bolyai-Lobachevskian geometry before "Lobachevsky"]
When this function is applied to the natural logarithm of the golden mean it returns one half. The derivative
of this function's inverse is the reciprocal of the square root of the quantity x squared plus one, and any
solution with initial condition y equals zero to the differential equation of y double-prime equals y must be a
multiple of this function. For small values of x, this function can be approximated by x plus x cubed over
six. This function itself is given by the formula one half times the quantity e to the x, minus e to the negative
x. Name this function that, when it is inputted half of the area confined by the x-axis, the right half of the
curve x squared minus y squared equals one, and a segment connecting the origin to that curve, returns the
y-coordinate of the point of intersection.
ANSWER: hyperbolic sine function [do not accept or prompt on a partial answer; accept sinh; accept sinch; accept shine]
The n-th power of this number is equal to this number raised to the power of n mod four. This number
multiplies the sine term in both de Moivre's formula and Euler's formula. e raised to this number times pi is
equal to negative one according to Euler's identity. The term containing this number has its sign changed
when taking the complex conjugate. For 10 points, identify this number defined as the square root of
negative one and which is the unit of imaginary numbers.
ANSWER: i [or j; or the imaginary unit until "imaginary" is read]
This number to the power of itself is about 0.20788, or e to the negative pi over two power. This number
is multiplied times the sine function in De Moivre's formula. It is related to e, pi, 1 and 0 by Euler's identity.
This number is equal to its own fifth power, and both it and its opposite are the solutions to the equation
x^2+1=0. Used to form complex numbers, for 10 points, identify this number equal to the square root of -1
and is represented by a single letter.
ANSWER: i [or the imaginary unit]
The matrix representation of this number is an antidiagonal 2-by-2 matrix with entries negative one and
positive one. The argument of this number is pi over 2. This is the only number on the upper unit half-circle
which is equal to the negative of its conjugate. This number multiplies the sine function in de Moivre's
formula. This constant appears in the exponent in Euler's formula. The cube of this nonzero number equals
negative one times itself. e to the power of "pi times this" equals negative one. Adding a nonzero multiple
of this unit number to a real number yields a strictly complex number. For 10 points, name the imaginary
unit, defined as the square root of negative one.
ANSWER: i [or j; or negative i; or negative j; accept the imaginary unit until mentioned; accept the unit imaginary number until "imaginary unit"; accept the square root of negative one until mentioned; accept mathematically-equivalent answers]
Composing multiplication by this number with the exponential function gives a function that is
equal to the negative of its second derivative. Multiples of this number plus one-half give all
nontrivial zeros of the zeta function via the Riemann hypothesis. It forms a basis for the (*)
quaternions alongside one and two similar numbers with which it anti-commutes. The first non-trivial fourth
root of unity, this number has magnitude 1 and polar angle 90 degrees in the complex plane. For 10 points,
identify this complex number, the square root of negative one.
ANSWER: i [or the imaginary number; prompt on square-root of negative one]
The dihedral angles in this solid have an angle equal to the arccosine of negative root five over three, which
is about 138 degrees. All of its vertices can be sorted into groups of four that form golden rectangles. One
of these solids with side length two can be placed in rectangular coordinates so that each point has one
coordinate equal to zero, one coordinate equal to plus or minus one, and one coordinate equal to the golden
ratio. It contains thirty edges and twelve vertices, and each vertex brings together five triangles. Name this
platonic solid, the dual of the dodecahedron, whose name is derived from the Greek for twenty because it
has twenty sides.
ANSWER: icosahedron
If two vertices [VER-tuh-sees] of this shape are on the z-axis, the other vertices are all approximately 63.4
degrees from the z-axis. In Cartesian coordinates, this shape's vertices can be placed so each has
coordinates whose absolute values are zero, one, and the golden ratio. This shape's surface area is a side
length squared times five root three. Using the center of each face of this shape as a vertex creates a
dodecahedron. Each vertex of this shape is the vertex of five triangles. Name this Platonic solid with twenty
faces.
ANSWER: icosahedron or icosahedra
One of these types of relationships uses different numbers from the Fibonacci sequence and is named after
Catalan, though a special case of that relationship is named after Cassini. The relationship of this type
named after Fibonacci and Brahmagupta shows the relationship between squares of magnitudes of vectors
and is a special case of the type named after Lagrange. In addition to those examples, which are equations
which are always true no matter what values the variables take on, another definition of this term is a
function that returns its argument. This term also refers to the number zero with respect to addition. Give
this term which also refers to a matrix that has the value one along its main diagonal and zero everywhere
else.
ANSWER: identity/ies
The only idempotent, invertible matrix is one denoted by this term. An elementary matrix differs from a
matrix denoted by this term by only a single row operation. The matrix denoted by this term is a square
matrix with ones in the main diagonal and zeroes elsewhere. This type of function always returns its
argument. This term is often applied to mathematical relations like sine squared of theta plus cosine
squared of theta equals one. It is one and zero for multiplication and addition, respectively. For 10 points,
name this element that does not change the output of a binary operation.
ANSWER: the identity element
The assumption in Britton's lemma is that the word is equal to this. Any element of a coset H acts as one
of these for H. In a group, if an element is of this type, it must commute with all other group elements and
furthermore there is only one of these elements in a group. This is the result of a function composed with its
inverse. In algebra, there are usually written as e. For matrices, this a matrix with ones down the diagonal
and zeros elsewhere. For 10 points, name these elements and functions that preserve the operand
exemplified by how one times any integer b is b.
ANSWER: identity element [or identity function; or identity map]
In mathematics, this term refers to the subspace spanned by the linearly independent columns of a
matrix, and is equivalent to the column-space. Extensions referring to this type of file include .crw and
.bmp. In optics, if an object is placed between the center and the focus of a converging lens, this thing will
be virtual and upright. Data representing these are usually stored as RGB values, representing colors. For
10 points, name this term which usually refers to a picture.
ANSWER: images
This point is at the center of a Conway Circle. Like the centroid and Nagel point, this lies on the Nagel line.
If a right triangle is placed so that its legs meet at the origin and are on the positive x- and y-axes, then this
point will always be located on the line y equals x. For any triangle, the distance between this point and
each side equals the triangle area divided by semiperimeter [she-my-per-IM-eh-ter]. Name this point at the
intersection of the angle bisectors, the center of an inscribed triangle.
ANSWER: incenter (accept center of inscribed circle or equivalents before it is mentioned at the end)
The radius of this circle is equal to the area divided by the semiperimeter of its generating triangle. For
triangles whose sides are Pythagorean triples, the radius of this circle is a whole number. Its center can be
found by taking the weighted average of vertices of the generating triangle using opposite side lengths as
weights, and it splits the triangle sides into lengths equal to the factors in Heron's Formula. The center of
this circle is at the concurrence of its generating triangle's angle bisectors, and is the same distance from the
three sides of that triangle. Name this circle that is tangent to all three sides of a triangle.
ANSWER: incircle [or inscribed circle]
The Marcinkiewicz-Zygmund (mar-sihn-KEE-vich ZIG-moond) inequality concerns the sum of the
variances of variables with this property. The General Poisson (pwah-SOHN) Approximation Theorem
holds for events with the asymptotic type of this property, and events can have this property as well as
mutual exclusivity only if at least one of them has probability zero. If the covariance, or equivalently the
correlation coefficient, of two events is zero, then they have this property; and the multiplication rule in
probability applies to any number of events that all have this property. Formally, events A and B have this
property if the probability of A given B equals the probability of A. Name this property of statistical events
that means that the outcome of one is unrelated to the outcome of the other.
ANSWER: event independence [or independent events, etc.]
According to the Lindemann-Weierstrass theorem, one form of this property for a set of numbers
implies another form of this property for the corresponding powers of e. In mathematical logic,
forcing is a technique which can be used to prove results regarding consistency and this property.
For a sequence of random variables, this property suffices, but is not necessary, to show that the sum
of their (*) variances is equal to the variance of their sum. In probability, two events have this property if
the probability of their intersection is equal to the product of their probabilities. The elements of a basis for
a vector space have this property. For 10 points, name this property, the linear form of which says no
element can be written as a linear combination of the others.
ANSWER: independence
If a set of solutions to a differential equation have this property, their Wronskian [RAHN-skee-un] is
nonzero. The smallest set of vectors that span a vector space and have this property is known as a basis; this
property for vectors implies that no nontrivial linear combination of them equals the zero vector. The rows
of a matrix must have this quality for the matrix to be invertible. If two random variables satisfy this
property, their correlation coefficient is zero, and if two events have this property, the probability of their
intersection is the product of their probabilities. Identify this property which in probability indicates that the
result of one event has no effect on the result of another.
ANSWER: (linear or statistical) independence [accept word forms of independent]
Coordinates of a random point on a high-dimensional sphere have approximately this property. If
the probabilities of events with this property sum to infinity, then infinitely many will occur,
according to the second Borel-Cantelli lemma. Bayesian networks extensively use its conditional
form. It is an assumption of the Central Limit Theorem and Law of Large Numbers, and for events X and
Y with this property, expectation distributes over multiplication. For ten points, identify this property whose
"linear" variety is possessed by a collection of vectors if none of them can be written as a linear
combination of the other.
ANSWER: Independence
If two random variables have this property, then their covariance is equal to zero as the expected value of
their product is equal to the product of their expected values. Any given element of the basis of a vector
space has this property with respect to any subset of the basis. That's because no basis is formed of vectors
that cannot be written as a linear combination of each other and are therefore linearly this. If two events, A
and B, are this, then the probability of both of them occurring is equal to the probability of A times the
probability of B. The effect of, for 10 points, what type of variable is traditionally measured in science
experiments?
ANSWER: independent [or word forms; do not accept or prompt on "dependent"]
In graph theory, this adjective is synonymous with stable and refers to a set of vertices that are not
connected to each other by any edges. In statistics, this adjective applies to variables that have a correlation
coefficient near zero. In probability, this adjective applies to events if the probability of both events
occurring is the product of the individual probabilities. Name this adjective that in algebra refers to a
variable that is input into a function.
ANSWER: independent or independence
By definition, A and B have this property if the probability of A given B is equal to the probability of A. If
the probability of A is nonzero, having this property precludes A and any other event with nonzero
probability being mutually exclusive. Rearrangement of the definition proves that if A and B have this
property, then the probability of A and B equals the probability of A times the probability of B. Name this
term that describes two events that have no influence on each other.
ANSWER: independence (or independent events)
This relationship is represented by a non-edge in a Bayesian net. The chi-squared distribution is a sum of
normal random variables in this relationship. When this condition holds, the covariance is equal to zero and
the variance is additive. The Gambler's Fallacy arises because the gambler does not realize that separate
trials satisfy this property. Events A and B have this property if the probability of A AND B is the product
of their individual probabilities. For ten points, identify this statistical relationship of two events that do not
inuence each other.
ANSWER: independence (accept conditional independence until the end of the second sentence)
This nation had a Kerala school of science and mathematics. One mathematician from this country
devised a formula that gives the area of general quadrilaterals. Another mathematician from this country
had a lost notebook and was "discovered" by G. H. Hardy. A physicist from this country names particles
with integer spin and contrast with fermions. For 10 points, name this country that was the birthplace of
Ramanujan and Brahmagupta, that became a nuclear power before its neighbor Pakistan.
ANSWER: India
This modern day country was where the problem of finding a circular altar equal in area to a square
altar originated. A mathematician from this country developed a formula for finding the area from the sides
of any quadrilateral inscribed in a circle. That mathematician also set down the first explicit form of the
quadratic equation. A mathematician from the Kerala school in this country first discovered a version of the
mean value theorem. For ten points, name this modern day country where zero was first used as a number,
by Brahmagupta.
ANSWER: India
Peano's [pee-AH-no-z] last axiom defines this technique, whose transfinite type can be used to prove that
the axiom of choice implies Zorn's lemma. A famous incorrect application of it demonstrates that all horses
have the same color, and a version of it that relies on more assumptions is called the strong type. This
method can show that a given expression is always divisible by a given number, or it can verify the closed
formulas for summing arithmetic and geometric sequences. Name this method of mathematical proof that
proves a base case, then proves that if a statement is true for n, it must be true for n+1.
ANSWER: proof by induction [or inductive proof]
This technique's strong form allows for the formula in question to work for not only for some n equal to k,
but n less than k. This tool works by first proving a base case, then showing that if a formula works for
some number n, then it works for "n+1." It is very similar to recursion. This mathematical proof technique
shares its name with a type of logic moving from cases to a general conclusion. For 10 points, name this
proof technique that also labels a type of reasoning that is not deductive.
ANSWER: induction or inductive
Properties of well-ordered sets, such as point-set topologies, are often demonstrated using the
transfinite form of this technique. George Polya used the example of a horse of a different color to
illustrate the subtleties of this technique. The strong form of this technique allows one to assume that
a statement is true for all values in between zero and k. This technique, which is closely related to
recursion, begins by proving a (*) base case and then assuming the namesake hypothesis is true for n;
subsequently, one must demonstrate that a statement holds for the n + 1 case. For 10 points, name this kind
of mathematical proof in which some statement is demonstrated to be true for all natural numbers.
ANSWER: induction [or deductive reasoning; or word forms; prompt on proofs]
Exponentiations of the function one plus x can be approximated by the Bernoulli one of these entities, while
another one governs inner products and is named for Cauchy (koh-SHEE) and Schwarz. Any two numbers
must satisfy one of three properties, two of which are of this type, according to the trichotomy property, and
these types of relations are antisymmetric. The arithmetic-geometric one of these concerns the means of
those types, while the namesake geometric figures as well as metric spaces must satisfy the triangle one of
these relations. Name this type of relation in which two quantities are compared using an order, such as
"less than" or "greater than".
ANSWER: inequality/ies [accept ordering relation before "order"]
The example of this thing named for Erdos [ur-dosh] and Mordell applies to any point inside a triangle. One
of the examples of this, named for Chebyshev [CHEH-bih-shef], limits the probability of attaining a value
more than a given number of standard deviations from the mean. Another example of this type of statement,
relating an inner product to a product of magnitudes, is named for Cauchy and Schwarz. One of these limits
the length of the longest side of a triangle. Name these statements that include less than or greater than
relationships.
ANSWER: inequality or inequalities
One of these which holds for random variables that attain only positive values is named for Markov, while a
more general one is named for Bienayme. Another one of these can be proven by taking the sum of the
quantity p sub j times q sub k minus p sub k times q sub j, quantity squared, and then taking advantage of
the fact that the sum must not be negative. That example is named for Bunyakovsky in Russia but in most
places is known as the Cauchy-Schwarz [koh-shee shvarts] one. The Minkowski one of these statements
generalizes the "triangle" one, which relates the length of one side to the sum of the lengths of the other
two. The solutions to these in a single variable can be expressed by shading a number line, and
multiplication by a negative number causes one of these to be "reversed." Name these mathematical
relations which can be expressed using the operators less than or greater than.
ANSWER: inequality/ies
This is the expected value of money won in a game in which a gambler receives two raised to the k minus
one dollars if it takes k coin flips for the first tail to appear. Hilbert's Paradox of the Grand Hotel addresses
sets of this size, and this is the surface area of Gabriel's Horn and the perimeter of a Koch [koach]
snowflake, which is a type of fractal. The symbol aleph-null is used for the countable version of this value.
Name this value that is large beyond any limit.
ANSWER: infinity (or infinite or unbounded, accept "countable" before it is mentioned, prompt on "undefined")
Georg Cantor proposed two "cardinalities" for this concept, one called "aleph-null" for sets that can be put
into one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers and another called "aleph-one" for sets that
cannot. Name this conceptual value ascribed to the secant of pi over 2 and the cosecant of 0, which is
greater than all other values.
ANSWER: infinity
In set theory, Georg [GAY-awrk] Cantor used "aleph null" to denote a set with this cardinality,
which he called "countable." This is the length of a Turing machine's tape, and Euclid proved that
there are this many (*) prime numbers. In calculus, the limit of 1 over x, as x approaches zero from the
right, takes this value. For 10 points, name this quantity that describes values that are greater than any real
number.
ANSWER: infinity (accept word forms; accept countably infinite or countable before "countable")
The extended real numbers are the real numbers combined with positive and negative versions of this entity,
which comes in uncountable and countable varieties, including aleph null, the cardinality of the set of
natural numbers. A sequence is said to converge if the limit of the terms a sub i as i approaches this entity is
defined. Name this entity, symbolized by a sideways eight, that is contrasted with finite numbers.
ANSWER: infinity
This value is the perimeter of the Koch snowflake, as well as the surface area of Torricelli's trumpet. This
value is the area under the curve of the function 1/x [one over x], a function that approaches this value as x
goes to 0. Euclid demonstrated that there are this many prime numbers. This is the value of the harmonic
series, as well as any divergent series. Horizontal asymptotes can be found by taking the limit as x goes to
this value. For 10 points, name this value attained when numbers get unquantifiably large, represented by a
sideways 8.
ANSWER: infinity [accept word forms like infinite]
Hillel Furstenerg used a topological proof to show that a certain group of numbers have this
property. A proof technique named after this property can be used to show that the square root of 2
is irrational and is known as this kind of "descent". In set theory, aleph numbers are used to describe
the cardinality of sets with this property, which may be countable or uncountable. The continuum
hypothesis states that there are no sets with a cardinality between that of two different sets that with
this property: the (*) integers and reals. L'Hopital's rule is applied to indeterminate forms, which can
contain zero or this quantity. For 10 points, name this mathematical property of having no limit that is
represented with a leminscate symbol.
ANSWER: infinite
In physics, renormalization is used to deal with sort of number. The tape on a Turing Machine is of this
length. The cardinalities of sets of this type are given by aleph numbers. Euclid proved that there are this
many primes. A population of this size is assumed by Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The symbol for this
concept looks like a sideways eight. Pi has this many digits. For 10 points, name this concept that when
applied to the length of a list, implies that it never ends.
ANSWER: infinite [or infinity; or non-finite]
The axiom named after this concept leads to the creation of a set containing all of the natural numbers, and
a point named after this concept allows for compactification. This is used to express the perimeter of a Koch
Snowflake, and one form of this is represented using the symbol aleph-null. This is used to represent the
limit of one over x squared as x approaches zero. Name this concept which is greater than all real numbers.
ANSWER: Infinity (or Infinite) (prompt undefined)
This concept was explored in a thought experiment about the Grand Hotel devised by David Hilbert. The
ordinal number lowercase omega is the smallest number with this property, and the conjecture that there are
no numbers of this type between lowercase omega and capital omega is known as the Continuum
Hypothesis. Sets with this property can be put in one-to-one correspondence with a proper subset. Cardinal
numbers of this type are represented with the letter aleph, with aleph-null being countable and all others
being uncountable. For ten points, name this type of set whose size is larger than any real number.
ANSWER: infinity (accept word forms like "infinite")
These points on an elliptic curve form a Hesse configuration, and any curve dividing the cover of a sphere
into two sections of equal area contains at least four of these. Intersections that are also these are
biflecnodes [bie-FLEC-nodes], and the graph of a polynomial of degree n has at most n-2 of these. When
critical points are not a local max or min, they are these types of points, where a curve goes through its
tangent line. Name these points where the second derivative of a function changes from positive to negative
or vice versa while equaling zero, changing the direction of curvature.
ANSWER: inflection point (accept point of inflection or flex)
The first fundamental form of a surface is essentially an instance of it performed on two elements of
the tangent space. The Bogoliubov type of this operation takes operators as arguments, and in a
Minkowski space this operation is non-degenerate rather than positive definite. Over a complex
Hilbert space, this object is necessarily a Hermitian form, and a Hilbert space is a complete abstract
vector space for which this (*) operation is defined. If the result of this operation on two elements is zero,
they are orthogonal, and setting both arguments of this operation equal gives the norm. A specific case of
this operation is equal to a b cosine theta. For ten points, name this operation which maps two elements of a
vector space to a scalar, an example of which is the dot product in Euclidean space.
ANSWER: Inner product [accept norm until mention; prompt on "dot product" until mention]
The Hermitian variety of this operation is a complex-valued bilinear form in which reversing the order of
arguments of this operation is equivalent to taking a complex conjugate of this operation's result. A common
example of this operation for the space of square-integrable real-valued functions is the integral of the
product of two such functions from minus infinity to plus infinity. Hilbert spaces are vector spaces on which
this operation is defined such that the norm results in a complete metric space. For 10 points, identify this
binary operation which maps two elements of a vector space to an element of the underlying scalar field, as
exemplified by the dot product in Euclidean spaces.
ANSWER: inner product
This data type is most commonly represented using two's complement notation. In many
languages, the keywords short and long are used to define a variable of this data type. Addition and
subtraction on data of this type uses modulo arithmetic, and arrays are (*) indexed by data of this
type. Float and this data type are the most common numerical data types. For 10 points, identify this data
type that only stores whole numbers.
ANSWER: signed binary integers [or integral data type; prompt on binary numbers]
Van Der Wardern's theorem gives the number of ways to color one subset of these numbers, and this result
is generalized by the Szemeredi theorem. The Eisenstein ones are imaginary numbers that lie in the
quadratic field "Q extension square root of negative 3", and the Gaussian ones lie in "Q extension square
root of negative 1". This set of numbers is a cyclic group under addition with cardinality Aleph-null, and a
mapping from the real numbers to them is given by the floor function. Usually denoted by a blackboard "Z",
FTP, name this set of numbers which consists of zero, the positive whole numbers, and the negative whole
numbers.
ANSWER: Integers (Accept "Positive Integers" before Eisenstein)
De Bruijn defined a subset of these entities as "universally bad." These objects can be represented
using twos complement notation. Any real number can be converted to a number of this type using a
function symbolized by square brackets, and the set of these numbers is denoted Z. A Diophantine
equation restricts the solution space to these numbers, and rational numbers can be expressed as a
ratio of two of these numbers. For 10 points, name this set of numbers that includes zero, all natural
numbers, and their negatives.
ANSWER: integers
A folding function maps this set of numbers onto one of its subsets. Matiyasevich showed that
equations that only accepts these numbers as inputs cannot always be solved in a finite number of steps. A
Diophantine equation is an equation whose solutions can only be from this set. When the two parts of a
complex number are this type of number it called Gaussian. Georg Cantor showed that there is no set with
cardinality between this set and the real numbers in the continuum hypothesis. Both the floor and ceiling
functions return numbers from this set. If a number can be formed as fraction of these numbers it is called
rational. For 10 points, name this set of numbers formed by the union of the natural numbers and the
negative natural numbers, denoted with a boldface Z.
ANSWER: integers
The ranges of the floor and ceiling functions are both equal to this set. The continuum hypothesis states
that there is no set with a cardinality between those of the real numbers and this set. A complex number is
Gaussian if its a and b components are both this type of number. The rational numbers can be written as a
fraction of two numbers from this set. For 10 points, name this set of numbers that includes the natural
numbers, their negative counterparts, and zero.
ANSWER: integers
There is no set with a cardinality between that of this set and that of the reals according to Cantor's
continuum hypothesis. Complex numbers whose real and imaginary part are both these numbers are the
Gaussian type. The fundamental theorem of arithmetic concerns the representation of the positive form of
these numbers. Rational numbers can be expressed as quotients of these numbers. For 10 points, name this
set of numbers that consists of the zero and the natural numbers and their negatives.
ANSWER: integers
In an April fool's column, Martin Gardner claimed that "e to the pi radical 163" is one of these. The
Eisenstein ones are proper supersets that are extended with complex numbers. They form an Abelian group
when endowed with addition and a commutative ring when endowed with addition and multiplication, but
they are not a field, as they lack multiplicative inverses. As a set, they have cardinality "aleph 0", although
they cannot be enumerated monotonically. The floor and ceiling functions yield, for 10 points, what type or
numbers represented with a bold "Z," the set that is exactly the union of the natural numbers, their additive
inverses, and zero.
ANSWER: integers
Every finite Abelian group is isomorphic to a direct sum of quotients of this group, as every finite cyclic
group is a quotient of this group, which is itself the only infinite cyclic group. In their namesake type of
domain, cancellation holds because there are no zero divisors. The Eisenstein and Gaussian types of these
numbers form triangular and square lattices in the complex plane. Equivalence classes of pairs of these
numbers are used to define the rational numbers. These numbers are countable, but they are not a field
because they do not support division. For 10 points, name this set of numbers symbolized Z that contains
zero, the natural numbers, and their additive inverses.
ANSWER: integers
A folding function maps this set of numbers onto one of its subsets. No set has a cardinality
between these numbers and the real numbers according to the continuum hypothesis of Georg
Cantor. This set of numbers defines all possible outputs of the (*) floor and ceiling functions. This set
of numbers is symbolized Z, and rational numbers can be expressed as a quotient of these numbers. For 10
points, name this set consisting of the whole numbers and their negatives.
ANSWER: integers
The cardinality of this set can be shown to be countable by creating an isomorphism ("eye"-soh-MOR-fism)
using the functions 2x+1 and two times the absolute value of x. The elements in this set are all of the
possible outputs of the ceiling and floor functions, which have alternative names that include this set. This
set, sometimes represented by a double-struck Z, is a subset of the rational numbers and contains the natural
numbers. Name this set which consists of the union of zero, counting numbers, and the additive inverses of
counting numbers.
ANSWER: integers [accept Z before it is mentioned]
According to Gauss's Polynomial Theorem, a reducible polynomial with coefficients of this type can
be factored into two polynomials with coefficients of this type. The Gaussian numbers of this type
include a complex part, and a ring with no zero divisors is known as this type of domain. Leopold
Kronecker hoped to ground analysis entirely in this set of numbers. This set can be extended from a
smaller one by including the (*) additive inverses of successors to zero as defined by the Peano axioms.
The floor and ceiling functions output a number of this type, and every rational number is a quotient of two
of these numbers. For 10 points, name this set of numbers symbolized Z which includes 0, the natural
numbers, and their negatives.
ANSWER: integers [accept word forms; accept Z before mentioned]
The modular group is isomorphic to a projective special linear group over this ring. In algebraic
geometry, every scheme has a unique morphism to the spectrum of this ring. Since the unit circle's
covering space is the real numbers, its fundamental group is isomorphic to this ring, considered as a
group. Every abelian group is a module over this ring. In the category of rings, this ring is the initial
object. The maximal ideals of this ring are the principal ideals generated by the prime (*) numbers.
This countably infinite ring embeds into Q, and its only units are 1 and -1. Solutions of Diophantine
equations take values from this ring, and the non-negative elements of this ring are known as the natural
numbers. For 10 points, identify this ring symbolized Z.
ANSWER: the integer ring [or Z until it is read]
This set underlies the the fundamental group of a torus, and a circle is the quotient space of the real numbers
by this set. Infinite cyclic groups are isomorphic to this set. The solutions to Pell's Equation must be from
this set, as are all solutions to Diophantine equations. This is the domain of the totient function and the
range of the floor and ceiling functions, which round their input up or down to the nearest one of these
numbers. For ten points, name this set denoted by a capital Z whose members can be classified as even or
odd and which includes all natural numbers and their negatives.
ANSWER: integers (accept Z until mention)
These types of numbers share the same cardinal number as sets referred to as aleph-null. By examining
values less than or equal to x, the floor function of x gives the largest value of these types of numbers,
which are the only solutions allowed by Diophantine equations. Z is used to denote the set of these types of
numbers, which include whole and natural numbers. For 10 points, name these types of numbers such as
negative two, zero, or five.
ANSWER: integers
This set is represented by a blackboard letter Z. Diophantine equations are those which allow only
solutions from this set of numbers. The floor function gives the largest number from this set that is less than
the function's input. The positive types of these are the natural numbers. Rational numbers are those which
can be written as a finite ratio of these numbers. For 10 points, name this set of whole numbers and their
negatives.
ANSWER: integers
Diophantine equations use this type of numbers as variables. They do not form a field and the
cardinality of this class of numbers is the same as the rationals. These are symbolized by a Z. Natural
numbers are a subset of these which are not negative. Sometimes the phrase whole numbers is used to
describe them. For 10 points, name this type of number that when represented as reals have only zeros after
the decimal point, examples of which include negative 17, 0, and 3.
ANSWER: integers
Nonlinear systems with this property can be separated into Lax pairs. The Toda lattice is a classic
example of a system that possesses soliton solutions as well as this property. A system is described by
the Frobenius form of this property if it generates an ideal closed under exterior differentiation,
whereas a completely this Hamiltonian system is a Hamiltonian system admitting the most possible
constants of motion. The (*) three question system lacks this property, causing its solutions to be chaotic.
The Lebesgue form of this property extends the Riemann form to sets of general measure. For 10 points,
name this property which implies roughly that a given function has an antiderivative.
ANSWER: integrable [accept word forms such as integrability, integration]
One version of this property uses the existence of the Cousin's lemma's guaranteed delta-fine sets
where delta is a gauge function. That variant is named for Henstock and Kurzweil. Given a set,
determining if a function has another version of this property involves sets that are non-empty,
closed under complementation, and closed under countable unions of elements. Those (*) sigmaalgebra sets have subsets that are measurable. Another form of this property uses refinements of partitions
to find that the supremum of the infimum and the infimum of the supremum of certain sums are equal.
Forms of this are named Darboux, Lebesgue, and Riemann. For 10 points, name this property that, by the
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, means a continuous function must have an antiderivative.
ANSWER: integrable [accept Riemann integrable; accept Lebesgue integrable; accept HenstockKurzweil integrable; accept Denjoy integrable; accept Peron integrable; accept gauge integrable; there are probably a lot more too, so prompt on other types of being integrable; accept any word forms such as integrating or being able to take the integral, etc]
One application of this operation is named for Dawson, who used it to approximate equations in heat
conduction, and Clenshaw and Curtis developed a method for computing a given example of one given a
Chebyshev-approximated function. Applying this operation to t to the power z minus one times e to the
negative t yields the gamma function, while applying it to one over the square root of one minus k squared
sin squared theta is called complete first elliptic one. Applying it to a probability density functions yields a
distribution function, and it comes in flavors named for Stieltjes, Lebesgue, and Riemann. For 10 points,
name this operation that by the fundamental theorem of calculus is also an antiderivative.
ANSWER: integral [accept word forms]
A condition in which this operation commutes with a limit is given by the Dominated Convergence
Theorem. Approximating a function with step functions is the key to the Lebesgue type of this operation. By
inverting the Product Rule, one can perform this operation "by parts". This operation can be approximated
using either Simpson's Rule or Riemann sums, and it can be computed exactly as capital F of b minus
capital F of a according to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Often achieved using antiderivatives, for
ten points, name this operation in calculus which computes areas.
ANSWER: integral (accept word forms like "integration", accept Lebesgue integral, prompt on "antiderivative" or "antidifferentiation")
One type of this process which yields inverse Laplace transforms is named for Bromwich. One method for
performing it uses measure theory and is named for Lebesgue [luh-BAY], and a numerical method for
performing it was developed by Runge and Kutta. According to Fubini's theorem, the order of performing it
doesn-t matter over rectangular regions, and when done for a complicated product, it can be resolved using
the ILATE or LIPET rule before doing it by parts. Typically introduced using Riemann sums, for 10 points,
identify this operation, which gives the area under a curve and is the inverse of differentiation.
ANSWER: integration [accept equivalents like integral]
The total effect of a vector field on a given curve is calculated by the "line" variety of this operation. A
series of parabolic curves is used to approximate this operation with Simpson's Rule, and this operation
can also be approximated using the trapezoid rule or less accurate Riemann sums. This operation's definite
form is used to calculate the area under a curve. For 10 points, name this calculus operation which is
contrasted with differentiation and uses anti-derivatives.
ANSWER: integration [or integral]
A convolution is equivalent to a form of this object named for Stieltjes that involves two functions.
Methods for calculating them include one named for Newton and Coates, as well as one using parabolas
named for Simpson. The Lesbesgue type of this object generalizes a variety based on Jordan measure that
can be thought of as a limiting sum of infintesimal rectangles, a form named for Riemann. For 10 points,
name this generalization of area paired with the derivative according to the fundamental theorem of
calculus.
ANSWER: Integral [accept word forms, accept definite or indefinite integral, prompt on "quadrature"]
One way of approximating this method involves using graphed values to determine the midpoint of the
height of a rectangle. A similar approximation of it can be done by setting equally spaced y-values of a
graphed function as the heights of a trapezoid. When given upper and lower limits, this method is described
as being definite. This operation's indefinite form is the same as the antiderivative. For 10 points, name this
operation of calculus that can be represented by the area under a curve and which is the opposite of
derivation.
ANSWER: integration [or integrals]
The dominated convergence theorem can be used to show the commutativity of a sequence of
functions and the Lebesgue one of this. Cauchy's residue theorem can be used to in this method.
Stokes's theorem and Green's theorem can be used to relate two types of this, while Fubini's theorem
allows multivariable equations to go through this method in any order of variables. The determinant of the
Jacobian matrix can be used in multivariable functions to perform the higher dimensional task of usubstitution as a means to simplify this method. For 10 points, identify this method to determine the area
under a curve, the opposite of differentiation.
ANSWER: Integration (Accept word forms)
In two dimensions, Green's Theorem relates two forms of this operation. This operation can be
approximated using parabolic segments with Simpson's Rule. It can be done using trigonometric
substitution, and is rigorously defined for continuous functions using a partition into (*) rectangular
regions in a Riemann sum. When it lacks bounds, it is called indefinite. For 10 points, name this calculus
operation, an inverse operation to the derivative which finds the area under a given curve.
ANSWER: integration [or integral]
Performing this operation in polar, cylindrical, or spherical coordinates yields a special case of the change
of variables, a process which requires using a Jacobian. A generalization of this operation in measure theory
is named for Lebesgue (luh-BAY). Methods for doing it numerically include the trapezoid rule, while
additional techniques include doing it by parts and u-substitution. One type of this operation is evaluated at
limits while another requires a namesake constant; these are the definite and indefinite types. For 10 points,
name this operation from calculus often interpreted as the limit of a Riemann sum, the opposite of
differentiation, used to find the area under a curve.
ANSWER: integration [accept word forms; prompt on "antidifferentiation"]
In a method named for Gauss for this process, Legendre polynomials are used when the weight function
equals one. Changing the order of this process is allowed by Fubini's theorem. The disk and shell methods
use this technique to find the volume of a solid of revolution. Methods for this process include the NewtonCotes formulas, one of which is Simpson's rule. The acronym LIATE can be used as a guideline in
performing it "by parts." For 10 points, name this process from calculus that can be used to find the area
under a curve, and is the inverse of differentiation.
ANSWER: integration [or quadrature; also accept word forms, such as "taking the integral"]
This operation can be carried out on well-behaved functions of multiple variables in any order by
Fubini's theorem, and the value of this operation around a closed curve can be related to the value of
it over the interior by Green's theorem. Doing it (*) "by parts" and with u-substitution are strategies of
performing this operation. The "disk" or "shell" types of this operation can be used to find the volumes of
solids of revolution. This operation can be defined using Riemann sums and interpreted as the area under a
curve. For 10 points, name this operation which, according to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, is the
opposite of differentiation.
ANSWER: integration (accept integral or word forms)
In some cases when this operation cannot be performed, a Cauchy principal value can be assigned instead.
An extension of this operation to more abstract sets of functions assigns measures to different objects before
performing this operation and is named for Lebesgue. The interchange of multiple instances of this
operation is governed by Fubini's theorem. The substitution and "by parts" techniques for doing this require
a change of limits to this operation's definite form which, unlike the indefinite form, does not require an
arbitrary additive constant. For 10 points, name this process which calculates the area under a curve, the
opposite of differentiation.
ANSWER: integration [or taking an integral]
The line type of this operation is related to its double type by Green's theorem, which is a special case of
Stoke's theorem. Another form of this operation can be simplified by applying the divergence theorem, and
the Newton-Cotes formula and Simpson's rule approximate this operation. This operation can also be
approximated by trapezoids and Riemann sums. For 10 points, identify this operation which usually returns
the area under a curve, the opposite of differentiation.
ANSWER: integration [or antidifferentiation until "differentiation" is read]
One method to perform this operation is known as partial fraction expansion. Green's theorem relates
the line form of this operation to the double form. One way to approximate this operation is with the
trapezoidal rule, which improves upon the rectangle method. The fundamental theorems of calculus both
involve this operation. For 10 points, name this operation that allows one to find the area under a curve and
whose indefinite form is known as an antiderivative.
ANSWER: integration [or equivalents like "calculating an integral"]
One method of performing this operation involves taking successive extrapolations to reduce the error term
by successive powers of 2. Another method for this operation chooses the optimal abcissas by evaluating
the roots of the orthogonal interpolating polynomial. In addition to Romberg's method and Gaussian
quadrature, another method for doing this operation constructs a weighted partition of the function being
operated on and calculates Lagrange interpolating polynomials for each partition. That is the Newton-Cotes
method, which has a special case with error proportional to f-double-prime and uses a quadrilateral. For 10
points, name this mathematical operation which can be performed numerically via the Simpson or trapezoid
rules and consists of evaluating an antiderivative.
ANSWER: numerical integration [accept anything mentioning the calculation of definite integrals]
According to Fubini's theorem, the order in which this operation is performed does not matter. The
surface variety forms the basis of the divergence theorem, while the line form of this operation can be
calculated with Green's theorem. If one of their bounds is positive or negative infinity, they are known as
improper. Depending on whether or not their endpoints are defined, they can be either definite or indefinite,
and they can be approximated using Riemann's sum. For 10 points, name this operation in calculus which
can be used to find the area under a curve.
ANSWER: integration [or equivalents such as taking an integral]
This operation is performed on the difference between the partial derivatives of two vector valued
functions according to Green's theorem. Stokes- theorem equates the surface type of this operation
with the line type, and this operation is performed on velocity to yield (*) arc length. When this
operation is performed on tan(x), the result is the negative natural log of cos(x), and when performed on 1/x
the result is the ln(x). The First Fundamental Theorem of Calculus can be used to evaluate, for ten points,
which operation also known as the antiderivative and used to find the area under a curve.
ANSWER: Integration or Taking the Integral [Accept antiderivative before mentioned]
One class of methods for performing this operation takes the sum from one to n of a weighting function
times a function and is accurate to degree two n minus one. The number of increments must be a multiple
of three in order to use the 3/8 rule for this procedure. That class is named for Gauss. The n equals two case
of the Newton-Cotes formula for this procedure approximates a curve using parabolas, and is called
Simpson's Rule. This procedure can more easily be done with trapezoids or rectangles, when it's called a
Riemann sum. For 10 points, name this procedure used to find the area under a curve.
ANSWER: numerical integration [or word forms; or quadrature]
The Dirac delta function is designed such that when it is subject to this procedure, the result is 1, and one
theorem that relates two types of this operation is called Green's theorem. Differential equations are often
solved by performing this type of operation, and an approximation of this operation is obtained by
performing a Riemann sum. For 10 points, name this operation that according to the Fundamental Theorem
of Calculus is the opposite of a derivative.
ANSWER: integral
Stratonovich introduced a version of this operation for stochastic processes. Another type of this
operation is named after Lebesgue (le bay). Fubini's theorem specifies the conditions under which the
iterated type of this operation can be performed in a different order. Doing this (*) "by parts" is useful
for certain products of functions. Another type of this operation is named after Riemann, and it can be
approximated using the rectangle method. For 10 points, name this operation which is connected to
differentiation by the fundamental theorem of calculus.
ANSWER: integration [accept word forms]
By Fubini's theorem, multiple instances of this operator can be performed in any order, and performing it
on a product of functions can be done "by parts." Using the disk or shell methods, one can use this operator
to find the volume of a solid of revolution. First defined rigorously by Bernhard Riemann, this operator can
be described graphically as finding the area under the graph of a function. For 10 points, name this function,
which by the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is the inverse function of differentiation.
ANSWER: integration [or integral]
This operation was extended by Lebesgue, and Fubini's Theorem states that the order in which it is
performed may be reversed. One type of this operation can be performed with the LIATE rule,
which advises that logarithmic functions should be u while exponential functions should be (*) dv.
This operation can be estimated using Simpson's rule, which is constructed from the midpoint rule and the
trapezoidal rule, and performing this operation on the term x results in x squared over two plus C. For ten
points, name this mathematical operation used to find the area under a curve, the opposite of a derivative.
ANSWER: Integration (accept word forms like integral or integrating, prompt on antiderivative and word forms)
Fubini's theorem states that the iterated forms of this operation can be done in any order. The line form of
this operation is evaluated along a curve and can be calculated using Green's theorem. A Riemann sum uses
rectangles to approximate this operation, which becomes more accurate as the widths of the rectangles
decrease. When given upper and lower limits, this operation takes its definite form. For 10 points, name this
operation that is defined as the inverse of taking a derivative by the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus and
often used to find the area under a curve.
ANSWER: integration [accept word forms; prompt on "anti-derivative"]
This operation was defined with respect to a general measure by Lebesgue. The Jacobian determinant is an
extra factor of "r squared sine theta" required to perform this operation in spherical coordinates. It can be
approximated using the Newton-Cotes formulas, Simpson's rule, or the trapezoidal rule. It can be
performed by parts or by u-substitution, and can be defined as the limit of a Riemannian sum. The
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus relates it to another operation. For 10 points, name this operation giving
the area under a curve, the opposite of differentiation.
ANSWER: integration or integral
Euler defined a formula for performing this operation on trigonometric functions by rewriting trigonometric
expressions in terms of "e to the i times x" and "e to the minus i times x." One method for approximating
this operation is by using Simpson's rule, which can be derived by using the trapezoidal rule. Another
method of approximating this operation is by Riemann sums. For 10 points, name this mathematical
operation, also known as the anti-derivative, which is defined as finding the area underneath a curve.
ANSWER: taking/finding the integral [accept word forms like integration; prompt on anti-derivative before read]
Driver improved upon Bismut's version of this formula for jump processes. Darboux's formula is a
consequence of its repeated application and Abel's formula is its analogous discrete method. It can be
derived by using the product rule on two functions then applying the fundamental theorem of calculus and
rearranging terms. One variant of takes the products of a item in a table with the item to its lower right then
sums the products using alternating signs. That tabular method is used when this is done repeatedly. The
LIATE rule is a heuristic for using it where L stands for logarithm and I for inverse trig function. For 10
points, name this integration technique that states that the integral of u dv equals uv minus the integral of v
du.
ANSWER: integration by parts
On vector fields, this relation generalizes to the first Green's identity, and finding the Laplace
transform of f prime of t requires using this relation. The tic-tac-toe or tabular method is simply
applying this identity repeatedly. The LIATE heuristic is used to determine which function should
substitute which variable in this identity, and usually logarithmic functions are preferred to (*)
trigonometrics for the first variable. One way of deriving this method is to use the product rule, integrate
both sides, and rearrange, and it is commonly used when the function in question is a product of e to the x
and a trigonometric function. For 10 points, name this method, which sets the integral u dv equal to uv
minus the integral of v du.
ANSWER: integration by parts
The best-known form of this process is equivalent to the Darboux (DAR-boo) type, while a generalization
of it is named for Lebesgue (luh-BAY). Quadrature methods approximate it, and iterations of this process
on well-behaved functions are independent of order according to Fubini's Theorem. Executing this process
may be made easier by decomposing a given function into the product of two simpler functions, which is
called performing this process "by parts". With polynomials, this operation involves adding one to all of the
exponents and dividing by the new exponents. Name this process which, by the Fundamental Theorem of
Calculus, is equivalent to antidifferentiation.
ANSWER: Riemann integration [or integrals; accept answers modified by either "definite" or "indefinite"; accept antiderivatives or antidifferentiation before the last word; do not accept or prompt on "derivative" or "differentiation"]
This company's 3rd employee was Andy Grove, who later became its CEO. This company pushed
heavily for the passage of the 1984 SCPA law, which allowed the patenting to topologies. Originally
started by Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore, this company was the first to commercialize MOSFET silicon
gate RAM. What is this company, the inventor of the x86 architecture and the Pentium line of
microprocessors?
ANSWER: Intel Corporation
Founders of this entity include Bob Kahn and Vint Cerf. Advancements in the administration of this
entity are submitted to the IETF as Requests for Comments. The naming space of this entity is administered
by ICANN, and protocols used to control parts of it include the Transmission Control Protocol.
Predecessors to this system include the French-developed CYCLADES and a system funded by DARPA
called ARPANET. For ten points, name this international network of computers which allows access to the
World Wide Web.
ANSWER: The Internet
The central path vector protocol for this technology is BGP and IXPs are convergences between
Autonomous Systems. ICANN serves as its governing authority; former head Vint Cerf is described as its
"father." The standards for different components are described in RFCs and WHOIS is used to look up the
controllers of resources in this system. DNS can be used to locate numerical addresses which are central to
its TCP/IP protocol. For 10 points, name this network, the backbone for technologies like IRC, email and
the World Wide Web.
ANSWER: Internet
This program originated as a relicensed version of Spyglass Mosaic. During Operation Aurora, the
German government warned against using this program. It has used the Trident engine since 1997, and
unlike some competitors it supports ActiveX controls. Its ninth version, released in March 2011, has
extended support for CSS 3, while its seventh version added a web feed reader and tabbed browsing. For 10
points, name this web browser which comes preinstalled with Microsoft Windows.
ANSWER: Windows Internet Explorer [or IE; or Microsoft Internet Explorer]
A version of this task that uses a Gaussian process is called kriging. The sum of the
coefficients of a construct used to do this task converges to Magata's constant, and that version of
this task can be done using Neville's algorithm. The unisolvence theorem states that the unique
solution to one version of this task is found by taking the determinant of the Vandermonde
matrix. For multivariate data over a regular grid, the nearest-neighbor method of performing this
task creates a series of piecewise-constant functions. The use of polynomials to perform this task
can lead to oscillatory behavior at the endpoints, which can in turn be avoided by using splines.
For 10 points, name this technique which uses some function to create new data points within an
interval.
ANSWER: interpolation
Shepard's method is a multivariate form of this technique which uses inverse-distance weighting.
Bandlimited functions can be constructed as a sum of sinc ("sink") functions using the WhittakerShannon formula for doing this. Hermite's method of doing this incorporates derivatives. Chebyshev
nodes are used alongside one method of doing this, which suffers from an oscillatory phenomenon
around the interval (*) endpoints; that is Runge's phenomenon. That occurs when using polynomials for
this purpose, but can be avoided
by using piecewise functions with smooth knots, known as splines. For 10 points, name this mathematical
technique in which additional points are created inside the bounds of a known set of data points, often
contrasted with extrapolation.
ANSWER: interpolation [prompt on "approximation" or "approximating a function"]
When a sample size equals one mod four, this value is equal to the H-Spread, or the difference between the
hinges. In a normal distribution, this value is supposed to equal approximately 1.35 times the standard
deviation, covering about two-thirds of a standard deviation both above and below the mean, and, like the
median absolute deviation, this statistic is robust. This value is represented as the width of the box in a
boxplot. Name this statistic which is calculated by subtracting the the median of the lower half of a data set
from the median of the upper half.
ANSWER: interquartile range [or IQR; do not accept or prompt on "range"]
In topology, this operation applied to an infinite number of open sets does not necessarily produce an open
set, as this operation does for a finite number of sets. By De Morgan's laws, performing this operation on
two sets and then taking the complement is the same as taking the complement of each set and taking the
union of the results. Name this operation that produces a set where each element is in all the operated-upon
sets.
ANSWER: set intersection
Moore and Penrose developed a formula for a generalized one of these applicable complex matrices. In
multi-variable calculus, one of these can be found for a vector-valued function if its Jacobian is not zero. In
logic, the one of these corresponding to a given statement is the converse its contrapositive. In
single-variable calculus, the derivative of this map can be shown by the chain rule to be one over the
derivative of its associated function. In order for a function to possess one of these, it must be bjiective, or
both onto and one-to-one, as this maps a function's range onto its domain. For 10 points, give this type of
object that, when combined with its associated object, returns the identity element.
ANSWER: inverses (accept pseudoinverses)
For a point in a reference circle, this corresponding point is found by expanding the radius of the
circle through the point until the new segment's length is the radius squared divided by the distance
from the original point to the center of the circle. For a statement, this is found by negating the two
clauses or by finding the contrapositive of the converse. For functions, this is found by swapping
the inputs and outputs. Name this construct which has an additive type that can be found by
multiplying a given number by negative one and which has a multiplicative type equal to a given
number's reciprocal.
ANSWER: inverses
A homeomorphism has a continuous one of these, and every element of a group has a unique one. An
involution is equal to its associated one, and over a finite-dimensional vector space, an operator has one of
these if it is either surjective or injective. If a function is not one-to-one, one of these may be formed by
restricting the domain, and the graph of one of these in the Cartesian plane is the same as the original graph
flipped around y=x. These are usually notated by an exponent of negative one. For 10 points, name this
mathematical object, whose additive type is the negative of an integer.
ANSWER: inverse [accept inverse function before "group"]
The derivative of one of these entities for a function is equal to one over the derivative of the function
applied to one of these. One of these exists for a matrix only if the determinant is not zero, and one of these
can only be found for a function if it passes the horizontal line test. For the natural logarithm, the
exponential function is one of these objects. For 10 points, name these objects, which return an output of x
when the input is y.
ANSWER: Inverses [or Inverse Functions]
By definition, a group has these entities, but a monoid does not. A field has these entities under addition for
all elements and under multiplication for all nonzero elements. A square matrix has one of these entities if
and only if it has a nonzero determinant. For real numbers, the multiplicative form of this entity is also
known as the reciprocal. For any element, this entity is defined as an element so that a binary operation
performed on the two elements gives the identity. Name this term for numerical "opposites," such as one
and negative one under addition.
ANSWER: inverses
In linear algebra, this function is only defined for square matrices, and is a function of a matrix A
such that A times this function of A equals the identity matrix. A function f(x) is (*) one-to-one if one
of these functions g(x) exists such that f of g of x equals x. The multiplicative form of this function is also
known as the reciprocal, and in addition it can be found by simply negating the expression. For 10 points,
name this kind of function that undoes the effect of another function, which in addition involves adding a
number such that the result is zero.
ANSWER: inverse
A continuous function between topological spaces which has a continuous one of these is called a
homeomorphism, while a homomorphism with one of these is called an isomorphism. The horizontal line
test guarantees one of these for a function, while for real numbers, the additive one of these of a number
may be calculated by subtracting that number from 0. For ten points, name this mathematical construct
exemplified by the numbers -2 and 1/2 relative to the number 2.
ANSWER: inverses
Numerical methods of calculating this for a function can run into problems if the condition number is
too large, and a condition number of infinity means that calculating this will be impossible. One
theorem states if the determinant of the Jacobian is non-zero at a point, then a smooth function will
have one of these for some open neighborhood containing the point. The difference between a field
and an (*) abelian ring is that ring elements don-t necessarily have these for one operation. The transpose
of an orthogonal matrix is equal to this, and one of these functions exists as long as the derivative is non-
zero. For 10 points, name the word that describes matrices whose product gives the identity.
ANSWER: inverse
This type of conditional statement is formed by negating both the condition and the consequence.
This concept does not exist for square matrices with determinant zero or for functions that are not
one-to-one and onto. Reciprocals form this concept for (*) multiplication of non-zero real numbers; that
is, multiplying a number and this type of number results in the identity, 1. For 10 points, name this
mathematical concept of "un-doing" a process.
ANSWER: inverse (accept word forms and additional information)
For a bounded operator on a normed space, this operation on the operator has a solution if the
Neumann series converges. Of the three objects in the Iwasawa decomposition, the one
designated K has the property that this operation is equal to the transpose of K. The equivalency
class of an object in a group is defined by flanking the element with two elements of the group
that are related by this operation. The Cayley-Hamilton theorem can be used to compute this
operation for a matrix, and the existence of a solution to this operation can be shown by proving
that the determinant is nonzero. For 10 points, name this operation that, for a matrix, returns
another matrix that multiplies the first matrix to return the identity matrix.
ANSWER: finding the inverse [or inverting; or obvious equivalents]
The existence of one of these entities corresponding to a function from R n to R n is guaranteed in
some neighborhood if the Jacobian is nonsingular, according to a theorem often contrasted with the
implicit function theorem. A generalization of one of them named for Moore and Penrose is an
example of a "pseudo" one. The existence of these entities is only guaranteed for one of the operations
in a ring, but for both operations in a field. If a function is injective, it has a corresponding one of
these functions. A square matrix has one of these if and only if has a nonzero (*) determinant, and
matrices without one of these objects are called singular. Multiplying a matrix by one of these gives the
identity matrix. For 10 points, give this term whose multiplicative kind is the reciprocal and whose additive
kind for a number x is negative x.
ANSWER: inverse [accept inverse function or pseudoinverse or inverse element or inverse matrix]
This term is base for the alternate name for a NOT gate. This term, of a function, is equivalent to a
reflection about the line y equals x. This term applied to the chain rule denotes u substitution. A matrix only
has one of these if it is row-equivalent to the identity matrix, which requires it to be square and have a
non-zero determinant. For a number h, the additive one is negative h while the multiplicative one is one
over h. For 10 points, identify this term that often designates the opposite of something.
ANSWER: inverse
A transformation with this name takes circles to lines and vice versa with respect to a given circle.
Moore and Penrose name one of these, that when multiplied by the original results in a Hermitian
product. The existence of one of these for a matrix can be proven by showing that it has full row and
column rank, or alternatively showing that it has a non-zero determinant. A function has one of these if and
only if it's both injective and surjective, and every element in a group has one while every element in a field
has both an additive and a multiplicative one. Multiplying one of these for a matrix with the original matrix
is equal to the identity matrix, and the reciprocal is the multiplicative one. For 10 points, name this concept
from mathematics, the opposite or something.
ANSWER: Inverse or Inversions (accept pseudoinverse)
To find a point that has this relationship to a point in a circle, you draw a ray from the center of the circle
through the original point, a right angle using that ray based at the original point, and another right angle
based where the ray from the first angle touches the circle. The formula for finding this type of matrix is to
divide the adjoint of a given matrix by its determinant. To find this for a statement, change p implies q to
not p implies not q. When this kind of matrix is multiplied by the original matrix, the product is an identity
matrix. Give this term that applies to functions created by flipping an injective function over the line y
equals x.
ANSWER: inverse
Square matrices for which this operation is defined have linearly independent columns. A statement with
this kind of relationship to a conditional statement is logically equivalent to the converse and can be stated
as, "if not a, then not b." Exponential and logarithmic functions have this relation, as do, over a certain
domain and range, the sine and arcsine functions. One third is one type, for three, while negative four is
another type, for four. For 10 points, name this mathematical term that includes multiplicative and additive
ones.
ANSWER: inverse
When multiplied on both sides by a matrix A, the matrix denoted by "pseudo-" this term is equal to A. In
traditional logic, it is a conditional sentence that is the contrapositive of the converse. When applied to the
output of a function f, a function of this type yields the argument to f. It is the element of a set that yields
the identity of that set, giving zero and one for addition and multiplication, respectively. For 10 points,
name this operation usually signified by a superscript negative one.
ANSWER: inverse
For a matrix, this entity is equal to one over its determinant times the adjugate of the matrix. A
matrix does not have one of these if its determinant is zero. The line y = x is a line of symmetry for
the graphs of two functions that have this property. Differentiation and (*) integration share this
property, as do exponential and logarithmic functions. For any real number a, 1 over a is its multiplicative
one. For 10 points, give this term that applies to operations that "undo" one another.
ANSWER: inverse
Matrices that are not square may have retractions and sections without having one of these, and a square
matrix doesn't have one if its determinant is zero; in other words, if it is degenerate or singular. The
trigonometric functions are made to have one by introducing domain restrictions, though notational
difficulties arise due to the traditional use of superscripts. The identity function has one, since it easily
passes the horizontal line test. For 10 points, give the term that indicates that a function's action undoes the
action of another.
ANSWER: inverse [accept word forms]
Its namesake suite is modeled in four layers, including those named "Link," "Transport," and
"Application." Values important to this system can be represented in CIDR ("cider") notation. The newest
version of this replaces ARP ("A-R-P") with a procedure called "Neighbor Discovery" and also allows
strings of zeroes to be represented by double colons. That new version, its sixth, also uses a 128-bit system
for its namesake addresses. For 10 points, identify this network addressing protocol commonly paired with
TCP.
ANSWER: IP [or Internet Protocol; accept TCP/IP or Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol before "newest version" is read]
One way of partitioning these is CIDR which uses subnet masking. ARP resolves these to MAC
addresses. Today they are mostly 32 bits long, but 128 bit ones are starting to be used because the 32 bit
ones are essentially exhausted. Those 128 instances are defined in version 6 of the protocol in which they
are used. The loopback one is 127.0.0.1 (one twenty seven dot zero dot zero dot one). DNS is used to
determine this of the server corresponding to a URL. For 10 points, name these addresses that are used in
networks such as the internet.
ANSWER: IP address [prompt on partial answer; or Internet Protocol Address]
A spectrum sequence with one of these numbers as a base is called a Beatty sequence. The Minkowski
question mark function maps them to another set of numbers. Quadratic ones can be written as periodic
continued fractions. They can be produced by a Dedekind cut. All square roots of square-free numbers are
these numbers, a subset of which is the transcendental numbers. Their decimal representations do not
terminate or repeat. Examples include pi, e, and the square root of two. For 10 points, name these real
numbers not expressible as a quotient of two integers.
ANSWER: irrational numbers [prompt on quadratic surds or quadratic irrationals]
A number of the form a to the b, where a is algebraic and not equal to zero or one and b is algebraic
and this kind of number, yields a number in this set of numbers according to Gelfond's theorem. This
set of numbers include all non-complex transcendental numbers. The proof that the diagonal of a
square is incommensurable proved that it was this kind of number. These numbers cannot be
expressed in the (*) form a over b, where a and b are integers, and their decimal expansion never repeats or
terminates. For 10 points, name this set of numbers that includes the golden ratio and the square root of two
and that constitutes the real numbers with the rationals.
ANSWER: irrational numbers [accept transcendental numbers before it is read]
Gelfond's Theorem states that algebraic numbers to a power that is this type of number are transcendental.
The fractional parts of the multiples of this type of number are dense in the unit interval. Theodorus used a
spiral to show that the side lengths of certain triangles have this property. The nth root of a positive integer
is either an integer or this type of number. Hippasus legendarily discovered the first number of this type,
leading to his death by drowning, by considering the ratio of the diagonal of a square to its side length. For
ten points, identify this type of number, exemplified by the square root of two, that cannot be written as a
quotient of integers.
ANSWER: irrational numbers
A measure of how well numbers in this set can be represented by numbers not in this set is the
Liouville-Roth constant. One proof showing that a number belongs to this set is based on the fact
that two raised to a natural number cannot equal three raised to a natural number, and another is
based on the fact that a positive integer cannot be less than the reciprocal of another positive integer.
This set includes the golden ratio in addition to all transcendental numbers, such as pi and e. Name
this type of real number whose decimal representation neither terminates nor repeats.
ANSWER: irrationals [or irrational numbers]
Numbers from this set are multiplied to generate Beatty sequences, and Apery's theorem states that the sum
as n goes from one to infinity of one over n cubed is one of these numbers. The reals can be constructed by
exploiting the fact that this set's complement lacks the least upper bound property; that procedure is known
as creating Dedekind (DEH-duh-kend) cuts. A classic proof for the existence of this set constructs an
example by considering the equation x squared equals two y squared, deriving a contradiction because y
must be both odd and even. Examples of these kinds of numbers include e, the square root of two, and pi.
Give the name of this set of numbers that cannot be written as a simple fraction of two integers.
ANSWER: irrational numbers [accept J]
An algebraic number raised to the power of a number with this property is transcendental according to the
Gelfond-Schneider theorem. The value of the Riemann zeta function at three, Apery's constant, has this
property, though it has not yet been proven for the Euler-Mascheroni constant. Their quadratic type has
periodic continued fractions. The fact that the square of an even number must be divisible by four is
invoked in the proof that this property is possessed by the square root of two. For 10 points, name these
objects which cannot be represented as one integer over another.
ANSWER: irrational numbers
A spectrum sequence with one of these numbers as a base is called a Beatty sequence. The Minkowski
question mark function maps them to another set of numbers. Quadratic ones can be written as periodic
continued fractions. They can be produced by a Dedekind cut. All square roots of square-free numbers are
these numbers, a subset of which is the transcendental numbers. Their decimal representations do not
terminate or repeat. Examples include pi, e, and the square root of two. For 10 points, name these real
numbers not expressible as a quotient of two integers.
ANSWER: irrational numbers [prompt on quadratic surds or quadratic irrationals]
An n-dimensional manifold has this property if any embedded sphere of dimension n minus 1 bounds
a ball of dimension n. Any representation of a finite Lie algebra can be decomposed into a direct sum
of representations with this property. A topological space has this property if and only if its not the
union of two proper subsets, and one way of showing that a ring has this property is to show that its
prime spectrum has it. A method of testing whether polynomials have this property relies on showing
that there exists a prime p that divides all coefficients except the leading one, and that the constant
term isn-t divided by the square of that prime; that is known as Eisenstein's criterion. The
fundamental theorem of algebra says that all polynomials with order less than two have this property
over the complex numbers. For 10 points, name this property, which for a fraction occurs when the
numerator and denominator has no common factors.
ANSWER: Irreducible (word forms ok)
An affine variety is described by this term if its coordinate ring has a unique minimal prime, while Schur's
lemma describes group representations with this property. A Markov chain is said to have this property if
there is a nonzero probability of any state transitioning to any other, while a topological space has it if it is
not the union of two proper closed subsets. Eisenstein's criterion is an easy to check whether a polynomial
has, for 10 points, what property of not being expressible as a product of two non-trivial factors?
ANSWER: irreducible
A GUI widget toolkit for this language is Swing. The Eclipse IDE is written in this language,
which was developed by James Gosling. This language offers public, protected, default and private as
access specifiers. Class files containing bytecode from this language are typically aggregated in a (*)
dot-jar file. For 10 points, identify this object-oriented programming language, originally developed at Sun
Microsystems, and noted for its portability since it runs on a namesake "virtual machine".
ANSWER: Java
The programming language at its center was once called Oak, and it was originally designed for cable TV
boxes. By 1994, its focus had changed to the emerging World Wide Web. It was released with the slogan
"Write Once, Run Anywhere." True to the slogan, at least 700 million PCs contain its Virtual Machine and
Runtime Environment. For 10 points, give the shared name of the computer language and software platform
developed by Sun Microsystems.
ANSWER: Java [do not accept "JavaScript"]
In 2009, a program to "enhance" this language through "an assortment of small changes" was created under
the name Project Coin. To combat slow performance, this language introduced just-in-time compilation to
its version 1.1; however, built-in garbage collection continues to make this language slower than its
predecessors. This language was once called Oak, and was marketed with the slogan "write once, run
anywhere", touting the portability it sees from running its programs in a namesake virtual machine in the
form of bytecode. A rival to C++, for ten points, name this object-oriented programming language
developed by Sun Microsystems.
ANSWER: Java (do not prompt on or accept "Javascript")
This language recently introduced autoboxing. GUIs (GOO-ees) can be created in this language by AWT
("A-W-T") and Swing. Its string class is immutable, but its stringbuffer class is mutable. Common
exceptions in this language are IndexOutOfBoundsException, NullPointerException, and
RuntimeException. It runs on a namesake virtual machine. For 10 points, name this object oriented Sun
Microsystems created programming language.
ANSWER: Java
This programming language differs from its predecessors in that it doesn-t require different software
for each individual processor; this is a result of the fact that it converts written code into bytecode,
which led to the slogan "write once, run anywhere." This bytecode can be run on any machine that
has its namesake (*) virtual machine. Though it is a higher level language that supports object-oriented
programming techniques, it doesn-t support pointer arithmetic, differentiating it from C++ (C-plus-plus).
For 10 points, name this programming language created by Sun Microsystems, often found in internet
applets.
ANSWER: Java [do not accept JavaScript, it is unrelated]
Since 2001, Windows has shipped without this programming language preinstalled as a result of
Microsoft's alleged modified implementation of it. This language lacks pointers, and it does not support
multiple inheritance for classes. A compressed folder containing files written in this language has the
extension .jar ("dot-jar"), and Oracle released JDK to allow for development in this language. This
language's namesake bytecode is executed by its virtual machine, and this language's namesake applets may
be run within web browsers. For 10 points, name this object-oriented language developed by James Gosling
at Sun Microsystems, whose logo is a coffee mug.
ANSWER: Java [do not accept "JavaScript"]
Doc comments for this language can be produced by including comments started by a forward slash
followed by two asterisks and ended by an asterisk followed by a forward slash. Checked exceptions
were first devised for this language. Almost all code in this language must be located inside a class.
IDEs written in, and primarily for, it include Eclipse and NetBeans. It is touted as (*) "write once, run
anywhere." Source code in this language is compiled into bytecode which runs on a namesake virtual
machine. For 10 points, name this language originally designed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems.
ANSWER: Java [do not accept "JavaScript"]
This language does not support operator overloading or multiple inheritance for classes, which helps to
prevent potential errors and anti-pattern design. Because this language does not support pointer arithmetic,
its garbage collector is allowed to relocate referenced objects. Widget toolkits are typically used to
implement applets in this language, and this programming language's motto is "write once, run anywhere."
This language's namesake bytecodes can be executed by its namesake virtual machine. For 10 points, name
this programming language developed by Sun Microsystems.
ANSWER: Java [do not accept "JavaScript"]
Project Lambda is an initiative to add closures to this programming language. Fragments were recently
introduced in one use of this programming language in which Intents are used to interact with other apps.
The graphical user interface for it is provided by the Swing library, and its just in time compiler compiles its
bytecode. Used to write Android applications, this object oriented language uses ArrayLists, and programs
in it often include the phrase "public static void main." Applets written in this language are often found on
web pages. For 10 points, name this programming language named for an Indonesian island whose logo is a
cup of coffee.
ANSWER: Java [Do not accept "JavaScript."]
Compilers of this language translate programs into bytecode, rather than machine language, which is
then run by a namesake Virtual Machine. Unlike C and C++, this language does not support pointer
arithmetic, though like those languages, it has primitive data types that are not objects. Widget toolkits like
the Abstract Window Toolkit and Swing are commonly used to implement applets in this language. Initially
called Oak, for 10 points, name this language, which is not actually related to a similarly named "Script."
ANSWER: Java
In development, this language was known as Oak. This language, which does not use pointer arithmetic
despite sharing much of its syntax with C++ ["C plus plus"], is able to run on multiple platforms because of
its "Write Once, Run Anywhere" design, where it runs on a Virtual Machine. Originally licensed by Sun
Microsystems and now by Oracle, for 10 points, name this object-oriented programming language,
developed by James Gosling, which shares its name with an island in Indonesia and is not related to a
similarly-named "Script."
ANSWER: Java [do not accept or prompt on "JavaScript"]
This language's arguments dot callee gives extra power to anonymous functions. Like Python, it has a for
in construction. Commonly used libraries for this language includes Ext, YUI, and Dojo. Primitive types in
this language include undefined and null. Instead of using classes, this language like its Self predecessor
uses prototypes. Local variables can be declared by the keyword var. For 10 points, name this programming
language often used in webpages.
ANSWER: JavaScript [or ECMAScript; or JScript]
One mathematician with this last name developed an algebra in which the most general associativity
relations are x and y x times y equals y times x and quantity x-squared times y, close quantity times x
equals x-squared times quantity y times x. Another mathematician with this last name proved the theorem
that a simple, closed curve divides the plain disjoint interior and exterior regions; such curves also bear his
name. Still another mathematician with this last is the second namesake of a method in which a matrix is
inverted by reducing it reduced row-echelon form. For 10 points, give this last name of mathematician
Wilhelm, who names a form of matrix elimination with Carl Friedrich Gauss.
ANSWER: Jordan
In the plane, this mathematician's namesake measure involves finding the greatest lower bound of the areas
of the coverings of a given set, where a covering consists of a finite union of rectangles. One result named
for this mathematician and Holder follows from Zassenhaus's Lemma via Schreier's Refinement Theorem
and states that any two composition series in a group are isomorphic. Any matrix with coefficients from an
algebraically closed field can be rewritten in terms of blocks containing a single eigenvalue on the main
diagonal and ones on the superdiagonal, a block form name after this man. Another result of his states that
any closed curve divides the plane into an inside and an outside. For 10 points, identify this French
mathematician, namesake of a "normal" or "canonical" form of a matrix, as well as a curve theorem.
ANSWER: Camille Jordan
F5 steganography encodes messages in files generated using this algorithm. The third stage involves
quantization of the coefficients generated by a two-dimensional discrete cosine transform. That stage makes
this a lossy compression algorithm. In its first stage, color and lightness data are encoded separately. For 10
points, name this standard for image compression developed by and named after the Joint Photographic
Experts Group.
ANSWER: JPEG [or JPG; or JPE; or Joint Photographic Experts Group until it is read]
He defended his doctoral dissertation on "Tschirnhaus transformations: algebraic equations with one
unknown" under the supervision of Franz Meyer. This physicist's most important contribution was
partially anticipated by the work of Nordstrom and Larmor, who both used the flat (*) Minkowski
space, which could not explain the deflection of light in a gravitational field. He utilized a universal tensor
from which the electromagnetic and gravitational fields arise, with a cylindrical condition or "fifth world
dimension." For 10 points, name this German mathematician, whose work was modified by Klein and forms
the basis of modern string theory.
ANSWER: Theodore Kaluza
In machine learning, this term describes a set of methods that allow operation in high-dimensional implicit
feature spaces by replacing inner products with other functions that satisfy Mercer's inequality. One
example of a set of such functions is the "radial basis function" one of these, which is used in SVM. In
mathematics, for an integral transform of a function f, this is a 2D-function that multiplies f inside the
integral. For a group homomorphism, the first isomorphism theorem guarantees that an object described by
this term is a subgroup of the domain group G. For linear maps, the set described by this term is equivalent
to the null space, and is a subspace of the domain whose elements all map to zero in the image. For 10
points, name this term also describing the central program of an operating system.
ANSWER: kernel
These things are divided into monolithic and micro types, the latter of which is exemplified by the
as-yet-unfinished GNU Hurd (NEW HERD). Programs request service from these things by executing a
system call. A BSD-based example of these things was originally used in OS X. The Tanenbaum-Torvalds
debate concerned the implementation of a type of these things for Linux. Identify this component of an
operating system that serves as an interface between hardware and software applications.
ANSWER: kernel [prompt on operating system]
This mathematician derived methods for solving cubic equations as well as some of higher orders. He
wrote about binomial coefficients in Pascal's triangle and wrote "On the Difficulties of Euclid's
Definitions". This man advanced Euclid's parallel postulate and contributed to the eventual
development of (*) non-Euclidean geometry. His approach to higher degree polynomials was through
geometric algebra and his solutions are not numerical but are line segments instead. For ten points, name
this Persian who wrote Treatise on Demonstration of Problems of Algebra and was popularized by Edward
Fitzgerald though the translation of his Rubaiyats.
ANSWER: Omar Khayyam
John Conway has suggested the word "strombus" derived from the Greek word for a spinning top for this
type of polygon. These shapes have a single reflective symmetry across one of their diagonals, and concave
shapes with similar definitions are sometimes called darts or arrowheads. Not generally parallelograms,
their area can be computed by taking one half the product of the diagonals, which are perpendicular to each
other though only one is necessarily a bisector. Give the name of this type of quadrilateral that has two pairs
of congruent adjacent sides.
ANSWER: kites
This is the most general quadrilateral for which exactly one pair of opposite vertices are equidistant
from any fixed point on the diagonal that does not go through them. Like rhombuses and squares,
these quadrilaterals have inscribed circles and perpendicular diagonals. When these quadrilaterals are
not convex, they can be called darts or arrowheads. One of this shape's diagonals is the perpendicular
bisector of the other, which is useful when proving that these shapes have one pair of congruent
angles. Name these shapes, also called deltoids, that have two pairs of congruent adjacent sides.
ANSWER: kites [prompt on deltoids]
This man's namesake algebra is a generalized boolean algebra that consists of a bounded distributive
lattice with an involution, and his name is sometimes given to the hierarchy of sets that is based on
the complexity of operations that define them. Another result named for him states that for any
recursive operator there exists a partial computable function such that the function of the operator
returns the operator, known as his namesake recursion theorem. A function that combines with and
negates itself is the subject of another statement of this man, which shows that the original lambda
calculus is inconsistent; that's a paradox named for him and Rosser. For 10 points, name this computer
scientist who invented regular expressions, which use a namesake operation star to define all possible
strings of a character set, known as his "star".
ANSWER: Stephen Cole Kleene
He is the namesake of the Hurwitz surface of the lowest possible genus, a compact Riemann surface
of genus three and order 168, known as his eponymous quartic. This author of the influential
classification scheme set forth in the Erlangen Program is the namesake of a (*) disc model of the
hyperbolic plane in which a line is defined as a chord. His namesake group has four elements and is the
smallest non-cyclic group. A surface named for this man is the only exception to the Heawood conjecture,
being non-orientable like the Mobius strip. For 10 points, name this man, the namesake of a closed, twodimensional manifold, his eponymous "bottle."
ANSWER: Felix Klein
168 orientation-preserving automorphisms exist for this man's namesake Riemann surface
quartic. This man proposed classifying geometries according to group theory and projective
geometry in his 1872 manifesto, the Erlangen program. While at Gottingen, this man served as a
doctoral adviser to Grace Chisholm Young, the first female mathematics Ph.D. recipient there.
An immersion of another object named for this man resembles a twisted figure 8. That object
only requires six colors for map coloring, making it the sole exception to the Heawood
conjecture, and is a one-sided 2-manifold with no boundary that is non-orientable, like the
Mobius strip. For 10 points, name this German mathematician who devised a namesake bottle.
ANSWER: Felix Klein [or Christian Felix Klein]
Two distinct ones of these cannot have the same exterior by the Gordon-Luecke theorem. Dowker
notation can describe their projection. Twist, poke, and slide make up the Reidemeister moves on diagrams
of these. They can be described by Jones and Alexander polynomials, which can be generalized to the
HOMFLY polynomial. A simple loop is known as the un- one of these; a simple, non-trivial one is the
trefoil. Slightly more general structures permitting open ends are known as braids. For 10 points, name
these closed non-intersecting curves that cannot be untangled.
ANSWER: knots
This computer scientist created Metafont to produce vector fonts, but it never caught on with font designers,
perhaps due to its sixty parameters. His MMIX is a fictional 64 bit RISC architecture that will replace the
MIX architecture, unusual for running in either binary or decimal, as the implementor chooses, and for
having bytes of either six binary bits or two decimal digits in the fourth edition of his most famous work,
which is currently unfinished, and includes a volume on "Fundamental Algorithms" and fascicles on
combinatorial algorithms. Version numbers for Metafont and this man's more famous program approach e
and pi, respectively. For 10 points, name this author of The Art of Computer Programming, for which he
created the typesetting program TeX.
ANSWER: Donald Ervin Knuth
His first scientific article was published in MAD Magazine, and he has used the royalties from one of his
works to install a pipe organ in his home. The version numbers of programs he has written asymptotically
approach transcendental numbers, and until recently he famously awarded one hexadecimal dollar to anyone
who discovered an error in his books. For ten points, name this computer scientist, creator of the TeX
typesetting system and the unfinished seven-volume work The Art of Computer Programming.
ANSWER: Donald Ervin Knuth
This person is the primary discoverer of an algorithm that orients input identities, completes the
resulting rules, detects critical pairs, obtains their normal forms, and adds a new rule for every
normal pair per the reduction order; that algorithm yields confluent term re-writing systems. This
scientist is the major author of a linear-time algorithm that compares a subject string to the
beginning of an object string, then repeatedly jumps the former ahead by the distance to the first
mismatch. Those algorithms are the completion algorithm named for him and (*) Bendix and the
search algorithm named for him, Morris and Pratt. Power towers can be written easily in his notation, which
represents numbers as integers connected by up arrows. For 10 points, name this author of the seminal The
Art of Computer Programming.
ANSWER: Donald Ervin Knuth
This person devised a method for picking rows from a matrix so that each column contains the number one.
Along with Ronald Graham and Oren Patashnik, he wrote a book combining continuous and discrete math
titled Concrete Mathematics. This person also made it easier to typeset math by devising Metafont and
TeX. This person developed a system for notating large numbers using uparrows. Name this Stanford
professor who authored The Art of Computer Programming.
ANSWER: Donald Knuth
For this algorithm to be implemented efficiently, a fast union-find data structure is required, because
it allows for the determination of connectivity. The complexity of the standard form of this algorithm
can be reduced from O(E logE) to the mathematically equivalent O(E logV) by using properties of
the logarithm. Upon initialization, this algorithm creates a (*) forest of size V and then utilizes the cut
property by sorting all edges of the graph and then checking for cycles with the lowest-weight, unused edge.
This algorithm differs from another that accomplishes a similar task because this algorithm works for
disconnected graphs. For 10 points, name this greedy algorithm for finding the minimum spanning tree of a
graph, which is more generalized than Prim's algorithm.
ANSWER: Kruskal's algorithm [prompt on "minimum spanning tree finding algorithm" until "minimum spanning tree" is mentioned]
One modification to this algorithm improves on its running time by replacing its primary data
structure with a number of leftist binary trees, which can be easily merged; that modification is the
Cheriton-Tarjan algorithm. The amortized run-time of one subsection of this algorithm is a notable
instance of the inverse Ackermann function appearing in time complexity. The optimizations of
"union by rank" and "path compression" can be used to improve on a subsection of this algorithm
known as the union-find algorithm. This algorithm has running time "Big O of (*) E log E" where E
is the number of edges, since the dominating step in this algorithm is sorting the edges by weight. It works
by iteratively choosing the lowest weight edge that connects two previously unconnected components in the
graph. For 10 points, name this graph algorithm that, like Boruvka's algorithm and Prim's algorithm, finds
the minimum spanning tree of a graph.
ANSWER: Kruskal's Algorithm
It has a discrete analog in the Stolz-Cesaro theorem, which holds that the limit of the ratio of the difference
between consecutive terms of two sequences is equal to the limit of the ratio of the terms. It is usually
proved using the extended mean value theorem, and this statement holds only when one of the functions it
describes does not change from positive to negative infinitely many times. It fails on the limit of x divided
by the square root of x-squared plus one as x goes to infinity. FTP, identify this method that uses derivatives
to compute indeterminate limits.
ANSWER: L-Hopital's rule (or Bernoulli's rule)
It does not hold where "g prime x" changes sign repeatedly as it approaches infinity, and can
sometimes cause problems in cases like the one where f of x equals the quantity x plus cosine of x
times sine x, and g of x equals e to the sine x power times the quantity x plus cosine x times sine x. In
other circumstances, it causes repeated oscillations, which make it impossible to find the limit. For
ten points, name this rule, discovered by Bernoulli and named for the author of the textbook in which it
first appears, which states that the limit of f of x divided by g of x as both approach infinity equals the limit
of f prime x divided by g prime x.
ANSWER: L-Hopital's rule (accept L-Hospital's rule or Bernoulli's rule before his name is mentioned)
Lawlor developed a multivariate version of this statement that applies to functions on a smooth
curve. This theorem is proven by invoking Cauchy's mean value theorem to show that one quantity
involved is bounded by two functions. This theorem can be applied to the expression x to the power
of x by using a logarithm. This theorem cannot be applied when ratios of certain trigonometric
functions are involved due to repeated (*) oscillations, and it is able to transform indeterminate forms to
determinate ones. This theorem states that f x over g x has the same limit as f prime x over g prime x. For
10 points, name this theorem which is used to find the limit when a expression like zero divided by zero is
involved.
ANSWER: L'Hopital's Rule
This man names a result stating that the order of every subgroup of a group must divide the order of that
group, and he lends his name to the remainder of the Taylor series. This man also proved that every positive
integer is the sum of four squares, and the difference between kinetic and potential energy serves as an
alternative to the Hamiltonian in defining his namesake mechanics. He names factors termed lambda and
mu which can be used to find the extrema of a function and are called his namesake multipliers. For 10
points, name this French mathematician who names a set of five points in space that are a solution to the
three-question problem.
ANSWER: Joseph Louis Lagrange [accept Giuseppe Lodovico Lagrangia]
A theorem named for him states that for a polynomial of degree n with integral coefficients, there exists a
maximum of n solutions to f of x equals 0 modulo p. In addition, this man proved that every positive integer
can be represented as a sum of four squares. A theorem named for him states that the order of a subgroup
must divide the order of the group, and he is also the namesake of a method of finding the optima of a
function by introducing the parameter lambda. The namesake of an error function associated with Taylor
series, for 10 points, identify this Frenchie, who also found a set of points where a tiny question remains
stationary relative to two larger bodies.
ANSWER: Joseph Louis Lagrange
This man improved upon Brouncker's continued fractions method to obtain a generalized solution of
Pell's equations. His theorem in abstract algebra says a subgroup's order must divide the group's
order, and he proved that each positive integer can be expressed as a sum of four squares. His work on
the 3-question problem led to his namesake points, where the gravitational attraction of two bodies is balanced.
For 10 points, name this French mathematician who lends his name to method of optimization which uses a
name namesake multiplier and is useful when geometric constraints are present.
ANSWER: Joseph Louis Lagrange
This man's "resolvent" is used to solve cubic equations, and his "spectrum," which ends at Freiman's
constant, consists of his "numbers." One theory named for him states that if p is a prime number and f a
polynomial of degree n, then the equation f of x = 0 mod p has at most n solutions between 0 and p. Another
namesake theorem states that the size of a subgroup must divide that of any group containing it. The
maximum and minimum values of a function subject to a geometric constraint can be found with his
multipliers. For 10 points, identify this man who found the five spots in a two question system where a third
question of negligible mass will be stationary, known as his "points."
ANSWER: Joseph-Louis Lagrange
An identity named for this man can be obtained by using only two, rather than four sets of elements in the
Cauchy-Binet identity and gives a more general form of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. This man also
names the remainder obtained in the Taylor series for a function. In physics, his namesake operator is equal
to kinetic energy minus potential energy, laying down his theory of mechanics. Locations in an orbital
system where centrifugal and gravitational forces balance are five points named for this man. For 10 points,
name this mathematician whose namesake multipliers are used to maximize a function subject to
constraints.
ANSWER: Joseph-Louis Lagrange
He showed that, for a squarefree integer n in the equation x-squared minus n y-squared equals one
that there are infinitely many x and y. In addition to creating continued fractions to solve Pell's
equation, he also published the first proof of Wilson's theorem. He proved that, for any subgroup of
a finite group, the order of the (*) subgroup divides the original group, and also created a technique for
performing constrained maximization that uses his multipliers. For 10 points, name this French
mathematician whose five points in an orbital system are the positions where a question affected only by
gravity can remain stationary.
ANSWER: Joseph Louis Lagrange or Giuseppe Lodovico Lagrangia
De Bruijn invented an alternative syntax for use in this system, and Sinot created director strings in order to
find the complexity cost of beta reduction in this system. Rosser and one formulator of this system found a
paradox proving the untyped version of this system to be inconsistent as a basis for logic, while Rosser and
the other creator of this system showed that this system possesses confluence. The funarg problem can arise
when implementing this system in stack-based languages, since such an implementation requires treating
functions as first-class objects. Containing "abstractions" and "applications," this system was shown to be
Turing-complete. Implemented in functional programming languages such as Haskell and Lisp, for 10
points, name this formal system for representing functions, developed by Stephen Kleene and Alonzo
Church and named for a Greek symbol.
ANSWER: lambda calculus
Two expressions in system are alpha-equivalent if they can be made literally the same by changing bound
variables. The startup incubator Y Combinator is named after the fixed point operator in this language, used
to create recursion. Since terms in the language consist entirely of variables and functions, numbers are
implemented as "numerals" named after the language's inventor. Its inventor used the undecidability of
equivalence in this Turing-complete model of computation to give a negative answer to Hilbert's
Entscheidungsproblem in 1936, soon after Turing's own answer based on the Halting Problem. For 10
points, name this formal system created by Alonzo Church that heavily influenced the Lisp family of
programming languages, in particular Scheme.
ANSWER: Untyped Lambda calculus
The inconsistency of this model was first demonstrated by showing that the number of provable
functions that it produces was enumerable. System F is a modification to it that introduces typing,
but it does not possess the power of computational universality that this possesses. Its relation to
deductive logic was shown to be equivalence via the Curry-Howard isomorphism. This system, which
was designed to minimally model (*) function creation and function application, is often used to model
functional programming languages. Alpha reductions and Beta reductions are used to show the equivalence
of statements in this system. For 10 points name this mathematical model developed by Alonzo Church,
which is named after a Greek letter.
ANSWER: untyped lambda calculus
With Lavoisier, this man invented an ice calorimeter, which they used to show that
respiration was a form of combustion. He corrected Newtonian calculations of the speed of
sound by taking into account heat compression. This man posited that if a being knew the state of
the universe at a given point in time, then it could predict the entire future of the universe, a
thought experiment known as his demon. His namesake equation gives rise to spherical
harmonics and he investigated the stability of the solar system. His namesake transformation is
the integral of zero to infinity of a function of t times e to the negative st dt. For 10 points, name
this French scientist who is the namesake of the divergence of the gradient, written as del
squared.
ANSWER: Pierre-Simon Laplace
Post's inversion theorem is a difficult method of inverting this operation. Performing this operation
on the probability density function of a distribution is an easy way of deriving the distribution's
moment-generating function. This function takes a differential equation with constant coefficients to
a polynomial, and in circuit theory it's useful to (*) take circuit elements to impedances in the s-domain.
This linear function is defined as the integral from zero to infinity of the product of e to the negative s times
t times the input function, dt. For 10 points, name this operation named for a Frenchman, a useful transform.
ANSWER: Laplace transform
It generalizes to the d-Alembertian in Minkowski space-time, and the objective of the Dirichlet problem is
to find a function with given boundary data that vanishes under it. This operator acts by a negative scalar on
a solution to the Helmholtz equation, and it yields the charge density when applied to the electric potential
according to Poisson's equation. The harmonic functions form its kernel, while for a particle in space, the
kinetic energy is given by a scalar multiple of its application to the wavefunction. For 10 points, identify
this operator which is equal to the divergence of the gradient and which is commonly denoted by a single
capital delta.
ANSWER: Laplacian [or Laplace operator]
It is equivalent to the trace of the Hessian matrix of a function and in Minkowski spacetime and the
d'Alembertian operator is an application of it. It can also be applied, component-wise, to vector fields, in
which case in three dimensions it is equal to the gradient of the divergence minus the curl of the curl. The
problem of finding an unknown function from the result of this operator applied to the function is known as
Poisson's equation. This linear second-order differential operator also appears in electrostatics where it
relates the potential to the charge density. Functions for which this is zero everywhere are called harmonic
functions and have no local extrema, and their average value over a spherical surface is equal to their value
at the center of that sphere. For 10 points, name this scalar operator equal to the divergence of the gradient.
ANSWER: Laplace operator or Laplacian
Markov's inequality can be used with Chebyshev's inequality to derive one form of this law, a form that
also leads to the asymptotic equipartition property. The other form of this theorem applies if the sum of all
variances divided by the index squared converges; that is known as the Kolmogorov criterion, and applies
to the strong version of this theorem, which adds that the convergence is almost sure. With a name coined
by Simeon Poisson, identify this law that states that as n approaches infinity, the arithmetic mean of n
random variables converges to its expected value.
ANSWER: law of large numbers [accept "weak" or "strong" as a modifier; accept Bernoulli's Theorem]
The "column address strobe" type of this phenomenon affects RAM. This quantity is fixed in a cut-through
switch, although it's variable in store and forward switches. Little's Law relates it to arrival rate and queue
length, and applications that seek to improve this quantity while reducing reliability often use the UDP
protocol. One common adage among computer designers says that "cycles are cheap, bandwidth is
expensive" but that this quantity "is physics", as the speed of light often provides a fundamental limit to it.
The round trip type of this phenomenon can be measured with the ping tool, and this quantity is often
compared to the length of a pipe, as opposed to the length of a pipe which represents bandwidth. For 10
points, name this delay between requesting something and receiving it.
ANSWER: latency
These constructs are used in statistical sampling to randomly cover an area with a fixed set of elements.
Gaston Terry's proof by exhaustion that there is no solution to the 36 officer problem proved that a more
generalized form of them of size 6 by 6 does not exist. Circulent matrices are an example of them, and the
Cayley table of a group is one of them. There are two orthogonal ones of size 4 by 4, and they also exist in a
Greco- variety. For 10 points, identify this type of n by n array, exemplified by Sudoku, in which each row
and column have permutations of the same entries, named by Euler for their traditional use with letters of
the namesake alphabet.
ANSWER: Latin squares [accept Greco-Latin Squares before "generalized"]
In trigonometry, the period of combined sine waves is found by calculating this for the individual periods of
each sine wave. In one method of finding this value, the unique factorization theorem is used on any set of
numbers, then the prime factors at the highest power in which they occur are all multiplied together. In the
most common method, the product of two numbers is divided by the greatest common factor of the two
numbers. FTP, name this value from number theory, a special form of which is the least common
denominator.
ANSWER: Least Common Multiple Accept LCM Prompt on Least Common Denominator or LCD
Aitken developed the "General" form of this method which overcomes the "HAC" problem. X prime X
inverse X prime y is a closed-form expression to calculate a parameter obtained by these techniques. Nonlinear problems utilizing this method can be solved using the Gauss-Newton algorithms, and the GaussMarkov theorem says that the parameter obtained by one type of this method is the best linear unbiased
estimator. The "ordinary" form of this technique is frequently employed in regression analysis to find best-
fit lines. For 10 points, identify this method which involves minimizing the second power of the difference
between an estimate and an observation.
ANSWER: least squares methods [accept LSRL]
This result can be calculated by taking the inverse of the quantity A transpose A, end quantity, times A
transpose B, where matrix A has a column of ones on its left or right side. That equation finds what is often
considered the "optimal" solution to an overdetermined system. The accuracy of this result is measured by
the square of the correlation coefficient, which equals one for perfect linear fits. Name this process of
producing a line that approximately goes through a set of given points.
ANSWER: ordinary linear least-squares regression line [accept either or both parts, or anything containing "regression"; accept line of best-fit; accept OLSRL]
A method developed by Bochner generalizes this operation to Banach spaces, while a similar but
weaker generalization was developed by Gelfand and Pettis using duality. The Henstock-Kurzweil
operation reduces to this operation for bounded functions, while for a sequence of non-negative
functions this operation can be bounded using a limit inferior according to Fatou's lemma, and this
operation also obeys the dominated convergence and unlike the operation it generalizes, it obeys the
monotone convergence condition and doesn-t distinguish functions that are identical almost everywhere.
Relying on its namesake's measure, for 10 points, name this generalization of the Riemann integral defined
in terms of measures.
ANSWER: Lebesgue integration (Prompt on integration or Riemann integration)
The Landau problem of proving that a prime exists between n-squared and quantity "n plus one squared" is
known as this man's namesake conjecture. Along with Gauss, this man lends his name to an algorithmic
process that uses four parameters to quickly calculate the value of pi to a large number of decimal places.
His namesake symbol names a construct modulo a prime number 'p- that is equal to one if an arbitrary
number 'a- is a quadratic residue of p. When taken at an argument of cosine this man's namesake 'associate
functions- form a component of spherical harmonics. His namesake transform involves finding the
maximum value of 'x- times a derivative minus its antiderivative and can be used to obtain the Lagrangian
from the Hamiltonian. FTP, identify this early 19th century French mathematician who should not be
confused with Laplace or Laguerre.
ANSWER: Adrien-Marie Legendre
The Diophantine equation given by ax^2 + by^2 + cz^2 = 0 is named for this mathematician who
conjectured that there is a prime number between n^2 and (n+1)^2 for every integer n and proved
that pi squared is irrational. The Dirichlet ["dee-ree-klay"] character generalizes this man's
"symbol," which for an integer a and a prime p returns either 1, -1, or 0, depending on whether or
not a is a quadratic residue mod p. His transformation, which is generalized by convex conjugation
and is denoted (*) f-star, satisfies the functional equation "f-star of f-prime of x equals x times f-prime of x
minus f of x." His namesake differential equation is encountered when solving the Laplace equation in
spherical coordinates. For 10 points, name this French mathematician perhaps best known for an
eponymous set of polynomials used in calculating spherical harmonics.
ANSWER: Adrien-Marie Legendre
One invention of this man was an early mechanical calculator capable of performing all four arithmetical
operations, the Staffelwalze. In contrast to most contemporary theories, he posited that space, time, and
motion are relative. Early on in his career, he invented the binary number system, and his greatest
contribution to metaphysics was his theory of monads. However, he is best known for an enduring dispute
with Isaac Newton. FTP, name this German polymath, who invented calculus.
ANSWER: Gottfried Leibniz
He held the conviction that space was relative rather than absolute, a prediction that would prove prescient
when Albert Einstein advanced the same view. Abraham Robinson would later vindicate his most famous
accomplishment, using the standard part function. Similarly, his identity of indiscernibles is considered to
have anticipated quantum mechanics, and he invented the modern system of binary arithmetic. For 10
points, name this German mathematician described by Bertrand Russell as the father of modern logic, and
an independent discoverer of infinitesimal calculus along with Isaac Newton.
ANSWER: Gottfried Leibniz
This shape is the cissoid of a single circle using a point located root two times the radius from the center,
and it is the inversion of a hyperbola. This shape also is the envelope of circles centered on a hyperbola and
passing through the center of that hyperbola, and it also is the locus of points such that the product of the
distances to two fixed points is constant. A specific case of a Cassini oval, this shape can be expressed in
polar form as r squared equals a squared times the cosine of two theta. It is the shape of the slice of a torus
if the slice has a point in the center. Name this shape which looks like a figure eight or an infinity sign.
ANSWER: lemniscate of Bernoulli [prompt Cassini oval]
The first constant named for this shape equals pi times Gauss- constant. This shape is the inverse curve of a
hyperbola. One form of the equation for this shape is the square of the sum of the squares of the coordinates
equals the difference of the squares of the coordinates. Its equation is easier to state in polar coordinates,
where r squared is proportional to the cosine of two theta. Name this shape sometimes named for Bernoulli
[ber-NOO-lee] that is used to represent infinity and looks like a figure eight.
ANSWER: leminscate of Bernoulli
Computer graphics specialist Henrik Jensen developed a mapping algorithm that depicts this phenomenon
more realistically. Depth of field is accounted for when trying to model the effects of this phenomenon in
the ray tracing algorithm. For 10 points, name this phenomenon whose accurate depiction in computer
science is necessary for photorealism.
ANSWER: light
Starting with a circle and fixed point P, this curve is the locus of all points X so that PX is perpendicular to
a tangent line of the circle, which means that this is the pedal [PEED-ul] curve of a circle. Similar to a
hypocycloid [hie-poe-SIE-kloid], this can be generated by following a point inside one circle as that circle
rolls around outside another circle. There are three forms this shape can take, one of which includes a loop
and another one of which is a cardioid. Name this shape generated by the equation r equals c plus d sine
theta.
ANSWER: limacon
This term can be used as an adjective to describe a set that represents the state of a dynamical system after
an infinite amount of time or to describe a point that can also be called an accumulation point. This term
also is applied to values whose existence can be proven using the squeeze theorem or a method referred to
as delta-epsilon. These values are often evaluated by taking the derivatives of both the numerator and
denominator of a rational function, a method known as l-Hopital's rule. These values are equal to the values
of continuous functions, and they are commonly used to find derivatives. Give this value that the output of a
function may approach when the input approaches a specified value.
ANSWER: limit
The test named for this concept can be used to show that a series diverges, but it can only show
convergence for alternating series. Evaluating derivatives of the numerator and denominator of
a rational function separately can be used in some cases to evaluate this value using L-Hopital's
rule. This concept may be formally defined using delta-epsilon proofs, and this concept applied to a
difference quotient is the definition of the derivative. The left and right values of this must equal
both each other and the value of a function for a function to be continuous. Name this value that a
function approaches.
ANSWER: limits
This operation is applied after setting up a ratio or root operation in a test for convergence. If a function
f is bounded by two functions g and h with a value L for this operation, then this operation on f also yields
L according to the squeeze theorem. Indeterminate forms in this operation can be simplified by taking
derivatives using L'Hopital's Rule. A right arrow is used to denote the approach to one of these. For 10
points, name this operation, the value of a function as it approaches a particular point.
ANSWER: limit
A double pointwise type of this operation is used to construct the indicator function of the
rationals. One method of evaluating this operation is to find a pair of functions that bound the input
and use the Squeeze Theorem. Proving that the result of this operation exists is done using the
epsilon-delta method. Solving improper integrals requires taking this operation on one of the bounds.
When substitution yields indeterminate forms, this operation is solved using (*) L'Hopital's Rule. The
result of this operation exists if and only if its left and right versions are equal, and this operation taken on h
is used to define the derivative. For 10 points, name this operation that gives the value of a function as the
input approaches a given value.
ANSWER: limit [accept more specific answers, like taking the limit as x goes to some number]
In complete metric spaces, Cauchy sequences always have one of these. Those of a function can be
found using the sandwich theorem and a typical definition is that for some delta region around x, f(x) will
be within some epsilon region. A technique for finding indeterminate ones of functions of form f(x)/g(x) c
uses the ratio of the respective derivatives and is better known as L-Hopital's rule. These are often used to
give define derivatives. For 10 points, name this concept often given as the value of a function as it
approaches a certain point.
ANSWER: limit
Statements involving this concept are formally proven using delta-epsilon proofs. The squeeze theorem
is used to find unknown ones based on ones already known. In statistics, a theorem named for the central
one of these states how variables approach the normal distribution. L'Hopital's (LOW-pea-tal's) rule is used
to find it for indeterminate forms. Functions that have a value for it are called convergent. For 10 points,
name this concept from calculus that is defined as a fixed value that a function gets infinitely close to.
ANSWER: limit
In complete metric spaces, Cauchy sequences always have one of these. Those of a function can be found
using the sandwich theorem and a typical definition is that for some delta region around x, f(x) will be
within some epsilon region. A technique for finding indeterminate ones of functions of form f(x)/g(x) c uses
the ratio of the respective derivatives and is better known as L-Hopital's rule. These are often used to give
define derivatives. For 10 points, name this concept often given as the value of a function as it approaches a
certain point.
ANSWER: limit
In a topological space, this operator on a net is equivalent to x if, for every neighborhood U of x, the net is
eventually in U. When "sup" is appended to its name, it defines the least upper bound of a sequence, and
points of this name are closely related to cluster points for sequences. A derivative is commonly defined by
this function as the denominator of a certain fraction goes to zero, and this function can be solved for
indeterminate fractions via L-Hopital's rule. For 10 points, identify this mathematical construct defined for
convergent sequences, which exists at a point if its one-sided values are equivalent to its overall value, often
symbolized L.
ANSWER: limits
One explanation of this developed by Bolzano includes using two Greek letters to define an error and a
distance. Known as the epsilon-delta definition of this function, L'Hopital's Rule gives a way to evaluate
this function using derivatives for certain expressions. Often used to evaluate functions from the right or
left side of an input, for 10 points, name this function that provides a value for an equation as it approaches
a particular point.
ANSWER: limit function
This word describes all the points found in the closure of a set, including accumulation points. The
"superior" and "inferior" forms of this operation are equal only for convergent sequences. The definition of
"big-O" notation in asymptotic analysis uses one form of this operation. Weierstrass developed the first
formal method of evaluating this operation, using "epsilons" and "deltas". When dealing with indeterminate
forms, l'Hopital's rule is used to evaluate this operation. Applying this operation to difference quotients is a
common way to define derivatives. For 10 points, name this operation that yields the value a function
approaches as its input approaches a given value.
ANSWER: limits [accept limit points]
In conic sections, one of these curves is used when defining the directrix. The degenerate case of the
hyperbola is two of these curves intersecting and this curve is formed by intersecting two planes. When
bounded by two endpoints they are known as segments and they can be written in point slope form or slope
intercept form. For 10 points, name this type of curve which on the Cartesian plane can be written with the
equation y equals ax+b ["A"-"X" plus "B"].
ANSWER: line
Euler's [OY-ler-s] method uses these figures to approximate solutions to differential equations, and
Newton's method approximates graphs as these figures to find roots. One of these figures is generated by
the polar graph of the secant function. For any two points there is exactly one of these that goes through
them, and these figures can be generated by extending a segment forever in both directions. Name these
figures whose graph equations can be put into slope-intercept form.
ANSWER: line (prompt on "segment" or "ray" until the end of the 2nd sentence; segment or ray is incorrect after that)
Inverting a circle that contains the center of inversion will produce one of these shapes. If a set of
points is in the "general position", then none of these shapes contain three of them. Newton's Method
relies on constructing some of these shapes tangent to a curve and then finding their intersections
with the x-axis. They are the union of two antiparallel (*) rays that share an endpoint. For 10 points,
identify these one-dimensional shapes whose equations can be written as y = ax + b.
ANSWER: lines
The Radon transform takes two parameters: a function and one of these. The Runge-Kutta method
approximates the solutions to differential equations by considering them to behave like these in short
intervals, as does Euler's method. This is the shape of the graph of r equals the cosecant of theta. In 3space, these can be expressed using symmetric equations and are formed by the intersection of two
nonparallel planes. Three points that do not lie on one of these define a plane in 3-space, and any two
distinct points define one of them. Point-slope and slope-intercept forms express what mathematical objects,
as does the graph of a function of the form y equals m x plus b?
ANSWER: lines [or linear functions; accept tangent lines after "Runge-Kutta", accept horizontal lines after "r equals"]
The Sylvester-Gallai theorem gives a requirement that all items in question are upon only one of these.
These objects are replaced by the idea of a geodesic on a general metric; specifically, in spherical geometry,
these objects are replaced by "great circles." In coordinate geometry, these objects can be specified in
slope-intercept form. Perpendicular ones intersect at an angle of ninety degrees. For 10 points, name this
geometric construct defined by two points.
ANSWER: lines
Systems that satisfy this property are homogenous and satisfy superposition. Solutions to a
differential equation that have a Wronskian of zero are described by this type of independence. A
branch of mathematics concerned with vector spaces and maps between them is this adjective's (*)
algebra. Elimination of variables is one way to solve systems of equations described by this adjective. For
10 points, give this term that describes equations of the form y = mx + b.
ANSWER: linear
This term and "logarithmic" form a portmanteau that describes the time complexity of the Quicksort
algorithm. The time for finding an item in an unsorted list grows as this type of function of the number of
items in the list, giving its time complexity this property. Functions of this type, which have no derivatives
above order one and constant first derivative, can be expressed in the point-slope and slope-intercept forms.
For 10 points, name this type of mathematical function with constant slope.
ANSWER: linear [accept words forms like linearity or line; prompt on n]
A filter has this property if no additional frequencies are added to a signal passing through it. A
system has this property if, for any inputs x1 and x2, T of c times x1 equals c times T of x1 and T of x1 plus
x2 equals T of x1 plus T of x2. A basis is formed from a set of vectors that are independent in this way,
and all functions of first degree have this property. For 10 points, name this property that is exhibited
by functions of the form y = mx+b.
ANSWER: linearity
The prefix "anti" is applied to this word to describe a transformation which obeys the equation T of a times
x equals the complex conjugate of a times T of x. Optimization over these types of functions contains a
feasible region which is a convex polyhedron. A nonzero Wronskian is possessed by a group of functions
displaying this type of independence. This type of mathematical programming can be done via the simplex
method. This type of transformation is preserved under vector addition and scalar multiplication. For 10
points, name this word that describes the equation y equals m x plus b, whose graph yields a straight line.
ANSWER: linear
In topology, for a transformation of this type, uniform continuity is equivalent to continuity. Inhomogenous
ordinary differential equations of this type can be solved with the method of variation of parameters.
Eigenvectors return a scalar multiple of themselves when a transformation with this property is applied to
them. Cramer's rule is used to solve systems of equations with this property, and this word also describes
vector spaces because they-re closed under addition and scalar multiplication. FTP, name this property that
is also used to describe polynomial equations of the first order, which generate lines.
ANSWER: linear
The Hahn-Banach theorem extends a bounded functional of this type on a subspace of a normed space to
a bounded functional of this type defined on the entire space. The inverse of this type of differential
operator is an integral operator whose kernel is the Green's function of the differential operator. Maps of
this type between vector spaces can be expressed as the multiplication of a standard matrix with the vectors
in the space being mapped. For systems, it is usually paired with time invariance and occurs when the
output satisfies homogeneity and superposition. A set of solutions to a differential equation is described by
it and independent if the Wronskian is not zero. a x is congruent to b mod n is this type of congruence
relation. For 10 points, give this term that identifies equations of the form y equals m x plus b.
ANSWER: linearity
This adjective describes a function between two vector spaces that preserves vector addition and
scalar multiplication. This adjective describes a form of independence among a group of vectors if
none of them can be written in the form of a combination of the other vectors that uses addition and
scalar multiplication. Both Gaussian elimination and Cramer's rule can be used to solve multiple
equations of this type. An equation of this type can be written in point-slope or slope-intercept form.
For 10 points, name this adjective that describes an equation of the form y equals Ax plus B.
ANSWER: linear
Krylov subspace methods are used to study certain entities of this type, and this type of system ensures only
one reference to any object at a time. This property with time independence implies a system's effect is
uniquely determined by its impulse response. This kind of continuous functional on a space forms that
space's dual. The heat equation, the Helmholtz equation, and the wave equation are all this type of
differential equation and thus satisfy the superposition principle. The bisection method for root-finding has
this type of convergence, and the worst-case of sequential search proceeds in this type of time. For 10
points, name this property in mathematics, which for a function f means that f of A times x plus B times y
equals A times f of x plus B times f of y.
ANSWER: linear [accept first line buzz on Linear Equations]
These types of equations are constraints for functions whose maximums are found through the simplex
method. The ordinary least squares method finds this type of equation that minimizes the distance between
its y-values and those of a sample. If a set of them is expressed in matrix form, their solutions can be found
by putting the matrix into reduced row echelon form. Cramer's rule is another method to solve for a system
of equations of this type. They can be written in the point-slope form, or the slope-intercept form. For 10
points, name these polynomials of degree one.
ANSWER: linear equation
Two solutions to homogeneous second order linear differential equations with this property have
zeroes that alternate according to the Sturm separation theorem. Sets of the edges of a graph possess
an analogous property to this one if they make up a forest; that generalization of this property is
called a matroid. Reduction of order takes one solution to a differential equation and produces
another solution with this property. The (*) columns of a matrix have this property if the matrix has a
nonzero determinant. A set with this property that spans a vector space is said to be a basis for that space.
For 10 points, name this property possessed by a family of vectors if no vector can be written as a linear
combination of the others.
ANSWER: linear independence [accept word forms]
The product of the elementary divisors of one of these mathematical objects is equal to its minimal
polynomial if it is nonderogatory. The multiset of elementary divisors is invariant for similar ones,
where similarity is defined as an equivalence class under conjugation by an automorphism in GL.
When the codomain is a field, these functions are one-forms. A subspace is cyclic if it is generated by
the action of exactly one of these functions an element of the subspace. These maps are the (*)
endomorphisms of vector spaces since they distribute over addition and scalar multiplication. The set of all
vectors that one of these maps to zero is the nullspace. For 10 points, identify these maps which, in the case
of a finite-dimensional domain and codomain, can be represented by matrix multiplication.
ANSWER: linear mappings [or linear operators; or linear transformations; accept linear functions; accept just linear after "functions" is read; prompt on "matrices" before "matrix" is read]
One early method for this procedure was Fourier-Motzkin elimination, and the Hirsch conjecture provides
an upper bound on the runtime of one method. Another method involves introducing slack variables and
then manipulating the tableau through repeated pivoting. Karmarkar's algorithm and other interior point
methods are among the fastest solutions, and the ellipsoid algorithm was the first polynomial time algorithm
for it. The cutting-plane method can be used to solve the integer variety, which is NP-hard but which can
sometimes be approximated by examining the dual. Originally developed by Kantorovich to optimize
plywood production, FTP, name this problem, efficiently solved using the simplex method, which calls for
the optimization of a linear objective function given linear constraints.
ANSWER: linear programming
A method developed by George Dantzig to solve these types of problems uses slack variables and pivot
operations within a canonical tableau and is known as the simplex algorithm. When these problems involve
only two independent variables, they can be visualized by determining which lines with given slopes have
exactly one intersection point with a convex polyhedron on the Cartesian plane. That convex polyhedron
represents the feasible region, which is expressed using a set of inequalities that come from the constraints.
Name these optimization problems in which the constraints and the function being optimized must be firstdegree polynomials.
ANSWER: linear programming [prompt on partial answers; prompt on optimization or finding extreme values or finding maxima or finding minima or minimization or maximization or variations thereon]
Problems that can be solved by this field can be produced from more general problems by the
Charnes-Cooper transformation. One popular algorithm in this field can cycle when not choosing the
lowest-indexed pivot according to Bland's rule. The degenerate cube suggested by Klee and Minty
showed the exponential running time of some algorithms in this field like the criss-cross algorithm.
One algorithm in this field creates a (*) polytope representing a feasible region before traversing the
edges of that polytope. Problems can be
converted using non-negative slack variables in order to use Dantzig's simplex method in this field.
Methods in this field maximize an objective function according to some constraints. For 10 points, name
this technique to solve optimization problems of the namesake form.
ANSWER: linear programming [prompt on partial answers]
One method of solving this problem is improved by using Bland's rule, and a polynomial-time
method of solving this problem is the ellipsoid algorithm. Interior-point algorithms, like
Karmarkar's, are another method of solving these problems. The fundamental theorem of solving
these problems states that there either exists a finite solution, or the problem is either infeasible or
unbounded. A popular method used to solve this kind of problem introduces slack variables in order to
find a canonical tableau, and in n-dimensional space it attempts to find the vertices of a region bounded by a
series of hyperplanes; that is known as the simplex method. Originally developed to optimize plywood
production by Leonid Kantorovich, for 10 points, name this type of optimization problem which seeks to
maximize a first-order function given a series of constraints.
ANSWER: Linear Programming or Linear optimization [prompt on optimization]
These data structures can be improved with the move-to-front heuristic. One can reduce the typical
two fields needed in one variety of these to only one using a namesake "XOR" variation. In LISP,
these data structures are constructed from cons cells that contain the car and cdr fields. Many of
these layered on top of each other is known as a (*) skip. Each node in one of these data structures
contains a pointer to the next node and a pointer to the previous node in a "double" version. For 10 points,
name these data structures that consist of nodes connected in a sequential order.
ANSWER: linked lists
Sequences of this data structure are used in a data structure created by William Pugh. This data
structure was first developed by Allen Newell, Cliff Shaw and Herbert Simon for use in IPL. This is
one of the simplest data structures one can build out of conses in Lisp. A dummy object used to
simplify boundary conditions in these data structures is called a sentinel. Their "unrolled" type uses the
cache to increase performance by storing just enough elements in each section to fill a cache line. Their
last element is usually null, but it can reference their first element to form a "circular" one of these data
structures. They are often used to implement stacks and queues. These dynamically allocated data
structures also come in a "doubly" variety. For 10 points, identify this data structure constructed of
nodes with a data field and a pointer to the next node.
ANSWER: linked list
Tsakalidis represented these data structures as a BB-alpha tree, which allows one to find the ancestor
relationship of elements in Big O of 1 time. Maurer's Shadow Algorithm uses a dynamic version of
one of these data structures to speed up simulations. CDR coding is a representation for these them in
LISP, and multiple pieces of information are stored in each element in the (*) unrolled variant of them.
Their ends may be demarcated by sentinel nodes, while circular ones have the final node point to the initial
one. For 10 points, name these data structures which come in "singly" and "doubly" versions, whose nodes
each contains a pointer to the next and/or previous node.
ANSWER: linked lists
These are the basic data structure in Lisp, and in many functional languages, are implemented via cons
cells, each with a head and tail. They do not support efficient indexing, but do have faster insertion and
deletion than arrays, and need not be contiguous in memory. These structures can be classified as "single-"
or "doubly-", and they also can be classified as "linearly" or "circularly". Name this type of data structure in
which each node contains two fields, one containing the value and the other containing the location of the
next value.
ANSWER: linked lists [do not accept partial answers]
CDR and B trees function similarly to one variety of these structures, which can store references
while increasing cache performance. These structures are well suited to solving the Joesphus
problem, because they can delete nodes in sequence in Big O of 1, and they sometimes they contain
sentinel nodes to avoid special case code. They respond well to both insertion sort and merge sort,
and the move-to-front heuristic compensates for slow search through these even when sorted,
because random access takes Big O of n time. They can change in size dynamically and in addition to
circular, they can come in single and double varieties. For 10 points, name these data structures where
every node contains a pointer to the next node.
ANSWER: Linked Lists
A graph can be represented by storing the adjacencies of each vertex in one of these data structures. A
skip is made from layers consisting of this data structure. The last element of these data structures is usually
NULL, but can be changed to reference their first element to form a "circular" one. They're not trees, but
operations on these structures can be made easier by adding sentinel nodes. They are often used to
implement stacks and queues. Name this data structure whose "doubly" form consists of nodes with
pointers to their next node and previous node.
ANSWER: linked list [prompt on list]
The root of a Fibonacci heap is one of these structures. The most common method of chaining to
resolve collisions in hash tables utilizes this structure. Heapsort is generally avoided for sorting this
structure due to its poor performance with it. This structure is notorious for its poor cache
performance due to low locality of reference. The performance of algorithms working on these
structures can be increased if, instead of terminating them with NULL, they are terminated with a
dummy sentinel. When its consecutive nodes reference each other, it is described as "doubly". For 10
points, identify this data structure that contains a node with data and a pointer to the next node.
ANSWER: linked lists
The CAR and CDR operators work on this data structure. It's not a tree, but this structure may include
sentinel nodes. It can be used to implement a stack efficiently since inserting and removing the first
element takes constant time. In the worst case it will take Big-O of n time to insert and remove elements
from an n-element instance of this data structure. For 10 points name this type of list which in which each
data entry is associated with a pointer to the next item in the list.
ANSWER: linked list [prompt on list; or free list before "circular" is read]
Problematic instances of these data structures are found with algorithms named for Floyd and Brent. Several
of these data structures are combined in a probabilistic data structure comparable to balanced trees. These
data structures can be indexed in big O of n time. CAR and CDR are used for these structures in LISP, and
stacks and queues are most often implemented using them. Sentinel nodes are used in implementations of
these structures to make the last element point to something other than null. For 10 points, name these data
structures, a type of list where each node contains a pointer to the next one.
ANSWER: Linked Lists [prompt on Lists]
The fact that this operating system's kernel is monolithic and not micro resulted in a debate
between its creators and Andrew Tanenbaum. SCO sued IBM for giving the creators of this software
program part of its source code. When this operating system's kernel panics, an "oops" results. (*)
Distributions of this operating system include Debian, Red Hat, and Ubuntu. For 10 points, name this
open-source Unix-like operating system, which is named for the first name of its founder, Linus Torvalds.
ANSWER: Linux operating system [or Linux kernel]
The book Samizdat accused this system's creator of plagiarizing its predecessor, although that predecessor's
author, Andrew Tanenbaum, denied those charges. This system added to the "more" command of its parent
system with "less". This system's graphical user interface relies on X11 and its desktop manager is most
often GNOME. Its technical name requires it be preceded by GNU, a recursive acronym distinguishing it
from its parent system. Initially developed by Linus Torvalds, this free open-source operating system is
often represented by a penguin. With a kernel based o of MINIX, for ten points, name this operating
system whose popular distributions include Fedora, Debian, and Ubuntu and which is not Unix.
ANSWER: Linux
Eric Raymond wrote about the model used by this operating system's creator in the essay "The Cathedral
and the Bazaar." There is a controversy over the proper name of this operating system, and Richard
Stallman insists that its most common name is incorrect. Distributions of this operating system include
Debian, Fedora and Ubuntu. Its namesake kernel is used in the GNU Project and was created by Linus
Torvalds. For 10 points, name this Unix-like operating system whose mascot is a penguin.
ANSWER: GNU/Linux
This operating system sees frequent use on servers via the LAMP setup. This operating system's kernel
was originally written as a noncommercial replacement for the MINIX architecture. Richard Stallman
believes it is properly prefixed with "G-N-U." For 10 points, name this open-source operating system,
primarily attributed to Linus Torvalds, which comes in distributions like Red Hat and Ubuntu.
ANSWER: GNU/Linux
One use of this theorem is to show that a function can be represented as the sum of constants divided by its
poles. More notably, it can be used to show the contradiction that one divided by a function with no roots
must be both a function on the entire plane and be bounded. In this way, this theorem shows that every
function must have a number x0 such that f(x0) is equal to 0, the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. It can
be strengthened such that its conclusion is true for functions not mapped to only three points on the plane,
although the statement of it means that it only applies to functions that are holomorphic over the whole
complex plane. For ten points name this theorem of complex analysis, which states that a function that is
entire and bounded is constant.
ANSWER: Liouville's Theorem
One type of these is a data structure consisting of a group of nodes each containing references to the
preceding and succeeding nodes. In HTML, one type of these is designated by the tag <ul> and is bulleted
while another designated by the tag <ol> is numbered. The previous examples are called doubly linked,
unordered, and ordered, respectively. FTP, name this term from computer science that refers to a collection
of items accessible one after another, which could model a plan for grocery purchases.
ANSWER: Lists
The "skip" variety of this data structure is a type of probabilistic data structure. S-expressions consist of
these data structures, which are in Lisp, a language built around processing them. When each component of
one of these contains a reference to the next component, it is called the "linked" variety. For 10 points,
name this data structure which consists of an ordered collection of values.
ANSWER: lists
In information theory, the self-information is defined as a function of this type applied to the reciprocal of
probability. On the complex plane, these functions, like the square root, require a branch cut along the
negative real axis. One of these functions is the antiderivative of 1/x ("1 over x"). All of them are
asymptotic at x=0, and cross the x-axis at x=1. The slide rule takes advantage of the fact that these functions
reduce powers to products and products to sums. The common one is taken to a base of 10, while the
natural one is taken to a base of e. For 10 points, name this type of function, the inverse of exponentiation.
ANSWER: logarithms or logarithmic functions [prompt on log]
The Euler-Mascheroni ("oiler" mah-scuh-ROH-nee) constant is the limit as n goes to infinity of the
harmonic series minus this function of n. In a sorted array with n elements, performing this operation on n
approximates the worst case time for a binary search. In chemistry, placing a lowercase p in front of a
quantity indicates that this function was performed on it. Differentiating this function for x yields a function
proportional to one over x. For 10 points, name this operation, the inverse of exponentiation.
ANSWER: logarithm [accept taking the logarithm; or finding the logarithm; or log of x; or obvious equivalents, accept natural logarithm before binary search]
The complex version of this mathematical function is multi-valued every two pi i and hence
requires a "branch cut." If the argument of one of these functions is raised to the c power, one
can move c to the front of the function, while the sum of two functions of this type may be
rewritten as a single function with the original arguments multiplied together. Any function of
this type equals zero when evaluated at one, as any number raised to the zero power is one.
For 10 points, name these inverses of exponential functions, which often use the "natural base"
e.
ANSWER: logarithms [or logarithmic functions]
The iterated version of this function can be used to find the Delaunay triangulation of a set of points.
On a complex plane, this function's primary branch requires a branch cut along the negative real
axis, and a Riemann surface is attached to this function. One type of this function's alternating
harmonic series converges to two, and is the antiderivative of u prime over (*) u. The slide rule can use
these functions to multiply numbers, as this function of the quantity xy is equal to this function of x plus this
function of y. For ten points, name this function developed by Napier, the inverse of the exponential
function.
ANSWER: logarithms (accept natural logarithms)
The Baby-Step Giant-Step algorithm computes the discrete analogue of this function. This function is a
homomorphism from the positive reals under multiplication to the reals under addition. The fractional part
of this function is called the mantissa. Powers of one minus ten to the negative seven power were used to
compute the first values of this function by its discoverer, John Napier. When this function is applied to
x times y, the result is the sum of its outputs for x and y alone. The Change of Base Formula relates its
"common" and "natural" varieties. For ten points, name these inverses of exponential functions.
ANSWER: logarithm (accept common logarithm or natural logarithm or something with another base, accept ln)
The complexity class named after this function includes the undirected graph reachability problem.
In terms of the number of nodes, p, this is the approximate runtime of searching, inserting and
deleting an element from an AVL tree. For a height-balanced binary tree consisting of q nodes, there
are approximately this function of q levels. For the average case, if there are n inputs into (*)
quicksort, then the algorithm will run in n times this function of n. This is the average case runtime of the
binary search algorithm, since half of the list will be removed from consideration after any given step. For
10 points, name this mathematical function, the inverse of exponentiation.
ANSWER: logarithm [accept "discrete logarithm"]
The earliest definition of this term involved the use of tens to the seventh and negative seventh and was
named for John Napier. Numbers of this type are made up of an integer called the characteristic and a
fraction called the mantissa. Taking this operation to the multiplication of two components is equivalent to
adding the values of this operation to those components individually. The derivative of one type of this
function is equal to one over x. That type is taken in the base of e and is called the natural type of this. For
10 points, name this function that is the inverse of an exponent.
ANSWER: logarithms [or Napierian logarithms; or natural logarithms]
This type of function is asymptotically equal to a recurrence of F of N over 2 plus a constant. The
complex form of this function for a given input can have infinite outputs separated by multiples of two pi.
Its
derivative is equal to one over x and the sum of two of these on values x and y is equal to this function of x
times y. Changing the base of this operation by dividing it by its value for the new base. For 10 points, name
this type of function that is that returns the inverse of an exponential and comes in natural and log varieties.
ANSWER: logarithm [or log; accept natural logarithm and variants]
This function can be applied before using L-Hopital's [loh-pee-tahl-z] rule to evaluate the limit as x
approaches infinity of x raised to the power of one over x. Long before the invention of calculators, these
were evaluated using the quantity one minus ten raised to the negative seventh power, raised to various
powers. Adding one to x and then applying this function is approximately equal to x minus one-half x
squared. For several applications, including finding a fractal dimension, it is helpful to apply this function to
the scales of a graph. Applying this to a product is equivalent to finding the sum when this function is
applied separately to the factors. Name this function credited to John Napier, which is used in the changeof-base formula and uses the base e for its natural type.
ANSWER: (natural or common) logarithms [accept answers that additionally mention a base]
The discoverer of these functions is John Napier. This function of a root of x is equal to this function of x
divided by the order of the root. Without a horizontal shift, these functions all possess a vertical asymptote
at x equals zero. This function of a quotient is equal to this function of the numerator minus this function of
the denominator. e is the base of the "natural" one of these functions, written as ln (L N). Ones that do not
specify a base are assumed to be base 10. For 10 points, name these functions which can be thought of as
reverse exponents.
ANSWER: logarithms
The earliest definition of this term involved the use of tens to the seventh and negative seventh and was
named for John Napier. Numbers of this type are made up of an integer called the characteristic and a
fraction called the mantissa. Taking this operation to the multiplication of two components is equivalent to
adding the values of this operation to those components individually. The derivative of one type of this
function is equal to one over x. That type is taken in the base of e and is called the natural type of this. For
10 points, name this function that is the inverse of an exponent.
ANSWER: logarithms [or Napierian logarithms; or natural logarithms]
Its "generalized" form is also known as the Richards function, and its derivative is the Hubbert curve. It is
useful in Rasch modeling, in which the subject's ability to answer and the question's difficulty are equal at a
point where the probability of a correct answer is one-half, while it's also used as an activation functions in
neural nets. Functions of this form are relevant to autocatalytic reactions, where the product catalyzes its
own formation, and it was first described by Verhulst in response to statements by Malthus. For 10 points,
give the term for this function, such as e to the x over quantity one plus e to the x, the most common
example of a sigmoid curve, typically applied to problems of population growth.
ANSWER: logistic function
This curve can be called Richards- curve and is similar to the Gompertz function, and it is used to create
scales under the Rasch model. A graph of this function has the same shape as the hyperbolic tangent, and its
derivative is equal to the function itself times the quantity of a constant minus the function itself. This can
be expressed as a number divided by the quantity of a number plus an exponential function. Name this
function that starts off with approximately exponential growth but slows, especially as it approaches the
carrying capacity.
ANSWER: logistic (curve or function)
Properties about these structures can be proven in Hoare logic using their namesake invariants and
guards. Transformations of them include interchange, fusion, and fission. A common programming error
involving them is the "fence post" error. A conditional test, a counting variable, and incrementing code can
be used to make the "for" variety of these, and an inaccessible exit condition results in an infinite one of
these. For 10 points, name these iterative structures in programs that execute the same instructions until a
certain condition is reached.
ANSWER: loops [prompt on iterators]
Whether the test condition is checked before or after the question of these structures determines if they are
pre-test or post-test. The namesake counter variable for some of these structures, which is commonly a
variable named i or j, is also called an iterator. These structures can be declared using the keywords for or
while, and repeat a block of code. For 10 points, identify these programming structures that can run forever
if their terminating condition is not met.
ANSWER: loops [prompt on iteration until "iterator" is read]
Invariants named for these constructs are true after every time they are executed. A type of them whose
name is prefixed with "do" checks the termination condition at the end, rather than the beginning. One can
go to the beginning of one of them with the "continue" command, or leave one entirely with the "break"
command. These constructs come in "while" and "for" types. Name these repeating pieces of code, an
"infinite" one of which will cause a program to run forever.
ANSWER: loops [or specific answers, such as for loops or while loops]
In functional languages these entities can be expressed using recursion or fixed point iteration instead
of their explicit constructs. These typically consist of a question and a condition, and some varieties
include a stop, start, and step value. A common error involving these occurs when one creates a
condition that can never be met and thus the question (*) continues indefinitely. This produces an "infinite"
variety of one of these. For 10 points, name this type of control structure in programming that most notably
comes in the While and For varieties.
ANSWER: Loops
The overhead of these constructs can be reduced by using a technique known as unrolling.
Continue is a common keyword used in the context of these constructs. Its pre-test type can be
transformed to post-test by appropriately prefixing the keyword "do." If a condition always
evaluates to (*) true, the infinite type of these constructs is created. Common keywords for these
constructs are for and while. For 10 points, identify these constructs that repeat a section of code.
ANSWER: loop [prompt on control flow statement]
The "enhanced" type of this construct in Java executes code for each element of a collection, while
the "continue" keyword returns to the start of one of these structures. The complexity of an
algorithm consisting of two nested ones is equal to the product of their complexities. An index
variable can be incremented to count the number of (*) iterations in one of these structures, and they can
be set off by "for" and "while" keywords. For ten points, name these programming control flow structures
that execute a block of code until a condition is satisfied, whose infinite type can prevent a program from
terminating.
ANSWER: loops (accept specific types of loops, like while or for)
A programmer can reduce the overhead of these entities by repeating statements within them in a
technique known as their namesake "unrolling." COBOL implements these constructs using the
PERFORM statement. Tail recursion can be simplified using these constructs. They can be replaced
by (*) Iterators. Selection sort is commonly implemented using one of these constructs nested within
another one of them. Infinite ones can cause a program to become unresponsive. For 10 points, name these
constructs which include for and while, methods of control flow that allow program statements to be
iterated.
ANSWER: loops (accept specific answers like for loops or while loops)
Functional languages like Scheme use tail recursion to approximate these elements. Several languages
have a foreach (for-EECH) type of this element, which goes through all elements of a collection. Another
type is the "while" one of these, which stops once a given condition is reached. Using as a stop condition a
statement that is never true can lead to an "infinite" example of these. For 10 points, name this code
element that repeats a sequence of instructions.
ANSWER: loops
Duff's device is commonly used to remove these items from a piece of code. The removal of
statements from these structures is called hoisting or scalar promotion. An empty type of this
structure is used to implement a busy-wait scheme. During compilation, they are typically removed
through a process called unrolling. In most languages, including Java and C, the continue keyword
passes control to the "nearest" of these structures. When using a type of these structures, the (*)
control variable is declared when it is initialized and only has local scope. These structures are evaluated at
least once when both the keywords "do" and "while" are used. For 10 points, name these pieces of code that
are usually executed several times until a condition is met.
ANSWER: loops [or repitition; or iteration]
In C++, the "continue" keyword returns control to the start of one of these constructs, while the
"break" keyword transfers control to the statement following one. In C++, the "for" keyword
creates one of these objects. A program can hang if it gets stuck in an "infinite" one of these
constructs, and the "while" statement in C++ is used to create one whose commands are executed
while a certain condition is true. For 10 points, name these programming control flow structures that
execute a given block of code repeatedly.
ANSWER: loops
J.H. Conway developed the "LUX" method to construct these objects, and in the 17th century Simon
de la Loubere introduced to the West a method for constructing them after returning from Siam. The
Nine Halls Diagram represents one of these known as "Lo Shu," which is the unique one of order
three. All 880 ones of order four were enumerated by Bernard Frenicle de Bessy, and Benjamin
Franklin notably created ones of orders 8 and 16 with special properties. Catalan artist Josep
Subirachs included one of these objects on the facade of the (*) Sagrada Familia, while a more famous
one is depicted next to an hourglass and above an angel in a 1514 engraving; that work is Albrecht Durer's
Melancholia I. For 10 points, name these mathematical objects in which n2 numbers are arranged such that
the n numbers in all the rows, columns, and main diagonals have the same sum.
ANSWER: magic squares
This man debated with Herb Simon about the Zipf frequency distribution in the journal Information
and Control, and the Weierstrass function is sometimes co-named for him. He has a namesake tree,
and his most famous creation was the subject of papers by Hubbard and Douady, who showed it was
(*) connected, and Shishikura, who showed that the object has dimension 2. Its usual representation shows
the regions in the complex plane where that sequence converges and displays high levels of self-similarity.
For 10 points, identify this Polish mathematician, the author of The Fractal Geometry of Nature and creator
of a namesake set.
ANSWER: Benoit Mandelbrot
This mathematician along with R.L. Hudson criticized the Black-Scholes financial model in his book The
Misbehavior of Markets. He studied the water level of the Nile and classified changes as Noah effects and
Joseph effects, and he studied cotton prices and determined that there was a symmetry of scale, and he then
worked for IBM, where he found a similarity between signal noise and Cantor dust. This mathematician is
the namesake of a recursive equation that squares a number and then adds a complex constant which can be
used to form a self-similar set. Name this recently deceased mathematician who wrote The Fractal
Geometry of Nature.
ANSWER: Benoit Mandelbrot
The "center" theory of this mathematical object is used to reduce the dimension of a dynamical system
around equilibrium points. Nash's Embedding Theorem provides the conditions for two algebraic ones to
be equivalent. "Surgery" must be done when attaching a "handle" to one of these mathematical objects,
which surgery theory can alter if they are over dimension five. Infinitely differentiable ones are called
smooth. Every smooth kind of this object under four dimensions is topological. Riemannian ones contain a
metric tensor and are acted on by Ricci flow, a method used to prove the Poincare Conjecture, which deals
with three-dimensional ones. For 10 points, name this mathematical object, consisting of a topological
space that is locally Euclidean, a generalization of a surface.
ANSWER: manifold
The consideration of a space homotopy equivalent to these things and a homotopy equivalence
of these things homotopic to a diffeomorphism is the subject of surgery theory, which is used to
classify them in greater than five dimensions. A smooth, compact one of these things of
dimension n can be smoothly embedded into the real numbers with dimension two n according to
the Whitney embedding theorem, which implies that they have a Riemannian metric. A simplyconnected,
closed, three-dimensional one is homeomorphic to a sphere according to a famous
conjecture. These things are defined by atlases, which are a collection of coordinate charts. For
10 points, name these locally Euclidean topological spaces whose two-dimensional form is a
surface.
ANSWER: topological manifolds
For supersymmetry to occur in four observable dimensions, the six unseen dimensions must assume
this form, named after Calabi and Yau, and lower dimension varieties in the 10D space seen by
strings are known as (*) D-branes. A set of local Darboux coordinates can be found at each point on the
symplectic type, and possessing a metric tensor allows them to be embedded isometrically in a Euclidean
space according to the Nash embedding theorem. When also smooth, they are named for Riemann and
whether a closed one is homeomorphic to the three-sphere is the basis for the Poincare conjecture. For 10
points, name these topological spaces which generalize the concept of closed surfaces.
ANSWER: manifolds [accept Calabi-Yau manifolds before "Calabi"]
A system named for this man can be analyzed using the Viterbi algorithm. Policy iteration and value
iteration can be used to solve one of this man's namesake decision processes. Another system named for
this man is called ergodic if any state can reach any other state in a finite number of steps. The simplest
dynamic Bayesian network is a "hidden" model named for this man, whose namesake property is possessed
by a system whose future states only depend on the present state. For 10 points, name this Russian
mathematician who names stochastic "chains."
ANSWER: Andrey [Andreyevich] Markov
The property named after this person applies to situations when present states of a system, but no past
states, have no impact on future states. This property often applies to stochastic processes,
which means that the future depends on random factors rather than being completely deterministic. When
the property named after this person holds, then the process named after him can be used to
predict future outcomes, and when time can be handled in discrete steps, that process can be calculated
using his namesake chains. Name this Russian mathematicians whose chains typically involve matrix
multiplication.
ANSWER: Andrey Markov
The Baum-Welch and Viterbi algorithm are used to find parameters of a type of model that uses one of
these mathematical entities. The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is a method of sampling that combines a
Monte Carlo method with one of these mathematical objects. The Chapman-Kolmogorov equation can be
used to find the joint distribution of the entities contained in one of these objects, which when aperiodic and
positive recurrent are referred to as ergodic. They are usually defined by a transition matrix and unlike a
martingale only rely on the previous state. Usually defined by a transition matrix and used in a namesake
type of hidden model, for 10 points, name these mathematical construct that has a series of states and
probability of transition between them.
ANSWER: Markov chains (accept Hidden Markov Model throughout)
The stability of the continuous parameter type can be determined by Foster-Lyapunov criteria, and the
application of Dynkin's formula can demonstrate that they are Harris recurrent. If it is possible to go from
each state to every other state, then they are ergodic, and the rate at which they converge to a stationary
distribution is the mixing rate. Ehrenfest, Bernoulli and Laplace used them to develop discrete models for
the exchange of gas molecules between two containers. The Gibbs sampler is an example of the Monte
Carlo type of this process, that simulates direct draws from a complex distribution of interest. For 10 points,
what is this stochastic process, named for a Russian mathematician, in which the future value of a variable is
independent of its past history?
ANSWER: Markov chain or Markov process [prompt on stochastic]
This eponymous process can be represented by the Chapman-Kolmogorov equation. Bayesian
probabilities are used with these processes to get a result similar to the Viterbi algorithm, which
is a max-sum algorithm. These eponymous processes, comparable to having no memory, are used by
the Google PageRank algorithm. These processes use arrangements of nonnegative numbers whose
columns add to one, called transition matrices. These processes are used to solve problems in which
probability plays a role in moving from one state to the next, which are called stochastic processes.
Name these processes that are also called chains.
ANSWER: Markov processes [or Markov chains; prompt on stochastic processes]
Kelly's lemma states that for a continuous one of these entities, the forward-time stationary
distribution and the reverse-time stationary distribution are identical. Kolmogorov's criterion is used
to determine whether these constructs are reversible, and if every sub-component of these entities is
aperiodic and positive-recurrent, they are called ergodic. The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm and
Gibbs sampling are examples of algorithms that attempt to construct one of these with an
equilibrium distribution equal to the (*) sampling probability distribution; those algorithms are named
for both Monte Carlo and these entities. A classic example of one of these is the drunkard's walk, in which
each end state is absorbing. For 10 points, name these constructs described by a transition matrix, in which
the probability of going to any state depends only on the present state.
ANSWER: Markov chain [or Markov processes]
In 1970, Paul Cohen proved by induction that these constructs alone are insufficient to create an
artificial intelligence that would pass the Turing test. When one of these constructs satisfies an
additional property, it is named after Harris. A version of this construct in which results are
completely independent is called the Bernoulli scheme. Examples include random-walk phenomena in
physics and the rolling of dice to move pieces across a game-board. For 10 points, name this kind of
stochastic process in which any future set of conditions is determined by and only by the present set of
conditions, named for a Soviet mathematician.
ANSWER: Markov chain [prompt on Markov Property; or state-dependent function]
Cramer's rule uses these structures to solve a system of equations. The spectral theorem applies to the
Hermitian (her-MIHT-ee-uhn) variety of these structures. Gaussian (GOW-see-uhn) elimination can be
used to find the rank of one of these. Eigenvalues (EYE-guhn-val-yoos) are important for the square type of
them. Multiplication with these objects is not commutative. For 10 points, name these mathematical objects
represented by rows and columns of numbers.
ANSWER: matrix
These entities can be factored using singular value decomposition. The characteristic equation is used to
find important values for them for multiplication by vectors. The Jacobian type is used for change of
variables in multivariate calculus, and diagonal ones have their eigenvalues along the main diagonal. These
entities can be used in conjunction with Cramer's rule or row elimination in order to solve systems of linear
equations. For the two-by-two type, their determinant is ad - bc, and multiplication of these entities is non-
commutative. For 10 points, name these rectangular arrays of numbers.
ANSWER: Matrices [accept Matrix]
Jacques Hadamard designed a type of these structures used to create error-correcting code. Some of these
are classified as upper or lower triangular, and these are skew-symmetric if their opposite equals their
transpose. These structures are used to represent graphs using degrees or adjacency. Putting an augmented
one of these into reduced row echelon [eh-cheh-lon] form can be used to solve a system of equations. Name
these rectangular arrangements of numbers, the square examples of which have determinants.
ANSWER: matrix or matrices
The existence of a singular value decomposition for these objects is guaranteed by the spectral theorem.
Multiplying them together corresponds to composing linear maps. The roots of the characteristic equation
of one of these objects are its eigenvalues. Collections of derivatives named for Jacobi and Hesse are
examples of them. Symmetric ones are equal to their own transpose. One property of these objects is
computed by cofactor expansion or by row reduction. They may be produced by right-multiplying a column
vector by a row vector, and have unique inverses if their determinants are nonzero. For 10 points, name
these arrays of numbers with rows and columns.
ANSWER: matrix [or matrices; accept Jacobian matrix; accept Hessian matrix; accept symmetric matrix; accept square matrix]
Solving the characteristic polynomial finds the eigenvalues for one of these objects. The rank of these is
found through Gaussian elimination, which can also be used to solve linear systems by putting one of these
in row echelon form. Multiplication is not commutative for these objects, and inverses only exist for square
ones. The inverse of one of these equals its adjugate divided by the determinant. For 10 points, name these
arrays of numbers.
ANSWER: matrices [or matrix]
The local curvature of a multivariable function can be found using the Hessian one of these constructs.
First-order derivatives are contained in the Jacobian one. If one of these is invertible, it can be multiplied
by its inverse to yield an "identity" one of them. Multiplication of them is not commutative. The
determinant is defined for these constructs, which are central to linear algebra. For 10 points, name these
rectangular arrays of numbers organized into rows and columns.
ANSWER: matrix [or matrices]
The Jacobian type of these structures is often used when changing between coordinate systems while
the Hessian variety is used in analyzing the critical point of a multivariable function. Eigenvalues can be
found by solving the characteristic polynomial of square ones, which sets their determinant equal to zero.
Two of them can be multiplied if the number of columns in the first one equals the number of rows in the
second. For 10 points, name these rectangular arrays of numbers encountered in mathematics.
ANSWER: matrix
The companion type of these objects is sometimes used to simplify differential equations. The GramSchmidt orthonormalization process is used for the QR decomposition of these objects. The exponential
function is defined by a finite series for these objects only if they are nilpotent. These objects that have four
fundamental subspaces can be used to represent linear transformations. Finding their eigenvalues allows
them to be diagonalized. If x and b are vectors and A is one of these, then A x equals b represents a system
of linear equations. These objects have a nonzero determinant if they are invertible and square. Identify
these objects whose multiplication is not commutative, rectangular grids of numbers arranged in rows and
columns.
ANSWER: (square) matrices [or matrix]
Certain types of these entities have characteristic functions, which can help in finding the eigenvalues and
traces of these entities. Different ones represent unique linear transformations., and operations on them
include "transpose." One quantity associated with them can solve linear equations with Cramer's Rule; that
quantity, the determinant, is equal to A times D minus B times C in a "square" one of these. For 10 points,
name these rectangular arrays of numbers.
ANSWER: matrix or matrices
Two of these entities labeled A and B are similar to each other if there exists another of these entities P
such that B equals P-inverse times A times P. One of these entities is classified as skew-symmetric if
it equals the opposite of its own transpose. Gauss-Jordan [YOR-dahn] elimination is used to put these
entities into reduced row echelon form, which is used to solve systems of equations. Accounting for
algebraic multiplicity, the product of the eigenvalues of one of these entities is equal to its determinant.
Name these objects multiplied by pairing each rows of the left example with each column of the right
example, creating another one of these rectangular arrangements of numbers.
ANSWER: matrixes [or matrices]
LU decomposition is one technique used to factorize these entities. The Hermitian example of these objects
consists of complex conjugates. The characteristic polynomial of these objects has solutions equal to
eigenvalues, and their lower left corner is filled with zeros during Gaussian elimination, which converts
them to their row echelon form. A system of linear equations can be solved by finding the determinants of
these and applying Cramer's rule. Multiplication of two of these objects is defined only when the number of
columns in the first matches the number of rows in the second. For 10 points, name these rectangular arrays
of numbers or expressions.
ANSWER: matrices [or matrix]
A unitary one is equal to the inverse of its conjugate transpose. The Fock one is used to solve the
Roothaan equations and the Hessian one contains the second-order partial derivatives of a function.
Wilhelm Jordan improved a method to reduce these structures into (*) row-echelon form, and if their
determinant equals zero, the system of equations they represent has zero or infinitely many solutions.
Multiplication of these entities is not commutative, and they can only be multiplied if the number of
columns in the first equals the number of rows in the second. For 10 points, name these rectangular arrays
of numbers.
ANSWER: Matrix [accept Matrices]
The adjacency variety of these entities are used to show which vertices of a graph are adjacent to other
vertices. One type of these entities over a commutative ring satisfies its characteristic equation according to
the Cayley-Hamilton theorem. One of these constructs containing the I, J, and K components of two vectors
as elements can be used to compute the cross product. For n linear equations and n variables, these
constructs can be used to represent the equations, and are used to solve the equations for the n variables
with Gaussian elimination. For 10 points, name these mathematical constructions used to organize an array
of numbers in rows and columns.
ANSWER: matrix [or matrices]
Complex ones of these can be Hermitian. These objects can be factored into three through Singular
Value Decomposition, of which the first and third are unitary, and QR-decomposition forms
orthogonal and right triangular ones. They have specific numbers symbolized lambda, eigenvalues,
and corresponding [*] eigenvectors. Reduced to row-echelon form by Gaussian elimination, in computer
science, these non-commutative objects are represented as double arrays. For ten points, name these
mathematical objects with determinants, rows, columns, and numbers as entries.
ANSWER: matrix or matrices
One of these entities that represents the location of vertices on a graph is the "adjacency" type. One used
to identify resemblances between two data points is a similarity type. A collection of second-order partial
derivatives of a function may be collected in a Hessian one of these entities. First-order derivatives are
collected in the Jacobian one. If one of these entities is invertible, it is row-equivalent to an identity variety,
and its determinant is nonzero. Multiplication of these entities is notably not commutative. For 10 points,
name this rectangular array of numbers.
ANSWER: matrix or matrices
General linear groups are made up of these objects, which are the subject of the Rank-Nullity Theorem. The
Cayley-Hamilton Theorem states that these objects satisfy their own characteristic polynomial, whose roots
are this object's eigenvalues. These objects can be put into reduced row echelon form through Gaussian
elimination, which can be used to find an inverse if it has a nonzero determinant. The transpose operation
swaps the rows and columns of, for ten points, these rectangular arrays of numbers.
ANSWER: matrix or matrices (accept additional adjectives "square" or "invertible")
George Pimentel developed an isolation technique named after these entities, and one named after
Harris allows archaeologists to view stratigraphic sequences in diagram form. This term describes
the fine-grained, non-phenocryst minerals in a porphyritic rock such as granite. Collagen and
proteoglycans form the (*) extracellular this in animals, and this term also describes the
intermitochondrial space. A mathematical object with this name can be put into row echelon form using
Gaussian elimination. For ten points, name this term which in math refers to an array of numbers for which
a determinant can be calculated.
ANSWER: matrix or matrices
The Cayley-Hamilton theorem applies to these entities when they are part of an abelian (uh-BEE-lee-un)
group, stating that each one satisfies its own characteristic equation. That characteristic equation is used to
find scalars which multiply certain vectors to give the same result as multiplying by these entities; those
scalars are called eigenvalues. Transition ones of these entities are used in Markov chains, and Gauss-
Jordan elimination can be applied to these structures to convert them into reduced row-echelon form. An
adjoint of one of these equals its inverse times its determinant. Name these mathematical structures that
usually consist of rectangular arrays of numbers.
ANSWER: square matrices [or matrix; accept linear transformations before they are mentioned; prompt on transformations]
A process named for Cholesky decomposes these objects into the product of a lower- triangular
matrix with its adjoint. These objects are always orthogonally diagonalizable, and are positivedefinite if and only if all their eigenvalues are positive. Different eigenspaces of these objects produce
orthogonal eigenvectors, and according to the (*) spectral theorem, these objects always have
orthonormal bases of eigenvectors; thus, all these types of matrices- eigenvalues are real. Generalized by
Hermitian matrices, for 10 points, name these types of matrices that are equal to their transpose, with entries
i,j always equal to entries j,i.
ANSWER: symmetric matrices [accept word forms; prompt on matrix before "types of" is read]
One way of performing of a process of this sort involves taking the square root of a pivot matrix,
multiplying it with the transpose of a certain type of matrix, and multiplying that product by its transpose.
The most common way of calculating the pseudoinverse can be easily calculated after performing another
type of this process on a matrix because the pseudoinverse of an eigenmatrix is simple to calculate. Those
processes for doing this activity on matrices respectively called Cholesky and the singular value one.
Another method of doing this action begins by using an augmented matrix then proceeds to eliminate using
pivots in both entries until it yields a canonical form of an upper triangular and lower triangular matrix. For
10 points, name this operation which includes the "LU" variety, which is the separation of a matrix into a
product of two matrices.
ANSWER: matrix decomposition or matrix factorization
For operands that represent linear transformations, this operation represents function composition.
It will yield the identity if and only if it is performed on a singular operand with its inverse. Unlike its
scalar counterpart, this process does not generally (*) commute, and it is only defined if the number of
columns of the first operand equals the number of rows of the second operand. For 10 points, name this
binary operation on two matrices.
ANSWER: matrix multiplication (accept matrix product; accept word forms or variations like multiplying matrices; prompt on multiplication or word forms thereof)
One method of performing this operation on a distributed system is Cannon's algorithm. Kleinberg showed
that it can be embedded on the wreath product of an order-17 abelian group and an order-2 symmetric
group. The fastest method for doing this has big-O of n to the 2.3 runtime, the Coppersmith-Winograd
algorithm. Another method splits the arguments into blocks and is named for Strassman, and this operation
naively ran in big-O of n to the third time. In a vector space, this operation is used to compose two linear
transformations, and is always associative but only commutative if there are no off-diagonal elements. FTP,
name this operation carried out on paper by multiplying the elements of the nth row and nth column of the
namesake constructs together.
ANSWER: Matrix multiplication (Accept equivalents)
The Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm is the fastest known method for accomplishing this task, although its
improvement over Strassen methods is only in extremely large cases. Kronecker and Hadamard are
namesakes of non-standard ways of performing this, and accomplishing this for identical entities can be
made simpler using the Cayley-Hamiton theorem by calculation of the characteristic equation from its
eigenvalues. Ordinarily, this non-commutative task of order n-cubed can only be done if the first entity has
the same number of columns as the number of rows in the second entity. FTP, name this mathematical
operation performed on an array of numbers.
ANSWER: matrix multiplication [prompt on partial answer]
Takaoka's algorithm reduces the all pairs shortest path problem to this performing this operation. This
operation on a certain set defines the GL group. One algorithm used to perform this operation is the
Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm which is faster than the Strassen algorithm. Computing the evolution of a
finitely described Markov process is done by repeated application of this operation. This operation permits
zero divisors. This operation is used to perform finite dimension linear maps. This operation is distributive
and associative, but not commutative. For 10 points, name this operation which involves taking the product
of two matrices.
ANSWER: matrix multiplication
Finding this sort of independent set is NP-complete. The default size for this type of transmission unit on
Ethernet is 1500 bytes. Determining the parameters of a statistic of a model can be done using this type of
likelihood estimation. This type of extrema occurs at a point when the first derivative is positive on an open
interval to the left and negative to the right of the point. For 10 points, name this term given to a largest
item which is paired with a minimum.
ANSWER: maximum
The conjugate gradient method is used to approximately find these locations, as are linear programming and
other techniques in mathematical optimization. A critical point is definitely one of these locations if the
second derivative at the point is nonzero. A real-valued function must attain each of these values at least
once on a closed and bounded interval according to the extreme value theorem. In statistics, these values are
found at the ends of the whiskers of a box plot. Integer multiples of pi are both "global" and "local"
versions of these locations for the cosine function. For 10 points, name these locations at which a function
attains its largest and smallest values.
ANSWER: maximum and minimum [or maxima and minima; accept maximum alone; accept minimum]
alone; or word forms; accept extremum or extreme value or word forms before "extreme value theorem" is
read and prompt afterwards; accept any of those answers with the word "local," "global," "absolute," or
"relative" in front]
The "tri" form of this measure is one-quarter of the sum of the two hinges and twice the median. The
second moment of a probability distribution is equal to this operation on the square of the variable
minus the square of this operation. For a continuous distribution function, the most common type of
this operation is given by the integral from negative infinity to infinity of its probability density
function times the function itself. Other forms of this measure include "harmonic" and "geometric"
ones, which require the reciprocal of the sum of reciprocals and the nth root of a product of n data points.
For 10 points, name this statistical average whose "arithmetic" form results from dividing the sum of n data
points by n.
ANSWER: mean [or average]
The t-test can be used to find the probability that this value is the same for two populations. For
continuous distributions, it equals the integral of x times the probability density function, making it
the first moment. This value for a population is usually represented as mu, while the sample type is
represented by (*) x-bar. The law of large numbers states that as the sample size increases, the sample
type will approach the population type. For the standard normal distribution, this value is zero. For 10
points, name this type of average, that equals the sum of sample values divided by the sample size.
ANSWER: mean [or expected value; prompt on average]
One variety of this quantity is used to find the volume of a pyramidal frustum and named the Heronian type.
Another variety of this quantity can be used to find the overall speed of an object which discretely changes
speed during its motion and is found by dividing a product by a sum. In addition to the harmonic variety,
another type of this quantity is calculated by taking the nth root of the product of n numbers and is known as
the geometric type. Name this quantity whose arithmetic (air-ith-MAA-tik) type is calculated by adding a
set of numbers and dividing by how many numbers there are.
ANSWER: means [prompt on average; prompt on measure of central tendency]
In ANOVA, a capital X symbolizes the "grand" form of this quantity. Cumulative distribution functions
evaluated at this point equal 0.5, and this value will always have a Z-score of 0. An approximation for this
number is found at the center of a confidence interval. Standard error is calculated by squaring the
difference between this value and each element in the sample. It is defined as the sum of a sample divided
by the number of elements. For 10 points, name this value, the average of a sample of data.
ANSWER: mean [or sample mean; or population mean]
This value is the first derivative of the moment generating function at zero. In linear regression, this
value of the dependent variable conditioned on the independent variable is the linear equation, assuming
this value for the error terms is zero. It is not multiplicative unless two random variables are uncorrelated.
For a continuous density function f, this value is the integral of x times f of x dx. For a normally distributed
population, the sum of all sample values divided by the sample size provides a good estimate of this value.
For 10 points, name this expected value of a random variable.
ANSWER: population mean [or expected value until it is read; prompt on average]
One form of this property can be calculated by raising the product of each value in a sample to 1/n ["one
over n"], and this property also comes in a "harmonic" variety. The law of large numbers states that the
value of this property of a sample becomes closer to its true value as the sample size increases. For 10
points, name this quantity from statistics that can be calculated by dividing the sum of the values of each
component over the number of components in a system, which is contrasted with the median and mode.
ANSWER: mean [accept average; accept arithmetic or geometric or harmonic mean]
By Markov's Inequality, the probability that a random variable exceeds a is at
most this quantity divided by a. This quantity of x can be computed as the
integral of x with respect to probability. The St. Petersburg Paradox concerns
a game in which this quantity is infinite despite finite payouts. The Law of
Large Numbers states that the average of the terms of a sequence(*) approaches
this value. In a normal distribution, ninety-five percent of data is within two standard
deviations of this value. For a finite data set, this value can be computed by summing the
data and dividing by the number of data points. For ten points, name this average value
of a data set.
ANSWER: expected value or expectation or mean (prompt on "average")
In the Poisson distribution, this quantity is equal to the variance. This quantity is undefined for the Cauchy
distribution, and for a binomial distribution, it is equal to the probability of success times the number of
trials. One variety of this quantity is equal to the sample size divided by the sum of the reciprocals of those
values, the "harmonic" type. This quantity is denoted by an "x" with a bar over it for a sample, and for a
population, it is denoted by the Greek letter "mu." For 10 points, name this quantity whose arithmetic
variety is equal to the sum of a set of values divided by the number of values.
ANSWER: Mean [prompt on Average]
The three most common types of this are known as Pythagorean and can be pictured for two values by
combining those values to form a circle diameter, with one of them equaling the radius and another equaling
the height of half the circle where the values meet. One of these values is the reciprocal of the reciprocal of
n times the sum of the reciprocals of the values. Another one is found by taking the nth root of the product
of the values. Give this value that, in addition to harmonic and geometric types, has an arithmetic type equal
to the common notion of an average.
ANSWER: mean (prompt on "average", accept arithmetic mean, geometric mean, or harmonic mean)
This operation is performed iteratively in the Babylonian method for square roots, which performs it on a
term and the radicand divided by that term. A famous inequality states that this operation yields a larger
value than a similar "geometric" one. The centroid of a triangle can be computed by performing this
operation on the (*) coordinates of the vertices. The Law of Large Numbers states that the expected value
is approached by this operation performed on the sample data. The axis of symmetry of a parabola can be
found by performing this operation on the roots. For ten points, identify this type of average contrasted with
modes and medians.
ANSWER: arithmetic mean (prompt on "average" before mention)
Two values of this quantity are compared in a two-sample t-test. In a chi-squared [KYE "squared"]
distribution, this value is equal to the number of degrees of freedom. For a function, this value can
be calculated by dividing its integral by the width of the interval of the integral. Often represented
by a letter with a bar over it, this number for a distribution is equal to the expected value. There are
harmonic and geometric versions of this quantity, the latter of which is found by taking the root of a
product. Name this value found by adding a set of numbers and dividing by the number of values in
the set.
ANSWER: arithmetic mean [accept average; accept expected value before it is mentioned]
Chisini types of these values include the quadratic and Heronian ones. For a continuous distribution
function, the population type of these values is equal to the integral of the product of the function and its
probability function over all possible values. A theorem named after these values states that for two (*)
endpoints of a function, there is always a tangent along that function parallel to the secant of the endpoints.
The square root of the product of two numbers is its geometric form, and it is often contrasted with medians
and modes. For 10 points, name this statistical measure whose arithmetic type is equal to the sum of a set of
values divided by the number of values.
ANSWER: mean or average
With deviation, this quantity names a form of data used in calculating least-squares lines. For a binomial
distribution, this quantity equals the probability of success times the number of trials. The geometric type of
this quantity equals the square root of the product of a set of values, while the harmonic type equals the
sample size divided by the sum of the reciprocals of those values. This quantity for a population is
symbolized mu, while for a sample it is denoted by an x with a bar over it. For 10 points, give this quantity
calculated by dividing the sum of a set of values by the number of values, the most common method of
calculating an average.
ANSWER: mean [prompt on "average" before the end]
This theorem can be used to prove Taylor's Theorem, of which it is also a generalization of, while a
generalized version of this theorem can be used to prove L-hopital's rule. That form states that the quotient
of the derivatives of two sections of a function at a certain point is equal to the quotient of the differences of
the endpoint values, and is named for Cauchy. A special case is of it states that if a continuous function has
the same value at the end points of an interval, its derivative must equal zero on that interval, and is named
for Rolle. For 10 points, name this theorem which states that there is a least one point on an interval at
which the slope is equal to the average derivative.
ANSWER: mean value theorem
The second version of this theorem states that the integral of a product of two functions is equal to an output
value of one of the functions multiplied by the integral of the other function. The version of this theorem
named after Cauchy (koh-SHEE) can be used to prove L-Hopital's (lo-pee-TAHL-s) rule. A special case of
this theorem, proven by the continuity property and extreme value theorem, is named Rolle's (ROHL-s)
theorem. If you travel a distance of sixty miles in one hour, this theorem guarantees that at some point in
time you traveled sixty miles per hour. Name this theorem that, for a function continuous on a closed
interval and differentiable on that interval's interior, guarantees the existence of a point whose tangent line
has the same slope as the average slope of the interval.
ANSWER: mean value theorem [accept MVT]
The generalization of this theorem allowing it to be applied to two functions rather than the usual one is
named after Cauchy, and a version of this theorem applied to integration sets an integral equal to the
product of its width times a function value and is derived from the extreme value theorem. Most proofs of
the common form of this theorem begin by proving Rolle's Theorem, which is a special case of this
theorem. Give this theorem applied to continuous and closed intervals stating that a point in the interval has
the same slope as a line going through the endpoints of the interval.
ANSWER: mean value theorem or MVT
In image processing, this statistic is used to reduce salt-and-pepper noise. It can be estimated by Pareto
interpolation, and for continuous distributions this statistic cannot be more than one standard deviation from
the mean. For a distribution, this is the point that minimizes the average of the absolute deviations. It can be
defined as the spot where the cumulative distribution function equals one half. A measure of central
tendency, it is less sensitive to outliers than the mean. Name this value that can be found by finding the
value at the fiftieth percentile or, for finite sets with an odd number of elements, the middle number of the
set.
ANSWER: median
For a cumulative distribution function, this name is given to the value of the input for which the output
equals one-half. The point of intersection of the segments of this name divides each one into segments
whose lengths form a two-to-one ratio. That point of intersection in a triangle is called the centroid. This
name is also given to the segment that connects the midpoint of a side of a triangle to its opposite site. For
10 points, give this term that names the second quartile, or "middle," of a data set.
ANSWER: median
The geometric type of this, also known as the Fermat-Weber [fehr-mah VAY-ber] point, is used to locate
transportation hubs and is defined as the point that minimizes the total distance to a given set of points. This
term also is used to describe a very simple non-linear rank-conditioned rankselection noise reduction filter.
This term also describes segments whose lengths can be calculated using Apollonius- [ap-pol-LONE-ee-us]
theorem, which meet, in the case of a uniformly weighted triangle, at the center of mass, and in the case of
any triangle, at the centroid. Give this term that names a segment going from a vertex to the midpoint of an
opposite side of a triangle and which also names the middle number in a ranked list of values.
ANSWER: median
Chebyshev's (CHEH-bee-shevs) inequality states that this quantity can vary from the expected value
by no more than one sigma. The integral of a probability density function from this value to infinity equals
one-half. For an even number of data points, computing this quantity requires averaging two of them. This
quantity is equal to the second quartile and the fiftieth percentile. For 10 points, give the term for the value
which separates the lower half of a set of data from the higher half.
ANSWER: median
An archaic form of this resource was implemented by Bell Labs using a piggyback twistor. A
more recent form of this resource that was created using chalcogenide glass is named for the
property of phase-changes. The access latency for this resource can be reduced by using a
translation-lookaside buffer, as one can avoid looking up things in a page table entry. A redundant
organization of this resource is performed by (*) RAID. The top of a "hierarchy" of this resource
contains processor registers and cache. It can be divided into volatile and non-volatile, the latter of which
includes hard drives. For 10 points, name this resource that is used for data storage, an example of which is
RAM.
ANSWER: memory [or virtual memory; or physical memory; or storage until it is read; hard disk drive; or HDD; or disk drive; or computer disk; phase-change memory until "phase-changes" is read; or RAM until it is read; or random access memory until "RAM" is read]
Erroneously attempting to access this thing can cause a segmentation fault. Garbage collection is an
automatic way to manage this thing. In C, malloc is used to dynamically allocate this thing. Paging is one
way to increase the capacity of this thing. Pointers point to an address in this thing, which has a contiguous
area taken up by arrays. For 10 points, identify this term for computer storage that includes types like
read-only and random-access.
ANSWER: computer memory [prompt on computer storage until it is read]
To deal with this problem in languages like C++, the idiom "Resource Acquisition is Initialization" is
implemented. If this problem is unresolved, it can lead to programs to encountering segmentation faults.
Computer languages such as Java have automatic means to resolve this situation known as garbage
collection. For 10 points, name this situation in which the eponymous resource cannot be reacquired by the
operating system.
ANSWER: memory leak
Katajainen, Pasanen, and Teuhola developed an in-place variation of this algorithm using a selection tree,
based on a version by Kronod that used constant additional space. A tiled version of this algorithm stops at
a particular array size, and this algorithm uses Theta(n) auxiliary space unlike heapsort. Tim Peters
developed an intelligent version of this algorithm which is used in Python, and using the Master Theorem
on its governing recurrence relation shows that it has both average and worst-case runtime of big-O of n log
n. This algorithm operates by halving the list, recursively applying itself, then using a namesake fusion
operation. For 10 points, name this divide-and-conquer algorithm that competes with quicksort.
ANSWER: merge sort
They are the subject of Wagstaff's Conjecture. The Lucas-Lehmer test is used to find these numbers. The
programs GIMPS searches for new examples of these numbers. Every even perfect number is the product of
one of these numbers and a corresponding power of two. The first four of these numbers are three, seven,
thirty-one, and one hundred and twenty-seven. For 10 points, identify these prime numbers of the form two
to the n minus one, named for a medieval French mathematician.
ANSWER: Mersenne prime numbers [prompt on prime before mentioned]
The sum of their reciprocals is the Erdos Borwein constant, which is approximately 1.607, and to find the
Nth one, S sub n minus two must be zero modulo N according to the Lucas Lehmer test. Their namesake
also names a "twister" used to generate random numbers and these numbers are being continuously scouted
for by the GIMPS program. Currently only 46 examples are known of, for 10 points, what numbers, which
can be expressed in the form 2 raised to the n minus 1 and are named for a French mathematician.
ANSWER: Mersenne primes [prompt on primes]
C++ allows the overriding of the "virtual" examples of these things. The term "signature" refers to
the number and types of arguments to one of them; if two of these have the same name but different
signatures, that phenomenon is called "overloading" these. Accessors and mutators are special types
of these used to "get" and "set" fields. Special names may be required for the constructor and
destructor examples of them, some of which in Java possessed by all classes are called hashCode and
toString. Name these functions performed by objects.
ANSWER: methods [accept virtual methods; prompt on functions or subroutines]
The funarg problem will occur when the first-class type of these constructs is used with a memory
stack. Imperative languages allow these constructs to have side effects, for which they are called
"mutators." Virtual ones are central to polymorphism, and if two of these have the same name, they
are said to be overloaded. A programming paradigm exemplified by Lisp and usually contrasted with
(*) object-oriented programming is named for them. These constructs usually take parameters, and classes
usually consist of attributes and them. For ten points, name these programming constructs which execute a
particular section of code and return output.
ANSWER: methods (or sub-routines, or procedures, or functions)
A space admits this type of topology if and only if it is Hausdorff, regular and has a countably locally finite
basis, by the Nagata-Smirnov theorem. This term also denotes a type of tensor which is preserved by the
Levi-Civita connection and whose eigenvalues are characterized by the signature. Spaces of this type in
which every Cauchy sequence converges are said to be complete, and these spaces are characterized by a
namesake symmetric, non-negative function that returns 0 only if the input points are identical and satisfies
the triangle inequality. FTP, name this type of space characterized by a function that gives a measure of
distance between points.
ANSWER: metric (accept metrizable before "tensor")
This object is guaranteed by the one-dimensional case of the Ham Sandwich Theorem. These points on a
quadrilateral can be joined to form a Varignon quadrilateral. The circumcenter of a triangle projects on to
these points on the sides. This point can be found by connecting the intersections of circles of equal radius
centered at two given points. This point on a diagonal of a rhombus is at the intersection with the other
diagonal, and the center of a circle is can be found at this location on a diameter. This point occurs where a
line segment meets its bisector. For ten points, name this point halfway between two given points.
ANSWER: midpoint (accept perpendicular bisector before "points")
In the process of crafting a deterministic linear-time algorithm to construct these objects,
which has a runtime proportional to the inverse Ackermann function, Bernard Chazelle invented
the soft heap. The verification step from Boruvka's algorithm for finding these objects is
sometimes used in other algorithms for them. Because the set of forests of a graph forms a
graphic matroid, greedy algorithms are very effective at constructing these objects. Constructing
one of these objects often relies on finding a light edge that crosses a cut. Two algorithms used to
find these objects, which run in big O of edges times log of vertices, are Kruskal's algorithm and
Prim's algorithm. For 10 points, name these acyclic subgraphs that connect all the vertices of a
graph, with smallest edge cost.
ANSWER: minimum-weight spanning trees [or MST; prompt on partial answer]
Its symmetry group is a ten-dimensional noncompact Lie [LEE] group called the Poincare group. The
triangle inequality is reversed when operating on it, since if you consider it as a vector space, its inner
product is not positive-definite. Instead, it has a signature with one unit vector of different sign from the
others, meaning that any orthonormal basis of this space has one vector of different sign, and that vector is
called the timelike component. Vectors are analogously called lightlike if their inner product with
themselves is zero. FTP, identify this four-dimensional manifold named for a German mathematician, the
setting for Einstein's theory of special relativity.
ANSWER: Minkowski space
This man's namesake function is equal to zero when the number of distinct primes dividing a number n
is less than the total number of prime factors of n. This man's transformation in the complex plane is equal
to az plus b over cz plus d, where a, b, c, and d are all complex numbers. That earlier transformation is a
bijective conformal map of the Riemann sphere onto itself. In cylindrical polar coordinates, this man's
namesake surface is represented by log of r times sine of one-half theta equals z times cosine of one-half
theta. When one object named for this man is cut and twisted it creates paradromic rings. He names an
object can be created by half-twisting a piece of paper and connecting its edges together. For 10 points,
name this mathematician whose namesake strip only has one side.
ANSWER: August Mobius
The function named after this man is equal to zero for non square-free numbers, one for numbers with an
even number of prime factors and negative one for numbers with an odd number of prime factors. A
statement involving summing over divisors that uses the aforementioned function is his namesake inversion
formula. The orientability of a surface is determined by whether it contains a subset homeomorphic to an
entity named after this man, which when glued to itself forms a Klein bottle. For 10 points, identify this man
who names an object that has only one side which is formed by taking a piece of paper, twisting it, and then
gluing the ends together, his namesake strip.
ANSWER: August (Ferdinand) Mobius
The Boy surface, cross-cap, and Roman surface are possible parametrizations of surfaces obtained by
sewing this to the edge of a disk. Deforming these can create paradromic rings and they have Euler
characteristic zero. Tori may be a cut one of these, and cutting a Klein bottle in half produces two of them.
The B. F. Goodrich Company patented a conveyor belt in the form of this which lasts twice as long as
conventional belts. These are also called twisted cylinders and are surfaces without a boundary. Identify
this surface with only one boundary component and one side, which can be produced by half-twisting one
end of a strip and attaching the two ends.
ANSWER: Mobius strip
This shape can be represented in cylindrical coordinates with the equation the logarithm of r times the sine
of theta over 2 equals z times the cosine of theta over 2. This shape can be topologically represented using a
cross-cap. This nonorientable surface has a boundary and Euler characteristic 0. Cutting this surface along a
line through the middle produces a paradromic ring, and attaching two of these shapes together along their
edges produces a Klein bottle. For ten points, identify this one-sided shape constructed as a loop with a
half-twist.
ANSWER: Mobius strip or Mobius band or Mobius surface
This structure can be defined by the parametric equations x equals cos t times the quantity A plus b
cos one-half t, y equals sin t times the quantity A plus b cos one-half t, and z equals b sin one-half t. This
structure can also be formed by cutting a Klein bottle in half; cutting this structure results in
paradromic rings. This nonorientable surface has Euler characteristic zero. For 10 points, name this
structure often formed by making a half-twist in a strip of paper and connecting the ends, which allows
one to draw a single line encompassing both sides of that paper.
ANSWER: Mobius strip
The namesake of this object also names a formula that assigns a value of (-1)k to a positive integer n that has
k distinct prime factors and also names a related inversion formula. A rectangle consisting of two 2x1
rectangles with a unit square in the middle can be used to tile it, and paradromic rings are created by
deforming it. Independently discovered by Listing and its namesake, two of these constructs can be
combined to form a Klein bottle. Formed by reattaching the ends of a closed band after cutting the band and
giving it a half-twist, name this structure named after a German mathematician, a one-sided, nonorientable
surface.
ANSWER: Mobius strip
This shape is the simplest example of a nontrivial fiber bundle over the circle with each fiber equivalent to
the unit interval. When a disk is sewed along this figure's edge, it becomes a projective plane. When two of
their edges are glued together, the result is a Klein bottle. A primary example of a non-orientable surface,
attempts to cut this shape lengthwise result in a shape twice as long. Name this shape with a one-sided
surface often realized by a piece of paper taped together with a twist.
ANSWER: Mobius strip
The probability that an element in a list will be within a certain distance of this value is given by Gauss's
inequality. This quantity is used to calculate Pearson's first skewness coefficient but not the second one.
According to Pearson's rule of thumb, it can be represented as three times the second quartile minus two
times the arithmetic mean. This number is at the vertex of a triangular distribution, and it is the maximum
point on the frequency graph of any distribution, but it is possible for a distribution to have more than one
of these. Name this value that has the highest frequency in a list, often contrasted with the mean and median.
ANSWER: mode(s)
This type of math is used with exponents to define the Carmichael function, and this is also used to
succinctly state the Chinese Remainder Theorem and Fermat's Little Theorem. Equivalent to a quotient
ring, this can be represented with a Z slash n Z, and this places all integers into residue or congruence
classes. Name this system in which two numbers are congruent if they give the same remainder when they
are divided by the same number, an example of which is clock arithmetic.
ANSWER: modular arithmetic (prompt on "clock" arithmetic)
This operation creates equivalence classes based on the ideal of a ring, and can be used to efficiently
express Euler's (OY-lurz) Theorem and Fermat's (fair-MAHZ) Little Theorem without using subtraction
and divisibility. It also explains why casting out nines can be used to check calculations. Single-bit Boolean
algebra is equivalent to this operation using two, and though it is not a type of number base, this operation is
a type of arithmetic. Also known as clock arithmetic, this operation involves residue classes and is often
written using congruence notation. Name this type of arithmetic based on division remainders.
ANSWER: modular arithmetic [or modulo; prompt on clock arithmetic before it is mentioned; accept word forms like modulo or modulus]
To save bandwidth, some versions of these objects make use of a technique in which all odd lines, then all
even lines, are traced. That technique is called interlacing. Most Windows NT-based operating systems use
a setting of 60 hertz as the default refresh rate for these pieces of hardware. Older examples of them can
suffer from phosphor burn-in, while newer versions can suffer from dead or stuck pixels. For 10 points,
identify these pieces of computer hardware, which are now less likely to use CRTs than LCDs, and which
are used to display images.
ANSWER: computer monitors [accept cathode ray tubes or CRTs until "pixels"]
One of these methods using Markov chains and sometimes classified as either an independence chain or a
random walk is the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, which is also considered a type of simulated annealing.
Often used in stochastic modeling, this method was first used to study radiation shielding by John von
Neumann and Stanislaw Ulam. Often used to approximate integrals, this mathematical method is used to
study situations such as Brownian motion, economic modeling, and games of chance when deterministic
solutions are unknown or unhelpful. Identify this type of solution that repeatedly uses random numbers
which is named after a European city.
ANSWER: Monte Carlo algorithm or method [accept annealing or stochastic before they are mentioned]
This technique can be implemented by moving particles in each direction at a series of time steps by
steps uniformly distributed between plus and minus square root quantity twice diffusion coefficient
times time step to model diffusion. This technique can be used to estimate integrals, providing a value
of volume times sampled average of integrand in the naive form. In this technique, that mean is
obtained by integrating a uniform pdf to obtain a cdf, then summing over repeated evaluations of the
integrand at points corresponding to the value for the cdf at a (*) random point drawn from the unit
interval. This technique can be made to converge faster by using reduction-of-variance techniques like
importance sampling. For 10 points, name this class of algorithms that work by repeatedly generating
random samples to use as inputs, named after a Monaco city and gambling mecca.
ANSWER: Monte Carlo methods [prompt on stochastic methods or random methods]
Performing one type of this process requires the use of a "burn-in," (*) and several adaptive or recursive
methods named after it involve importance sampling. The error term in the "integration" named after it
decreases as one over square root of N and bootstrapping yields estimates of parameters in another type of
this process. Peter Lepage invented a version of this technique that applies to particle physics which
involves constructing a separable multi-dimensional weight function. Including the VEGAS algorithm and
simulated annealing approaches such as the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, this type of technique includes
is stochastic, contrasting it with deterministic algorithms such as molecular dynamics. For 10 points, give
the general term for these methods of Markov Chain, integration, or sampling, which generally involves
randomly selecting a whole bunch of points and is named for a European gambling mecca.
ANSWER: Monte Carlo methods (accept "annealing" before *)
The original formulation of this problem was created in 1959 by Marvin Gardner and involved three
prisoners and a warden, who knew which of the three prisoners was to be executed. In 1990, Marilyn vos
Savant published the correct solution to this problem, which states that by switching doors after a goat has
been revealed, the probability of winning a car increases from one third to two thirds. Name this probability
problem based on a hypothetical situation from Let's Make a Deal.
ANSWER: Monty Hall problem (accept equivalents for problem, accept Three Prisoners problem before "prisoners" is read)
According to a theorem partially proven by Ostrogadsky, this operation yields zero if a vector field is
divergent free. The determinant of the Jacobian is used as a multiplicative factor when changing variables
for this operation. One of these operations is equated to a line integral around a simple closed curve by
Green's theorem. This operation can sometimes be more easily evaluated by transforming to polar,
cylindrical or spherical coordinates. The order in which this operation is performed can be changed as a
consequence of Fubini's theorem. For 10 points, identify this operation that involves multiple Riemannian
sums and can be used to find surface area or volume.
ANSWER: multiple integrals [or double integrals; or triple integrals; or surface integrals; or flux integrals; or word forms of "integral", such as integration; prompt on integration]
Every finitely generated Abelian group can be decomposed by taking this operation over a
series of cyclic groups. Taking this operation on a set of groups creates a new group with a pair
of homeomorphisms to the original groups called the coordinate functions. Taking it on a series
of compact topological spaces returns a compact topological space according to Tychonoff's
theorem while taking it on a pair of sets returns a set of ordered pairs when taking the Cartesian
form of this operation. A ring whose nonzero elements form an Abelian group under this
operation is called a field. This operation doesn't have inverses for the integers, but does for the
rational numbers. For 10 points, name this operation that can be viewed as repeated addition.
ANSWER: product [or multiplying; or Cartesian product; or direct product]
Until its replacement by the Furer algorithm, the Schonhage-Strassen algorithm was the
asymptotically fastest way of doing this to large numbers. One version, sometimes known as
"mediation and duplation" and originally found on the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, involves as one
step decomposing a number into powers of two; it's more commonly known as the "peasant" version of this.
For matrices, it is performed by taking the dot products of the columns of one matrix with the rows of the
other. For 10 points, identify this mathematical operation, the inverse of division.
ANSWER: multiplication [accept word forms, apologize for sketchy question]
When this operation is applied to two quaternions [kwa-TEHR-nee-ons], it is anticommutative. If this
operation is applied to a function and the derivative of another function, the result can be integrated by
parts. For matrices [MAY-trih-ses], this operation pairs each of the rows of the first matrix with each of the
columns of the second matrix. When this is applied to two prime numbers, the result is composite. Name
this operation that can be done repeatedly using exponents and which can represent repeated addition.
ANSWER: multiplication (accept word forms, product, or times)
The Toom-Cook and Karatsuba algorithms do this operation. In a field, all but one of the elements have
an inverse for this operation. A capital pi is used to denote repeatedly doing this over an index. This
operation on matrices is non-commutative and requires that the number of columns in the first matrix
equals the number of rows in the second. Repeatedly doing this is called exponentiation. For 10 points,
name this operation that when applied to two and three yields six.
ANSWER: multiplication [or product; accept word forms like multiply]
Anatolii Karatsuba determined an efficient way to perform this operation on large numbers. Skew fields
may not commute under this operation, but fields must. Though this operation is commutative for real
numbers, it is not commutative for matrices. Using logarithms, this operation can be used to find powers,
while logarithms allow addition to be used to perform this operation. The identity for this operation on real
numbers is one, and the inverse for this operation on real numbers is the reciprocal. Name this operation
used to find products.
ANSWER: multiplication [accept times; accept product before it is mentioned; accept word forms]
Furer's algorithm is the asymptotically fastest method for doing this task, replacing the SchonhageStrassen algorithm in 2007. One recursive method for doing this task has a run time of "big-O of n to
the log 3 power," surpassing the "big-O of n squared" time of traditional methods. That divide and
conquer algorithm is a specific case of the Toom-Cook algorithm and was developed by Anatolii (*)
Karatsuba. Another way to perform this operation is to decompose the inputs into polynomials and use a
fast Fourier transform. The GNU Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library is often used when doing this
operation with two large numbers. This operation can also be done by converting the numbers into binary or
by using the "grade-school" method. For 10 points, name this mathematical operation which results in the
product.
ANSWER: multiplication of two (large) integers [accept equivalents like computing the product of two (large) integers]
Booth encoding was originally developed to speed up this operation, and that method can improve
this operation when employing Wallace trees to make this problem decidable in polylog time on a
parallel computer. One popular algorithm for performing this action has a runtime of big O of n log
n log log n and is improved upon by Fuhrer's algorithm. That algorithm performs Fast Fourier
Transforms in a ring, and is the (*) Schonhage-Strassen algorithm. The divide-and-conquer method for
this operation is named for Karatsuba, and common methods of doing it involve converting to binary or
using the "grade school" method. For 10 points, name this process which calculates the product of two
numbers.
ANSWER: integer multiplication [accept word forms; do not accept or prompt on polynomial multiplication or word forms]
The nth Catalan number is given by 2n choose n divided by this function of n, and the coefficients of
this function to the kth power are found in the kth row of Pascal's Triangle. To prove an argument
via induction, one proves that if the statement is true for a value n, it is also true for this function of
n. The remainder when a polynomial P is divided by this function is (*) P(-1) ["P of negative one"], and
if there are n holes and at least this many pigeons, two of them will be in the same hole. This function is
graphically represented by a slope-1 line through the point (0,1) "zero comma one". For ten points, name
this function, which, when applied to an integer, yields the next higher integer.
ANSWER: n+1 ("n plus one", accept also stuff like "adding one" or anything that implies the number coming out is one bigger than the one going in, or anything with a different variable than n like x+1)
This person's primary work was based on a point on a segment that begins at one end and moves at a rate
proportional to its remaining distance. Using the best trig tables he had available, he started with
a value of ten to the seventh power, though he changed that when he started working with Henry Briggs.
This person also developed a method for performing multiplication he called rabdology that uses a set of
rods or bones. Name this Scottish mathematician credited with developing the first log table.
ANSWER: John Napier
This person used several decreasing geometric sequences whose first number was ten million. This person
also designed a series of rods that made it easier for people who don-t know multiplication tables to perform
multiplication and division. Those rods are this person's namesake bones. His work with geometric
sequences allowed him to compile tables that allowed people to use addition to multiply and use
multiplication to evaluate exponents. Name this Scottish developer of logarithms.
ANSWER: John Napier
This man proved the isometric embeddability of abstract Riemannian manifolds, and that work was shown
to be applicable to the periods of celestial orbits by Jurgen Moser. In 1994 he shared the Nobel Prize in
Economical Sciences with Reinhard Selten and John Harsanyi. He's best known for positing a game
situation in which players are aware of each others- strategies and need make no changes to benefit
maximally, his namesake equilibrium. For 10 points name this oft-troubled mathematician whose life was
the subject of the 2001 film A Beautiful Mind.
ANSWER: John Forbes Nash, Jr.
In his later work, this man has addressed the problem of partial agency. Braess's paradox
concerns how adding capacity to a network can decrease its performance when a concept named for
this man is not optimal. An important model developed by this man was expanded upon by John
Harsanyi, who added factors for predictability. Other examples of his idea at work are coordination
(*) games such as the prisoner's dilemma. For 10 points, name the Princeton economist whose 1994 Nobel
Prize was awarded for his work on a namesake "equilibrium" within game theory.
ANSWER: John Forbes Nash
This thinker criticized Keynesian psychology in a work that called for an "industrial consumption price
index." This man determined that every Riemann manifold can be isometrically embedded into a given
Euclidean space in his namesake "embedding theorem." This thinker is best known for a concept proved by
the Brouwer Fixed Point theorem which describes a situation in which no person will change his strategy
while knowing the strategy of his opponent. For 10 points, name this subject of a biography by Sylvia Nasar
and namesake of an "equilibrium" in the field of game theory, an American mathematician whose struggles
with schizophrenia were famously detailed in A Beautiful Mind.
ANSWER: John Forbes Nash, Jr.
A theorem this person developed on inverse function theorems on Banach [bah-NAHK] spaces is now
named after him and a person who applied it, Jurgen Moser. That theorem was used to develop this person's
theorem on Riemannian [ree-MAHN-ee-un] manifolds, his embedding theorem. He is sometimes used as
the namesake of the bargaining game, which he solved in a way that is Pareto [pah-REE-toe] efficient. His
name is also attached to the solution of the Prisoner's Dilemma and several other problems from game
theory with his namesake equilibrium. Name this mathematician who was the subject of the book and film A
Beautiful Mind.
ANSWER: John Forbes Nash
A theorem named for this man states that every Riemann manifold can be isometrically embedded into a
Euclidean space. The situation in which each actor is making the best decision given the decision of the
others is known as this man's equilibrium, one of the contributions to game theory that won this man the
1994 Nobel Prize in Economics. For 10 points, name this mathematician whose struggles with
schizophrenia are depicted in his biography A Beautiful Mind.
ANSWER: John Forbes Nash, Junior
They are absorbing states for learning via fictitious play, but Shapley showed in 1964 that convergence to
these does not always occur. Dynamic programming and self-generation techniques were used by
Fudenberg, Maskin, and Levine to establish the existence of its public perfect refinement when players only
use publicly available historical information. While it is the best result that can be supported in one-shot
games, the folk theorem implies that it can be improved for repeated games. FTP, name this game
theoretical situation in which when all players are best-responding to their opponents- play.
ANSWER: Nash equilibrium
Reinhard Selten added more criteria to this idea to account for small accidental perturbations so that they be
"trembling hand perfect." This concept requires that any two participant's beliefs about a third participant
be the same, and also requires that no action involved is "strictly dominated" by another. An example of it
that does not have this pure-strategy form of it is the matching pennies game; in the Prisoner's Dilemma, the
only instance of it is when both participants defect. For 10 points, name this concept in game theory, in
which each player's set of actions is a best response to the other player, and which is named after a
schizophrenic mathematician.
ANSWER: Nash Equilibrium
Reinhard Selten proposed a "trembling hand" version of this concept. A more specific version of this
concept requires it to hold for every subgame; that version is the "subgame perfect" type of this
concept. Iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies preserves these entities, but allowing
weak dominance does not, and in one, each player plays a best response to the others' strategies. For 10
points, name this concept from game theory identifying a strategy profile where no player can benefit by
unilaterally changing strategies, a type of equilibrium named for a Nobel-winning economist.
ANSWER: Nash equilibrium [accept just Nash after "equilibrium" is read; prompt equilibrium before it is read]
Mertens and Zamir proved the mathematical foundations for one method of solving for these, which
involves a transformation from incomplete information to a state space. The possibility of that type
of these entities was argued for in the paper "Agreeing to Disagree" by Robert Aumann, while
Reinhart Selten developed another extension to them that takes into account perturbations and is
known as the "trembling hand." Folk Theorems deal with their existence over protracted periods of
time, while ones which take (*) belief systems into account are referred to as "Bayesian." Pure ones are
always evolutionarily stable, and backward induction can be used to find the "subgame perfect" type of
these situations. Mixed-strategy ones are found by applying the minimax theorem to pure-strategy ones with
best response analysis, and mutual defection fulfills the only one of these for the Prisoner's Dilemma. FTP,
name this game theory situation in which no player can change strategy without making himself worse off,
named for a notably schizophrenic Princeton mathematician.
ANSWER: Bayesian-Nash equilibrium (prompt on just "equilibrium")
A variation to this concept that includes perturbations in decision models is known as trembling-hand
perfect. This concept holds when certain sets are non-empty, convex, compact subsets of a Euclidean space
by the Kakutani Fixed Point Theorem, and the utility function is continuous and quasi-concave. A Bayesian
one is found by anticipating the plans of others, and they were worked on by Harsanyi and Selten as well as
their namesake, who introduced them in the paper Non-Cooperative Games. For 10 points, name this idea
in which each player's strategy choice is a best-response to the strategies played by his rivals, a game theory
equilibrium named for a schizophrenic.
ANSWER: Nash equilibrium [accept Nash after "equilibrium" is read, prompt on it before]
In a network, implementing this situation can cause slowdown, known as Braess- paradox. Adding a
probability element creates the "trembling hand" example, and they can be found by finding the row and
column maxima in a payoff matrix. Chicken has three of them, with one involving mixed strategies, while
the stag hunt and prisoner's dilemma has only one. For 10 points, identify this situation from game theory
in which no player can gain anything by changing their strategy unilaterally, named for a Princeton
mathematician.
ANSWER: Nash equilibrium
Rousseau famously wrote about a variation of this idea with his analysis of the Stag Hunt. Weak and Strong
versions of this exist, and Cournot analyzed a variant of this concept in his model of duopoly, which gives
the amount that both firms will choose to produce if they take into account the other's actions. Many of
these can exist for a given model, and determining one of these is often found using a payoff matrix. FTP,
identify this concept from game theory, which gives the solution to a game in which no player can improve
himself by changing his strategy unilaterally, given what the other players are doing.
ANSWER: Nash Equilibrium
This function applied to 2 is equal to 1 minus one-half plus one-third minus one-fourth and so on.
This function satisfies the equality f(xy)=f(x)+f(y) ("f of x times y equals f of x plus f of y") and its
integral is equal to x times itself minus x. Its derivative is the (*) reciprocal function, 1 over x, and this
function's inverse is the exponential function. Equal to the power to which 2.718 must be raised to equal a
number, for ten points, what is this logarithm with base e?
ANSWER: Natural logarithm (prompt on Logarithm, accept ln(x))
The Riemann surface for the complex version of this is a helix-like plane spiraling around the z axis; in
hyperbolic geometry, this function is in the distance formula for the geodesic between two points. First
defined to contain a "mantissa" by John Napier, this function is equal to the antiderivative of one over x.
Increments on the slide rule increase according to this function using its product-to-sums property, and
dividing one by another allows for a change of base. For 10 points, identify this function which, when found
in base e form, is known as "natural," the inverse of the exponential function.
ANSWER: natural logarithm [prompt "ln" or "lon"]
One corollary of the Riemann Hypothesis is that the difference between the logarithmic integral and the
prime counting function is upper bounded by the product of the square root function and this function. The
first term of the Maclaurin series of this function is x minus 1, and the integral of this function is 1 over x.
When this function is applied to a product, it may be written as the sum of this function applied to each
term in the product. For 10 points, name this mathematical function, which specifically has base e.
ANSWER: natural logarithm [or logarithm before "i pi" is read; prompt on logarithm after "i pi" is read]
This function, with argument 1 plus x, is equal to the sum of [pause] negative one raised to the n plus
one [pause] times x raised to the n [pause] all over n from [pause] n equals one to infinity. This
function's integral is equal to x times this function minus x. This function is equal to the definite
integral of 1 over t from 1 to x, which implies that the derivative of this function is (*) 1 over x.
Multiplying the argument of this function by a constant is equivalent to adding a constant to the value of this
function, and one often uses the change of base formula on this function. For 10 points, name this function,
the inverse of exponentiation, whose base is Euler's number, e.
ANSWER: natural logarithm [accept ln]
The alternating harmonic series converges to this function of two; that fact can be proven using
the Mercator series, a special Taylor series for this function. The integral of the tangent of x is equal
to this function of the secant of x. That identity is a special case of the identity that the integral of f
prime of x over f of x, dx, is equal to (*) this function of f of x. The derivative of this function is one over
x. For 10 points, name this function that is the inverse of the exponential with base e.
ANSWER: natural logarithm [prompt on logarithm]
The difference between this function and the harmonic series gives the definition of the EulerMascheroni constant. Similar to the namesake method for integer factorization, Pollard names a rho
algorithm for solving the discrete variety of this function. The Mercator series is equivalent to the
Taylor series for this function, which begins (*) x minus quantity x squared over two, plus quantity x
cubed over three. The derivative of this slow growing function is equal to 1 over t and the inverse of this
function applied to x is e to the x. For 10 points, name this function equal to the Log function with a base of
e, commonly symbolized L-N.
ANSWER: Natural Logarithm [accept ln before mentioned; accept Logarithm before mentioned, prompt on it afterwards]
A constant plus this function is used to approximate partial sums of the harmonic series. The
Mercator series is used to approximate this function applied to the quantity 1 + x, and is calculated
by alternately adding and subtracting terms of the form xn /n ["x to the nth power, divided by n"].
Applying the complex version of this function to negative one yields the opposite of i times pi. The
derivative of this function is the reciprocal function, 1/x ["one over x"]. This function was used to
design slide rules and is used for the decibel and Richter scales. Name this function, the inverse of
the exponential function, that uses the base e.
ANSWER: natural logarithm(ic function) [accept answers that include logarithm and base e; do not accept answers mentioning "common"]
The polar equation theta equals this function of r produces a spira mirabilis, or golden spiral. The nth term
of this function's Maclaurin series equals the quantity x minus one, quantity to the nth power, over n. This
function can be integrated by multiplying it by x and subtracting x, and its derivative equals the reciprocal
of x. Multiplying two numbers together and then applying this function has the same result as applying this
function separately to the two numbers and adding the results, and exponents inside these functions can
instead be used to multiply outside of them. This function can be transformed to other bases by dividing it
by itself applied to a constant, and its discovery is often credited to John Napier. Name this inverse of the
exponential function.
ANSWER: natural logarithm of x [or logarithm (to the base e); accept ln; accept lg]
The integral of tangent of x is equal to the negative of this function of cosine of x. For an input of
negative one, this function gives i times pi. This function grows more slowly than x to the power of
epsilon, where epsilon is any number greater than zero. The coefficients of the Maclaurin series for
this function are the alternating harmonic series when its input x plus one. Its derivative is (*) one
over x. This function of x plus this function of y equals this function of quantity x times y. For 10 points,
name this inverse of the exponential function that is abbreviated ln.
ANSWER: natural logarithm [or ln until it is read]
When a complex number is input to this function, it returns this function of the modulus plus i
times the argument of the complex number. The Euler-Mascheroni constant is the limit of the first n
terms of the harmonic series minus this function of n. The Taylor series centered at 1 for this
function has the (*) alternating harmonic series as coefficients. The derivative of this function of x is one
over x. For 10 points, name this inverse of the exponential function.
ANSWER: natural logarithm
According to an asymptotic law developed by Chebyshev and Riemann, [one over [this function of a
natural number roughly estimates the chance of that number being prime. On a complex plane, this
function is used in the definition of any inverse (*) hyperbolic function, and the limiting distance between
the harmonic series and this function is a constant named after Mascheroni. Its Taylor series begins, "[x,
minus x squared over 2, plus x cubed over 3]", and is also known as the "Mercator series." Defined at [x
equals 2], this function equals roughly 0.693. The integral of [one over x], for 10 points, name this
alternative to a base-ten logarithm, the inverse function of [e to the x].
ANSWER: natural logarithm [accept ln ["lawn"], log-e of x, or base e logarithm; prompt on just "log" or "logarithm"]
The Euler-Mascheroni (OY-lur mash-uh-ROH-nee) constant is the limit of the difference between
this function and the harmonic series. The coefficients of its Taylor series centered at one are the
terms of the alternating harmonic sequence. Its derivative is (*) "one over x". The value of this function
applied to a product of numbers equals the sum of this function applied to each number separately. Its base
is approximately 2.718. For 10 points, name this function inverse to the exponential function.
ANSWER: natural logarithm [or base-e logarithm]
This set, a commutative monoid, is the domain of Landau's function as well as of the totient function, and
numbers of this type can be written as the sum of other numbers of this type via a partition. According to the
well-ordering principle, any subset of this set contains a least element. Multiplication and addition on this
set are recursively defined along with a successor function by the Peano axioms. According to the
Archimedean property, there exists one of these numbers larger than any given real number; and all
inductive sets contain these numbers as a subset. Contained in both the rationals and the integers, name this
set of the positive integers, denoted N.
ANSWER: natural numbers [or naturals; accept N before the end; prompt on integers; accept positive integers or nonnegative integers before "positive integers"; accept whole numbers before the end]
Russell defined them by defining a function that established a set consisting of x union y, where x belonged
to the set being operated on and y was not an element of x. A well ordering can be defined on these based
on subset relation in the usual construction. It can be defined by starting with the empty set and using the
power set operator to establish a successor function, and when the axiom of infinity is used this represents
the smallest such infinite set. Hence, the size of this entity is aleph naught. The integers can be defined as
equivalence classes of these entities added together, and any finite amount of data can be coded into them
based on the prime factorization theorem. For ten points, name these numbers, which include 1,2,3,4... and
often zero, a set of numbers often abbreviated N.
ANSWER: natural numbers
These numbers can be constructed so that each is the set of smaller numbers of this type, starting from the
empty set. The input to the Ackermann function is two of these numbers, and this set is the range of the
Hamming distance function. This set of numbers is defined by the Peano ["Pee-ah-no"] axioms, and this set
is well-ordered as a result of the axiom of induction. In contrast to the difference and quotient, the sum and
product of two of these numbers is also in this set. These numbers along with their additive inverses form
the set of integers. For ten points, identify this set of numbers abbreviated N.
ANSWER: natural numbers (accept ordinal numbers before end of second sentence, prompt on "ordinals" until "Peano axioms", grudgingly accept whole numbers, prompt on "W" or on "N" until mention)
This set does not contain the number zero, but it can be constructed using the Peano axioms, which
guarantee that every member of this set has a unique successor. This set obeys the well-ordering principle,
which states that any nonempty subset of this set has a least element. The Fundamental Theorem of
Arithmetic guarantees that every member of this set greater than 1 has a unique prime factorization. The
cardinality of any finite nonempty set is an element of this set, which can be generated by starting with 1
and adding 1 repeatedly. Name this set of numbers that begins 1, 2, 3 and so on.
ANSWER: natural numbers (or N or positive integers or Z+; do not accept integers or nonnegative integers or whole numbers or Z)
When implementing a computer system using this kind of number as the base, allowances must be made for
the fact that their integer division is often rounded to zero. In Python, passing one of these numbers as the
index argument of a list will return an element selected from the end of the list. In the twos-complement
system, these numbers are preceded by a one; thus, a one followed by a series of zeroes can represent this
kind of zero. Overflow errors can occur when a variable exceeds the maximum possible value and rolls over
to one of these. For 10 points, name this kind of number contrasted with a positive number, one that is less
than zero.
ANSWER: negative numbers [or negative integers]
Operations in them include unicasting, multicasting, and broadcasting. Topologies for them include star,
tree, and mesh. Protocols used with these include ARP, ICMP, and UDP. One can create a virtual private
one of these inside an existing one. They often include switches, hubs, or routers, and ways to create them
include ethernet and Wi-Fi. For 10 points, name this term for a group of interconnected computers.
ANSWER: computer network
His namesake algebra consists of bounded operators on a Hilbert space closed in the weak operator
topology, and contains the identity operator. He was second man to win the Fermi prize, and identified
quantum mechanical states with vectors and pioneered the use of operator theory in quantum
mechanics. With Stanislaw Ulam, he designed the implosion mechanism for the atomic bomb at Los
Alamos. He invented the field of cellular automata and the idea of a universal constructor; in a different
field, his namesake architecture maps data and program memory to the same space. For 10 points, name this
badass Hungarian polymath who invented the minimax theorem and, with Oskar Morgenstern, game theory.
ANSWER: John von Neumann [accept Margittai Neumann Janos Lajos]
This computer scientist created the concept of the arithmetic logic unit. With Stanislaw Ulam, this
scientists developed, and named, Monte Carlo methods. He created an algorithm that divides a list of length
n into n sublists, then concatenates them in an organized fashion to sort them. That algorithm is merge sort.
The Harvard architecture is a rival scheme for computer organization to one this scientist devised. For 10
points, identify this man who created an architecture in which instructions and memory access occur on the
same bus.
ANSWER: John von Neumann
This mathematician showed that a locally compact Hasudorff group with a finite dimensional representation
can be given a Lie group structure. He created a method where getting a zero is defined as getting heads
then tails to simulate an unbiased coin using a biased one. He defined a structure that is an identity
containing strongly closed sub C star algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space. This man proved that
in a two player, zero sum game there exists what would later be called a Nash equilibrium solution. This
prover of the minimax theorem devised a scheme where data and instruction use the same memory and
lines. For 10 points, name this Hungarian member of the Manhattan project and the namesake of a computer
architecture.
ANSWER: John von Neumann
One of his most influential papers contained sections on "Elements, Synchronism Neuron Analogy" and
"The Binary Point". Ravi Lonberg implemented a random number generation technique he posited in the
paper "Various Techniques Used in Connection with Random Digits", based on the theory of cellular
automata he helped develop. With Fermi and Ulam he is credited with developing Monte Carlo algorithms.
One of his most influential ideas, which had the unintended consequence of making buffer overflow attacks
possible, was laid out in his "First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC". Also known for developing codeveloping game theory with Oskar Morgenstern, for 10 points, name this Hungarian born mathematician
who proposed storing programs and data in the same memory component, his namesake computer
architecture.
ANSWER: John "Johnny" von Neumann [also accept Margittai Neumann Janos Lajos]
This scientist names the operator algebra that can be defined as a C-star algebra that admits a
predual. This scientist first developed an axiomatic set theory that features classes and is a
conservative extension of ZFC; that set theory is named with Paul Bernays and Kurt Godel. This
scientist introduced the density matrix formalism for quantum mechanics. The negative trace of the
density matrix times the log of the density matrix is the quantum form of the Shannon entropy and is
named for him. With Stanley Ulam, he developed the first Monte Carlo method. This scientist developed
merge sort and in his best known eponym, instructions and data are stored in the same memory. For 10
points, identify this Hungarian-American scientist who names a computer architecture.
ANSWER: John von Neumann
This computer scientist created the concept of the arithmetic logic unit. With Stanislaw Ulam, this
scientists developed, and named, Monte Carlo methods. He created an algorithm that divides a list of length
n into n sublists, then concatenates them in an organized fashion to sort them. That algorithm is merge sort.
The Harvard architecture is a rival scheme for computer organization to one this scientist devised. For 20
points, identify this man who created an architecture in which instructions and memory access occur on the
same bus.
ANSWER: John von Neumann
The lack of linear separability of the XOR function led to its namesake problem in these models.
Rumelhart and McClelland introduced the backpropagation algorithm for training the feedforward type of
these models. These models were inspired by a biological unit is activated when it receives a signal from
dendrites through synapses and then emits a signal to an axon. For 10 points, identify these mathematical
models inspired by neurons.
ANSWER: artificial neural networks [or ANNs]
This mathematician extended the binomial theorem to cover fractional exponents. In his Method of
Fluxions, this man proposed an iterative method of following tangent lines to the x-axis to find zeroes of
functions. The differential equation y prime is proportional to the difference between y and a constant is
known as this man's (*) Law of Cooling. This man showed that Kepler's Laws were consequences of the
inverse-square rule of his Universal Law of Gravitation in Principia Mathematica. For ten points, name this
British mathematician who, independently of Leibniz, developed calculus.
ANSWER: Isaac Newton
Albert Girard [jeh-RAHRD] and this person are the namesakes of a series of formulas giving the
relationship between sums and powers of symmetric polynomials. Roger Cotes [KOTES] and this person
are the namesakes of a series of integration approximation formulas that include the trapezoid rule and
Simpson's Rule. He generalized the binomial formula to allow for fractional exponents, and this person is
the namesake of a method of successive linear approximations to find the roots of a function. His best
known work is Philosophiae [fil-os-uh-FEE-ay] Naturalis Principia [prin-SIP-ee-ah] Mathematica. Name
this thinker who, along with Gottfried Leibniz [LEEB-niz], is credited for independently discovering
calculus.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
The Saccheri quadrilateral and the Lambert quadrilateral were among the first theorems on this
topic. One form can be described by four models, while another has three. In one model, the crossratio is used to describe distances. They are useful for modeling space, since one type can describe the
edges of the universe where no matter exists, and since the theory of relativity states that space is
curved where there is matter. In another model, called the hyperspheric model, lines are modeled by
great circles. They do not obey the parallel postulate, (*) since in the hyperbolic type there are infinitely
many lines intersecting a point A not on a line L, and in the elliptical type all lines intersect. FTP, name
these geometries that do not follow the precepts of an ancient Greek geometer.
ANSWER: non-Euclidean geometries (accept response of "hyperbolic geometry" before "while another has three")
A space has this property if and only if any two disjoint closed subsets can be separated by a
continuous function by Urysohn's lemma, and those spaces satisfy T4. Extensions that are separable
and have this property are Galois. Since A5 has no non-trivial proper subgroups with this property, it
is(*) simple. The kernels of group homomorphisms are given by this type of subgroup, whose left and right
cosets are identical. For a curve parameterized by arc length, this type of vector is the derivative of the
tangent vector with respect to length, and is thus perpendicular to the tangent. For 10 points, independent
and identically distributed variables with finite mean and variance will approach this type of distribution
according to the central limit theorem.
ANSWER: normal
This adjective describes a topology in which any two disjoint closed sets are separated by open
neighborhoods. A subgroup of this type is invariant under conjugation, and a matrix of this type commutes
with its conjugate transpose. A surface is orientable if there is a continuous choice of this type of vector.
The central limit theorem holds that the mean of a large number of independent random variables will
approach this kind of distribution, which has a bell-curve-shaped density function. For 10 points, give this
adjective which can describe a vector that is perpendicular to a surface, or at a right angle to a tangent.
ANSWER: normal [do not accept "orthogonal"]
According to the Frenet-Serret formulas, the space derivative of the tangent equals curvature times a vector
described by this adjective. All sinusoidal systems can be described as the superposition of this type of
mode. Subspaces are often described by bases which are mutually orthogonal and have this property,
meaning they are of length one. Taking the cross product of two vectors in a plane will yield this vector,
which determines the plane's orientation. The empirical 68-95-99.5 rule applies to a distribution described
by this non-eponymous adjective. For 10 points, name this adjective which describes the Gaussian
distribution, or bell curve.
ANSWER: normal [do not accept "perpendicular"; do not accept "orthonormal"]
This type of matrix has orthogonal eigenvectors that span its space. A vector called this is the
ratio of the tangent vector's derivative divided by the curvature. For a given surface, that vector is
the cross product of two non-parallel vectors in the surface, and its direction can be found using the
(*) right-hand rule. For finite mean and variance, the cumulative density function of a sample will approach
a distribution called this as the sample size increases, as shown in the central limit theorem. For 10 points,
name this word given to a distribution that forms the bell curve.
ANSWER: normal
A matrix operator of this type commutes with its conjugate transpose, while a number of this type is a real
number whose base b digital expansion has uniform density. A subgroup of a group is called this if it is
invariant under conjugation, while a mode of a system is called this when it is associated with a resonant
frequency. For 10 points, give this mathematical adjective, which can also be used to describe the vector
that is perpendicular to a surface.
ANSWER: normal [do not accept orthogonal]
The tobit model uses a truncated form of this, and if 2 variables are unrelated but follow this pattern,
then their sum follows this too. Given a large number of independent variables, their sum will
converge toward it according to the central limit theorem. Its formula is 1 over the square root of 2
pi times the population standard deviation times e to the negative x minus the mean squared over 2
sigma squared. Subject of the empirical rule, for ten points, name this distribution that resembles a bell
curve.
ANSWER: Normal distribution or Gaussian distribution (do not accept standard normal, or anything that modifies the word normal)
One quick way to test how similar a data set is to this mathematical object is to draw a Q-Q plot and look
for a linear relationship. Because it is described by a variant of the function "e to the negative x squared", its
CDF is based on the error function. This mathematical object is equal to the t-distribution in the limit when t
goes to infinity. Z-scores are computed based on a standard version of it. The means of random variables
from any distribution will follow one of these distributions, according to the central limit theorem. For 10
points, name this probability distribution that is described by the 68-95-99.7 rule and is shaped like a bell.
ANSWER: normal distribution [or Gaussian distribution; accept standard normal distribution; accept z- distribution until "Z-scores" is read]
The equation of the standard form of this entity is e to the quantity negative x squared over two all
divided by the square root of two pi. If the number of trials is high, the binomial distribution can be
approximated by this distribution. As the sample size becomes large, the distribution of a population
of means approaches this distribution according to the (*) central limit theorem. If a random variable
has this distribution, then approximately 68% of its values fall within one standard deviation of the mean.
For 10 points, name this probability distribution often referred to as the bell curve.
ANSWER: normal distribution [or Gaussian distribution]
This distribution's ability to describe a population is the subject of the Shapiro-Wilks test. This distribution
has at most two nonzero cumulants and forms a straight line on a Q-Q plot. It approximately describes the
mean of a large number of random variables, according to the central limit theorem. This distribution,
whose "standard" version has a mean of zero and a variance of one, has 68 percent of its values within one
standard deviation of the mean. For 10 points, name the probability distribution whose graph is a symmetric
bell curve.
ANSWER: normal distribution [or Gaussian distribution; prompt on bell curve before mentioned]
The kurtosis is a measure of how badly a distribution deviates from this kind of distribution. The error
function is given by the integral of this distribution. This distribution is characterized by an "e to the
negative x squared" term, and in this distribution, ninety-five percent of the population is found within two
standard deviations of the mean. For 10 points, name this distribution that is also known as a Gaussian
distribution or a bell curve.
ANSWER: normal distribution [or Gaussian distribution before it is read; prompt on bell curve]
The Box-Mueller transformation converts a uniform distribution to this distribution. If the sum
of two random variables has this distribution, then both of those random variables have this
distribution by Cramer's Theorem. The distribution of sample means of any distribution converges
to this distribution by the Central Limit Theorem. The integral of this function, the error function,
allows one to calculate (*) probabilities based on z-scores, which represent the number of standard
deviations away from the mean of this distribution. For 10 points, name this distribution that resembles a
bell curve.
ANSWER: normal distribution [or Gaussian distribution; prompt on bell curve]
The Behrens-Fisher problem deals with testing whether two of these distributions have the same mean, and
in least squares data-fitting, it is assumed that errors follow this distribution. As sample size approaches
infinity, this distribution is a limiting case of the binomial distribution, and this distribution is often used as
an approximation in accordance with the central limit theorem. Defined in terms of its mean and variance,
For 10 points, name this continuous probability distribution sometimes called the Gaussian distribution or
the "bell curve".
ANSWER: Normal Distribution [prompt on Gaussian Distribution before mentioning; prompt on Bel Curve before mentioning]
This entity always has a kurtosis of zero, and the area under this curve between any two points is
proportional to the difference in the error function at those points. As the number of samples increases, the
binomial distribution approaches this curve, whose standard form has mean zero and variance one. By the
Central Limit Theorem, the distribution of the means of a set of random variables will converge to this
distribution. For 10 points, give this common distribution sometimes called the "bell curve."
ANSWER: normal distribution curve [or Gaussian distribution curve; or bell curve before read]
The flux of a vector field across a surface is given by the double integral, over the surface, of the vector
field dotted with this quantity. The direction of this vector determines the orientation of a surface. For a
plane, it can be found by taking the cross product of any two vectors in the plane; for a curve in space, it is
equal to the derivative of the tangent vector. The direction of this vector, along with any point in the plane,
defines the plane. For 10 points, name this vector, which is perpendicular to a surface.
ANSWER: the normal vector [or N; or unit normal vector]
For a binary expression x in Boolean algebra this operator is defined as one minus x. It cannot be defined
with only conjunction and disjunction, and DeMorgan's Laws explain how it is distributed over
expressions with logical OR and logical AND. For 10 points, name this unary operator which makes true
boolean expressions into false ones and false expressions into true ones.
ANSWER: logical not [or negation; or logical complementation; do not accept "bitwise not"]
This operation is the basis for both of the two universal logic gates that can be used to build any logic
circuit. In C and Java, the bitwise form of this operation is represented by a tilde. Performing this operation
on the first bit of an IEEE (I triple E) 754 floating point number changes its sign. In C and many other
programming languages, the logical form of this operation is represented by an exclamation point. For 10
points, name this operation that returns 1 if the input is 0 and 0 if the input is 1.
ANSWER: not [or negation]
Gates representing this operation are symbolized with a triangle with a circle at its tip. According to modus
tollens, this operation applied to Q implies this operation applied to P, if P implies Q. In Java, this operation
is represented with a "bang" or exclamation point. This operation may be represented as a tilde before a
proposition. DeMorgan's Laws give the result when this operation is applied to binary conjunction and
disjunction. The inverse of a logical statement requires this operation to be applied to both statements.
When applied to binary 0, it results in 1. For 10 points, name this binary operation that gives the logical
opposite.
ANSWER: NOT [or negation; or word forms; or inverse or word forms; or logical complement]
The makeup of this set is described by Fagin's theorem and the concept of natural proofs was introduced to
argue against certain approaches for finding particular substructures within it. The Valiant-Vazirani theorem
gives a way for this set to be collapsed. Changing the definition of this set to harness probability results in
the Arthur-Merlin protocol. The intersection of this set and its complement includes primality. It contains
both the problem of discrete logarithms and deciding whether a graph has a given size clique. Richard Karp
gave a list of 21 problems that are as hard as any in this complexity class, including the Boolean
satisfiability problem. This is the set of problems which have a polynomial-time verifier. For 10 points,
name this complexity class that may or may not strictly contain P.
ANSWER: NP [or Nondeterministic Polynomial time]
The pointer of this name does not point to any valid address. This name is given to the ASCII character
used to terminate c strings. The kernel of a matrix is also known as this space. This term also applies to the
empty set. The statistical results of an experiment can reject the hypothesis of this name which assumes that
no significant effect occurred. For 10 points, name this term that refers to things with out value, that when
combined with void describes a contract without legal effect.
ANSWER: null
The competitive exclusion principle serves as this type of statement for ecology and the steady state model
was once one of these in cosmology. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and the molecular clock form one of
these statements for evolution, based on the presumption that most mutant alleles (uh-LEELS) are neutral.
Famous ones rejected by experiment include the luminiferous (loo-muh-NIF-er-us) ether and the plum
pudding model, and a Type II error occurs when this statement is accepted even though it is false. Often
assuming no correlation between two events, name this type of experimental statement, symbolized H-subnaught, which holds that the assumed explanation is the correct one.
ANSWER: null hypothesis [prompt on H-sub-naught or H-sub-zero before "naught"; prompt on a partial answer]
This entity's name reflects the fact that there is no difference between the unknown population parameter
and a constant usually denoted theta. If a sample falls within the "critical region," then this entity is assumed
to be not true. The power of tests of this statement can be improved if one uses a one-sided test rather than a
two-sided test. When the level of significance is greater than the p value, this entity should be accepted,
because if you reject, you-re more likely to make a type-one error. After performing a z-test, this entity is
accepted if the z-score is sufficiently low. For 10 points, name this statistical hypothesis that may be
rejected in favor of the alternative one.
ANSWER: null hypothesis [accept null hypothesis after "hypothesis" is read]
BCD, one way of storing these objects, is close to the way humans use them, and the Gray code
representation of them differs among adjacent points by one bit. Commonly used in microprocessors
is two's complement notation for denoting these objects, and one format used in scientific computing
comes in standard and double forms specified by IEEE 754. That technique uses a mantissa, sign bit,
and (*) exponent and is called floating point, while most operations on these are fixed point and are done
by
the Arithmetic Logic Unit. For 10 points, name these abstract entities which can be shifted, added, or
multiplied by a computer.
ANSWER: numbers
This task is performed by using a Chebyshev expansion of the relevant function in the ClenshawCurtis method. It's not parameter or posterior distribution estimation, but accomplishing this task by
averaging across samples from updating conditional distributions is known as Gibbs sampling, which
is an application of Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods for accomplishing this task. For evenly
spaced intervals, this process can be done using the (*) Newton-Cotes rules, whose closed type of degree
two is equivalent to Simpson's rule. For uncomplicated functions, this can be done precisely by hand using
the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. For 10 points, identify this procedure that can approximate the area
under a curve.
ANSWER: numerical integration [or numerical quadrature; anti-prompt on "automatic integration"; prompt on "integration"]
A time-reversible and symplectic method for performing this task uses a technique called
"leapfrogging" and is often used when the model in question is a dynamical system. While
performing ragdoll physics calculations, the central difference is computed as part of an algorithm
designed for this task named after Loup Verlet ["Ver-lay"]; that method improves upon the simplest
method for doing this, which is an algorithm that takes an initial point and calculates the next point
by evaluating a function at x and y, then multiplying that expression by the (*) step size. That simple
method for doing this task is a first-order method, which means that the error varies with the square of the
step size. The most common family of algorithms for performing this task are the Runge-Kutta methods; a
simple example of which is the Euler method. For 10 points, name this task of approximately computing a
definite integral.
ANSWER: numerical integration to solve a differential equation [or numerical quadrature, or numerically solving an initial value problem, prompt on "integration," prompt on "Riemannian integration," prompt on "solving a differential equation," prompt on "solving an initial value problem", do not accept or prompt on "analytic integration" or "Lebesgue integration."]
This is the run time of a lookup operation of an element when using a Bloom Filter. When efficiently
implemented using up-trees, the find function in a disjoint set makes look-up times for elements of a
given set be this. Linked lists are often implemented in lieu of arrays because insertion into one has
this run time on average with a linked list, even though directly accessing an individual array element
has this run time. Also the run time of all bitwise operations, it is also the run time for a function that makes
use of a "bucket array." For 10 points, identify this big-O run time that is the average look-up time for
hashes, a run time that does not change with respect to any given property.
ANSWER: O(1) run time or constant run time
The diamond problem occurs when using these programming constructs during the "multiple" type of a
certain process. Except for private member variables, languages like Smalltalk are entirely comprised of
these constructs, lacking even primitive types. Functors are these kinds of things specifically designed for
function use. In C++, "the rule of big three" refers to the necessity of writing an assignment operator,
destructor, and copy constructor for these things, and these structures are instantiations of classes. A
programming philosophy named for these entities emphasizes polymorphism, inheritance and
encapsulation. For 10 points, name this these things that certain programming paradigm "orients" towards.
ANSWER: objects [accept classes until mentioned]
On UML diagrams, these things are shown to have a "has a" relationship with a filled-in diamond.
According to the book Design Patterns, a factory method is a common way to create them. In subtype
polymorphism, one of these things can behave as though it belongs to different types. These things can be
created by constructor methods. They can borrow attributes and behavior from their superclasses through
inheritance. For 10 points, name these instances of classes, the namesake of a type of programming
exemplified by C++ and Java.
ANSWER: objects
JSON ["Jason"] is a "notation", inspired by JavaScript, for writing these things. They usually
feature encapsulation, meaning that access to their fields is controlled. These things can inherit
from supertypes and are created by constructors. In Java, this type includes methods named
hashCode() and equals(), and everything except primitives inherits from it. C++ ["see plus plus"]
uses a paradigm named for this term, which is abbreviated "OOP". Give this term for an instance of
a class, around which a certain type of programming is "oriented".
ANSWER: objects
Languages in this paradigm often contain the special variable "this" or "self" that implement open
recursion. Data of one type can be used as data of another type by the use of subtype polymorphism in this
paradigm. By concealing the way data is implemented in this paradigm, one can organize data with
encapsulation. The procedures associated with the namesakes of this paradigm are called methods. For 15
points, name this programming paradigm that includes languages like Java.
ANSWER: object-oriented programming [or OOP]
The Delphi programming language is a variation of Pascal developed to encourage this paradigm. Its
central principles include encapsulation, the concept of hiding internal data from public access, and
inheritance, or the ability to create derived classes. Languages designed explicitly to support this method of
programming include Smalltalk, though common languages like C++ and Java employ it extensively. For
10 points, name this programming paradigm that focuses on using the namesake instances of classes to
represent problems.
ANSWER: object-oriented programming [prompt on anything involving objects]
A non-Chinese group called the Gang of Four authored the textbook Design Patterns about this
system. One feature of this system is a recursive feature often implementing the keyword "this." A
feature of this methodology is the ability to "override." Major tenets of this system include limiting
the scope of a variable, called (*) encapsulation, and the ability of a variable to have more than one form,
called polymorphism. In this paradigm contrasted with "functional" languages, the namesake constructs are
instances of classes. For ten points, name this common programming paradigm exemplified by languages
like C++ and Java.
ANSWER: Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)
This shape can be graphed by setting the sums of multiples of the absolute values of x+y, x-y, x, and y equal
to a constant. Six of these figures combine with eight triangles to form the surface of a truncated cube, and
placing two of these shapes and a square at each vertex tessellates the plane. The regular version of this
shape has interior angles that measure three times as large as its central angle, which means that an interior
angle also measures three times an exterior angle. A convex version of this shape has a total of 20
diagonals, and each vertex is the endpoint of five of them. Name this polygon with eight sides.
ANSWER: octagon
The volume of one of these shapes can be found by first cubing an edge length, then multiplying by the
square root of two, and dividing by three, and each of their vertices can be placed in a coordinate system by
giving each vertex two coordinates equal to zero and one coordinate equal to plus or minus a constant.
Their surface area can be calculated by squaring an edge length and multiplying by two times the square
root of three, and the vertices of this shape can be used as the center of the faces of a cube. These shapes are
essentially two square-based pyramids with the squares covering each other. Name this Platonic solid
which, like the tetrahedron and icosahedron, has triangular faces.
ANSWER: octahedron
This type of vertex cannot exist in an Eulerian (OIL-air-ian)graph. There are no known perfect numbers
of this type. sine of x is this type of function, while cosine of x is not. Functions of this type satisfy the
condition f of negative x equals negative f of x, and their graphs are symmetric with respect to the origin.
The sum of two consecutive integers of this parity is always divisible by four. All integers of this type can
be written in the form 2n + 1 for some integer n. For 10 points, give this term, the opposite of even.
ANSWER: odd
There is a bijection between the number of integer partitions with distinct parts and those with parts solely
of this type. Functions of this type only have sine terms appearing in their associated Fourier series, and
they remain unchanged when rotated 180 degrees about the origin and are therefore symmetric with respect
to the origin. Those functions follow the property that f of x equals negative f of negative x, while numbers
of this type can generally be written in the form 2n+1. For 10 points, give this adjective describing any
whole number that can be expressed as one plus an even number.
ANSWER: odd
The sign of a permutation is negative one if the permutation has this distinction. There are no
known perfect numbers with this distinction. The Taylor expansion for sine consists of x to the n over
n factorial where n is positive and this. A function is this if f of x equals (*) negative f of negative x.
These numbers are congruent to one mod two. With the exception of two, all prime numbers are this. For
10 points, name this distinction given to numbers that are not even.
ANSWER: odd
The sum of the first n ones of these numbers is a perfect square. There are no known perfect numbers
that can be described by this term. The integral, from negative to positive infinity, of a function described
by this term is always zero. Functions with this descriptor can be represented by the equation f of x equals
negative f of negative x and include the sine function. Those functions have rotational symmetry about the
origin. All but one prime is this type of number. For 10 points identify this term that describes numbers not
divisible by two, unlike even numbers.
ANSWER: odd
For any integer N, the sum of all numbers having this property from 1 to N must be a perfect square.
It has been proven that for all numbers less than ten to the three hundredth power, there are no perfect
numbers with this property. The tangent and sine functions both have this property, which applies to any
function for which f of x plus f of negative x equals zero, and is therefore symmetric about the origin. Every
binary number with this property must end in 1, and all prime numbers but the smallest have this property.
For 10 points, identify this class of numbers, which leave a remainder when divided by two.
ANSWER: odd numbers
A test symbolized by this letter was developed by William Pugh to determine whether integer solutions
exist to a given set of linear equations and inequalities. This letter denotes the density parameter found in
the Friedman equation. This letter describes compounds like docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapentaenoic
acid, where it indicates the position of the final double bond. Whereas upper asymptotic bounds of
functions are denoted with big-O notation, lower asymptotic bounds are denoted this letter writ big. One
quantity symbolized by this letter is equal to the inverse of the square root of the inductance times the
capacitance in an LC circuit. For 10 points, name this Greek letter a capital one of which is used to denote a
quantity equal to the projection of a surface from a point onto the unit sphere, the solid angle.
ANSWER: omega
This number is the coefficient of all terms in the expansion of one over quantity one minus x. A proof by
induction involves proving that if a claim is true for n equals k, then it is true for n equals k plus this
number. It is the smallest number of real roots an odd-degree polynomial can have. A quadratic will have
exactly this many roots if its discriminant is zero. It is the largest number found in the identity matrix
because it is the multiplicative identity. For 10 points, name this first digit after the decimal point in pi.
ANSWER: 1
In set theory, this number can be defined using the set that contains only zero. If a function approaches this
positive value raised to infinity, then it is indeterminate. This number equals the length of each vector in an
orthonormal basis. This is the only positive number that cannot be used as the base of a logarithm, and this
is the only positive number equal to its own reciprocal. Name this number that is the multiplicative identity.
ANSWER: one
The integral of the Dirac [dih-RAK] delta function over any interval containing 0 has this value. The
probability of any event plus the probability of the event's complement equals this number. It
represents (*) "true" in Boolean algebra. The logarithm of this number, with any base, is zero, since any
number b to this power equals b. It is the multiplicative identity, since it times any number x equals x. For
10 points, name this smallest positive integer.
ANSWER: one
For a subset E of the real numbers, if this number, as well as this number plus x for all x in E, are in E,
then E is called an inductive set. Two numbers are relatively prime if their greatest common divisor is this
number. The sum of the probabilities of an event A and its complement is equal to this number. Evaluating
the sine of pi over two radians yields this number, and the unit circle has a radius of this length. For 10
points, the multiplicative inverse is equal to what smallest positive integer?
ANSWER: one
This is the numerator of Egyptian fractions and the number of sides of a Mobius strip. It is repeated
in the Fibonacci sequence and any nonzero number raised to the zeroth power equals (*) this value,
the largest that the sine and cosine functions take. This number is the multiplicative identity because it times
any other number is the original number. For 10 points, name this smallest positive integer.
ANSWER: one (accept unity)
The Mobius function takes this value for square-free inputs with an even number of prime factors.
An n-simplex has n plus this number of vertices, and a tree on n vertices has an edge count of n minus
this number. Benford's Law states that this number is most likely to be the first digit of a given
integer. This number is the leading coefficient of all (*) monic polynomials and the degree of all non-horizontal
 linear functions. Dividing this number by x gives the reciprocal of x. This number represents the
probability of an event that will always occur, and this number is the zeroth power of every positive integer.
For ten points, give this largest number equal to its own square, the smallest positive integer.
ANSWER: one
Paul Erdos conjectured that a set of points whose pairwise distances differ by at least this amount has
diameter quadratic in its size. In the discrete metric, this distance separates distinct points. Between four and
seven colors are needed to color the plane so that those at this distance from each other get different colors.
Compass and straightedge constructions begin with a segment defined to be of this length. The legs of a
right triangle whose hypotenuse's length is this value are the sine and cosine of one of its acute angles. For
ten points, name this value, the sum of the squares of sine and cosine and also the radius of a unit circle.
ANSWER: one
A 2 by 4 rectangle in a 4 variable Karnaugh map may be expressed as an expression with this many
variables. This is the number of output lines that a multiplexer has, and algorithms that have constant run
time are often said to be big O of this value. Boolean logic demands that a term plus its complement equals
this value. This value plus the inverse of n raised to the n, as n approaches infinity, equals e. Injective
functions map values from their domain to their codomain at most this many times. For 10 points, name this
number that is the length of a unit vector, and can be produced when multiplying a non-zero number with its
reciprocal.
ANSWER: One
For a real projective plane or a tetra-hemi-hexahedron, a characteristic symbolized chi is equal to
this. The Riemann zeta function evaluated at this argument is identical to the harmonic series.
Fermat's Little Theorem states that for a prime number p and any integer a, a to the p minus one is
congruent to it mod p, and every square of an odd number, taken modulo 8, is [*] congruent to this
number. The natural log of e, and fourth power of the imaginary unit i is, for 10 points, what number which
is the multiplicative identity, and the only positive integer that is neither prime nor composite?
ANSWER: one or 1
As a consequence of Lagrange's theorem, this is the size and number of all proper subgroups of a group of
prime order. This is the genus of a torus and the number of points mapped to a given point by a bijection or
invertible function, and when using this many variables, there is no need for a (*) partial derivative. Equal
to the limit as x approaches zero for sine x over x, it is the maximum value of the sine and cosine functions.
Linear equations have this many solutions, and it is used in multiplicative identity, meaning its product with
a number is that number itself. For 10 points, name this number whose sum with itself is two.
ANSWER: one
The sum of the reciprocals of Sylvester's Sequence converge to this number, and in ZF set theory, it
is defined as the set whose only element is the empty set. This only odd number in the range of
Euler's totient is the largest output possible of the Mobius function, and Egyptian fractions have this
number as the numerator. (*) Zero-factorial is equal to this number, as is i to the fourth power. Events
which will definitely occur have probability equal to this number, and, like zero, all powers of this number
are equal to it. For ten points, give this multiplicative identity, the first positive integer.
ANSWER: one
The difference between the partial sum of this function and the natural log is one way of defining
the Euler-Mascheroni constant. This function is used to prove that an ant crawling on a continuously
growing rope will reach the end. The sum of this function from one to infinity over the integers is
equal to the Riemann zeta function of 1. Its integral diverges when taken from one to infinity in
accordance with the p series test, and its antiderivative is (*) ln(x) (EL en of x). This function's graph is
a hyperbola whose branches are in the first and third quadrant and whose asymptotes are the x and y axes.
This function taken over the natural numbers gives the harmonic series. For 10 points, name this function,
which finds the reciprocal of a number.
ANSWER: 1/x [or one over x; or one divided by x; or x to the negative 1; accept harmonic series at any time before mention; accept any letter instead of x; accept reciprocal until mention, prompt after]
The gamma function of this number is equal to the square root of pi, and multiplying the golden ratio
by this number gives the cosine of pi over five. It is hypothesized that all non-trivial zeroes to the
Riemann zeta function have a real part equal to this number, and taking x to the power of this
number is equal to finding the (*) square root of x. This number's reciprocal is the smallest prime, and to
find the area of a triangle, you multiply this number times the base times the height. For ten points, what is
this fraction equal to 0.5?
ANSWER: one-half (accept 0.5 before mentioned)
This is the ratio of the area of an inscribed circle to the area of a circumscribed circle for a square. This
number is hypothesized to be the real part of solutions in the Riemann [REE-mahn] hypothesis. Multiplying
this number by a whole number and one more than that whole number gives a triangular number. This
number equals the cosine of the quantity pi over three. Raising a number to this power is equivalent to
taking a square root. Give this number that is multiplied by the base and height of a triangle to find its area.
ANSWER: one-half or 0.5
To find the n-th triangular number, one multiplies this constant times the quadratic n-squared
plus n. It is hypothesized that this number is the real part of all non-trivial zeros of the Riemann zeta
function. Removing the final zero of a binary number is the same as multiplying it by this number.
The area of a triangle is equal to this constant times (*) base times height. For 10 points, identify this
reciprocal of the smallest prime number, which is also the probability that a fair coin lands heads when
flipped.
ANSWER: one-half [or obvious equivalents, such as one over two or 0.5]
The Riemann hypothesis conjectures that every non-trivial root of the zeta function has a real part
equal to this. Multiplying this number by the quantity one plus the cosine of two x is equal to cosine
squared of x. Using Heron's formula requires one to multiply the (*) perimeter of the triangle in
question by this number, and finding the square root of a number is equivalent to taking it to this power. For
10 points, identify this number, equal to the sine of thirty degrees.
ANSWER: one-half
Every graph has a bipartite subgraph with at least this proportion of its edges.
Pick's Theorem states that the area of a lattice polygon is equal to I minus one plus this value times B, and
thus this is the smallest possible area of a lattice triangle. The Riemann Hypothesis conjectures that all non-
trivial zeroes of the zeta function have this number as their real part. This is the maximum value of sine of x
times (*) cosine of x, and this is also the maximum distance from a real number to its nearest integer. For
ten points, name this number which, when used as an exponent, is equivalent to a square root.
ANSWER: one- half (accept equivalents)
In algebra, a generalization of this basic property on categories is the monomorphism. The inclusion map on
sets, represented by a curved arrow, is the canonical map possessing this property. A linear transformation
on a vector space possesses this property if and only if its kernel is zero. A function is termed bijective
when it is both surjective and this, and f(x) equals f(y) implies x equals y for functions with this property.
On the Cartesian plane, functions with this property pass the horizontal line test. For 10 points, name this
property of a function where every element in the domain goes to no more than one element in the range
and vice-versa.
ANSWER: one-to-one [accept injective]
Topological spaces are termed Lindelof if every cover with this property has a countable subcover, while
the existence of a finite subcover for every cover of this type commonly defines a compact space. A set
possesses this property if every point in the set has an epsilon-neighborhood in the set. This property is not
necessarily possessed by the intersection of an infinite number of sets of possessing it because that
intersection can form a single point, which notably lacks this property. Often denoted for intervals by
parentheses at the endpoints rather than brackets, for 10 points, identify this property, which, for a set, can
be formed from the complement of a closed set.
ANSWER: open [accept word forms like openness or open set etc.]
A theorem named for this type of mapping says that non-constant analytic functions map sets of this type to
other sets of this type. All the elements of a topology possess this property with respect to the topology. For
a compact set, every cover of this type has a finite subcover. The interior of any set has this property, and
every point in a set with this property is an interior point, meaning that it has a neighborhood contained
within the set. A set of this type does not contain its boundary points, and intervals of this type on the real
line are denoted with round parentheses. For 10 points, name this property, possessed by sets whose
complements are closed.
ANSWER: open
Given some line, a nonintersecting oriented curve constitutes this kind of meander, while in game
theory, this kind of "-loop model" assumes that players cannot remember their opponents' play, and
in functional analysis the Banach-Schauder theorem refers to surjective continuous linear
transformations. Invariance of domain holds that any locally injective continuous function between
two manifolds must be this kind of (*) map. In a metric space, this adjective applies to every set such that
for all points in that set, there exists a neighborhood around that point contained in the set. Denoted for an
interval with parentheses, rather than square brackets, FTP, identify this term describing a set that does not
contain its boundary, also the complement of a closed set.
ANSWER: open
For a set with this property and a function f with singularity at z in that set, f comes arbitrarily close
to any complex value around z by the Casorati-Weierstrass theorem. In T1 spaces, every pair of
points is contained in two neighborhoods with this property that do not intersect. A G-sub-delta set is
a countable intersection of sets with this property, and (*) intersections of infinite sets with this property
do not necessarily have this property. The largest subset of a space that has this property is called the
interior, and metric spaces have this property if each of their points has a neighborhood around it that is in
the set. For 10 points, name this property used to describe sets that do not contain their boundary points.
ANSWER: open
A Grothendieck topology defines a sieve as a collection of subsets of a set with this property that
themselves have this property. The Lindehof condition for a space requires every cover of this type to
have a countable subcover. Generally, two points are "separated" if each point is contained in a set of
this type that doesn't contain the other. In the particular point topology, all sets that contain an arbitrary
point are of this type. A subset U of a metric space has this property if every point therein has a
neighborhood inside U. Sets have this property in R^n when every point is an interior point. For 10 points,
name this topological property, possessed by a set if its complement is closed.
ANSWER: open
A map has this property if it is a surjective continuous linear operator between Banach spaces, by the
Banach-Schauder theorem. In a Baire space, a countable intersection of dense sets with this property will
also be dense. If a collection of subsets and any union of those subsets has this property, those subsets
define a topology. A space is compact if every cover with this property has a finite subcover. A set has this
property if every point is an interior point, so that each point has a neighborhood entirely contained within
the set. The set of points less than one unit from the origin is the unit ball with this property. On the real
line, intervals of this type don't include their endpoints. For 10 points, name this property that is possessed
by the complements of closed sets.
ANSWER: open [accept word forms]
Andrew Tanenbaum created a "mini" one of these that was widely used as a teaching tool. The game Space
Travel inspired Ken Thompson to develop one of these that make use of "pipes." Multics greatly influenced
one of these for which X-11 provides a graphical user interface. Fedora and Debian are distributions of one
of these that was developed by Linus Torvalds and has a penguin as a mascot. Updates to another one of
these were formerly named for types of big cats. For 10 points, name this type of software exemplified by
Linux and Microsoft Windows.
ANSWER: operating systems [or OS; accept Unix on an early buzz; prompt on "kernel"]
An older example of this software was Solaris, which was used mostly on SPARC systems. This
type of software implements schedulers to manage threads, and is loaded by a boot loader. A central
component of this type of software is the kernel. This type of software provides a large contiguous
virtual memory, which can be supplemented by swap space or a (*) page file. It interfaces with
computer hardware and applications run on top of it. For 10 points, identify this software that includes Mac
OS X and Windows.
ANSWER: operating systems
One variant of this logical operation computes the sum, not the carry out, in half adders and full
adders. A bitwise variant of this logical operation is represented by a caret in C, is true only when the
bits differ, and is the exclusive type. In C, the bitwise and logical forms of this operation are
represented by a single pipe symbol and two pipe symbols, respectively. Taking the (*) union of a set
is equivalent to this logical operation. According to De Morgan's laws, the not of the expression that
contains this operation performed on A and B is equal to not A dot not B. It is often represented by plus.
For 10 points, name this operation that is true if any input is true and is contrasted with and.
ANSWER: inclusive or [or logical disjunction; accept U or set union before "union" is read; accept plus before it is read]
This point lies opposite the Nagel point on a Fuhrmann circle, and its distance from the Nagel point is half
its distance from the circumcenter. Its distance from the sides of its triangle are proportional to the secants
of the angles opposite those sides. Along with the nine-point circle center, centroid, and circumcenter, this
point is on the Euler (OI-ler) line. For obtuse triangles, this point is located outside its triangle, and for right
triangles, this point is located at the right angle. Name this intersection of the three altitudes of a triangle.
ANSWER: orthocenter
The groups of this type are ones that given a vector space over a field, preserve a non-degenerate
quadratic form over that space. Euler's conjecture on Graeco-Roman Squares was refuted for n=6 by
finding this sort of matrix. Householder matricies are always symmetric and this. Linear transformations of
this type preserve inner products. Fourier's theorem is dependent on trignometric functions having this
property, which means the integral from negative pi to pi of sin kx times sin jx dx is only non-zero for k
equals j. If the vectors in a basis are of unit length and this, then they are orthonormal. If the dot product of
two vectors is zero, the vectors are this to each other. For 10 points, name this adjective used to describe
lines or curves that are perpendicular.
ANSWER: orthogonal
If a basis has this property, then any vector can be expressed as the sum of projections onto its vectors.
In addition to normalizing a set of vectors, the Gram-Schmidt process gives them this property. The
gradient of a function has this relationship to its level curves. In the equation of a plane, the vector
whose components correspond to the coefficients has this relationship to the plane. If two vectors
have this property, then the product of their magnitudes equals the magnitude of their cross product,
and their dot product equals zero. If two lines in the Cartesian plane have this property, then their
slopes are opposite reciprocals. Name this property of lines that meet at right angles.
ANSWER: orthogonal [accept mutually perpendicular or normal; prompt on orthonormal or answers mentioning right angles]
A linear transformation has this property if it preserves the inner product, and the functions sine and cosine
have this property with respect to the Lesbesgue measure. This type of matrix is a unitary matrix with all
entries real, and the Gram-Schmidt process can take a set of vectors and produce another set that is both this
and normal, a special kind of basis. This is also the relationship between two vectors with a dot product of
zero and two lines whose slopes are negative reciprocals. FTP, identify this property possessed by the
diagonals of a rhombus and the sides of a square.
ANSWER: orthogonal (accept perpendicular after the phrase "dot product")
In QR decomposition, a matrix is factored into one in this form and one in upper triangular form. A
linear transformation, T, with this property satisfies the equality inner product of two vectors v and w
equals the inner product of T v and T w. This type of matrix preserves the inner product and yields the
identity when multiplied by its transpose. If a set of vectors satisfies this property, then it is linearly
independent. A basis whose vectors are of unit length and have this property can be created with the
Gram-Schmidt process. Two vectors with this property have a dot product of zero. For 10 points, identify
this property of things that intersect at right angles.
ANSWER: orthogonal [or word forms]
A matrix with this property and one that is upper triangular is given by the QR decomposition.
Given a linearly independent set of vectors x, a process that gives a set with this property computes a
set of vectors v as v-sub-n equals x-sub-n minus the sum from i equals one to n minus one of the
projection of v-sub-n along x-sub-i. That process is named for Gram & Schmidt and gives a basis
that can later be normalized. The standard unit (*) vectors of the Cartesian coordinate system all have
this property with respect to each other. Two vectors have this property if their inner product, or dot
product in lower dimensions, is equal to zero. For 10 points, identify this property that two lines have if
they are perpendicular.
ANSWER: orthogonality [or orthonormal; or perpendicular until it is read]
One sequence of polynomials with this property begins one, then x, then three-halves x squared minus one
half; the integral of any product of two of those from negative one to one equals zero. This term also refers
to a specialization of unitary matrices, namely, matrices whose transposes equal their inverses. A set with
this property can be produced by recursively subtracting vector projections; that is a basis produced by the
Gram-Schmidt process. This term also describes vectors whose inner product, or dot product, is zero; as
well as two lines whose slopes are opposite reciprocals. Give this property which applies to adjacent sides
of a rectangle.
ANSWER: orthogonality [accept perpendicularity; accept normality; accept word forms of any of the answer choices; do not accept "right"]
This operating system is based on Darwin, a flavor of BSD. This operating system includes the "Terminal"
application, through which Unix commands may be entered into a command line. The visual interface of
this operating system is called Aqua. Specific versions of this operating system include Tiger, Jaguar, and,
most recently Snow Leopard. For 10 points, name this operating system found on Apple Computers.
ANSWER: Mac OSX [or Macintosh Operating System Ten; accept letter-by-letter pronunciations of "OSX"; accept pronunciations of "O-S-Ten"; prompt on Mac OS]
An ensemble learning approach to finding these things relies on running the LOF algorithm
repeatedly and is a form of "feature bagging". The RANSAC method can be used in the presence of
large numbers of these things. Grubbs method for finding them relies on a test statistic consisting of
the max residual over the standard deviation. Winsorization is one method of dealing with these
values, which are also the motivation behind the development of so-called (*) "robust" methods. The
existence of a large number of these entities assuming a normal prior may indicate a high kurtosis in the
underlying distribution. These things are generally plotted above or below the "whiskers" in a box-andwhisker plot and are usually one point five times the interquartile range beyond the upper or lower quartile.
For 10 points, name these points in a data set which do not fit within the presumed distribution.
ANSWER: outliers
One method for identifying these involves dividing gap by range and is known as Dixon's Q test.
Chauvenet's [shao-veh-nay-z] criterion identifies these when a probability times the sample size is less than
one-half, while the critical value of a t-distribution is used to look for these using Grubbs- test. Other
methods work by adding or subtracting a multiple of the interquartile range to one of the quartiles.
Statistical measures that can be used effectively without eliminating these are called robust, and these are
sometimes defined as any measurement more than 3 standard deviations away from the mean. Name these
data points that do not fit in with the rest of the data because they are abnormally high or low.
ANSWER: outliers [accept outlying points or similar answers]
One condition with this name caused the destruction of the Flight 501 of the Ariane 5 launch system.
In the x86 processor, the TEST instruction clears its namesake flag, and the DieHard allocator prevents
the "heap" form of this from happening. "Trampolining" is a notable method of exploiting the stack
buffer form of this phenomenon, and the arithmetic form of it excludes division by zero. Infinite
recursion is a common cause of the stack form of this condition. For 10 points, name this term referring
to crashes caused by an inundation of information or data.
ANSWER: overflows
Steve's class adds a spatial constraint to this class, and an open problem concerns whether Nick's class
equals this class. The Klee-Minty cubes show that the simplex method is not in this class, while Khachian's
ellipsoid method was the first example of a linear programming solution in this class. By Schaefer's
dichotomy theorem, the Boolean satisfiability theorem for both Horn and anti-Horn formulas is in this class,
and for any formula is either in this complexity class or in NP-complete. This complexity class contains
problems that can be solved by a deterministic Turing machine. For 10 points, name this class of problems
that can be solved in polynomial time, which may or may not equal NP.
ANSWER: P [or early polynomial time]
This shape can be generated by drawing an infinite number of lines that are perpendicular to segments
coming from a fixed point where those segments hit a fixed line. This shape also can be generated by
finding all of the points so that a right angle is formed at the y-axis with one ray going through a fixed point
on the x-axis and one ray going through the point on this shape with twice the y-coordinate as the point on
the y-axis. Any ray coming from the fixed point on the x-axis that bounced off this shape the way light
bounces off a mirror would travel parallel to the x-axis. This shape is also defined as the set of points
equidistant from a fixed line, called a directrix, and a fixed point, called a focus, and this shape also is the
conic section with an eccentricity of one. Name this shape generated by quadratic functions such as y equals
x squared.
ANSWER: parabolas [prompt on quadratics]
This shape is the inverse curve of a cardioid. Its three-dimensional analog is given by z over c equals x
squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared, and it can be represented in polar coordinates by r
equals d over one plus or minus cosine theta. A method of approximating integrals using these shapes is
named for Simpson. Light reflected off a mirror with this shape will be focused at a single point. Its
eccentricity equals one, and it may be generated by slicing a cone with a plane parallel to a straight line
along its surface. For 10 points, name this conic section which is the set of points equidistant from a line
and a point, an example of which is y equals x squared.
ANSWER: parabolas
The solution of the Poincare conjecture via Ricci flow requires a general solution of a partial
differential equation of this kind. An aberration known as a coma occurs in reflectors of this shape. The
hyperbolic version of its three-dimensional analog is shaped like a saddle, and rolling it along a straight
line produces a catenary curve. It is the locus of points equidistant from a focus and directrix, and is
produced when a plane intersects a right circular cone. For 10 points, name this conic section with an
eccentricity of 1, the shape of curves like y = x2.
ANSWER: parabola [or word forms like parabolic]
This shape's universal constant is root two plus the natural log of quantity one plus root two, and it
has only one associated Dandelin sphere. When one of these curves is rolled along its mirror image,
the cissoid of Diocles is formed, and if the focus of one of them is rolled along a straight line, a
catenary results. As one focus of an ellipse moves to infinity with the other fixed, this curve is the [*]
limit. A plane intersecting a cone parallel to its slant height forms this section. This curve is the locus of all
points equidistant from the focus and the directrix. With an eccentricity of one, for 10 points, name this
conic section, the graph of a quadratic function.
ANSWER: parabola
In polar coordinates, this curve is given by an equation that is inversely proportional to 1 over quantity 1
plus cosine of theta. If an object with this shape is mirrored, it will redirect parallel rays of light to its focus
point. In rectangular coordinates, the slope of a tangent line of this curve at x is 2 times x. All points on this
shape are equidistant from the focus point and the directrix line. For 10 points, name this curve, which in
rectangular coordinates is produced by the equation y equals x squared.
ANSWER: parabola
Each "bulb" of the Mandelbrot set is an inverse of one of these figures, because the bulbs are
cardioids. Menaechmus found a solution to the problem of doubling the cube by intersecting two of
these figures, and Joachim Jungus demonstrated that a catenary was not one of these curves. This
shape is the locus of all points equidistant from a focus and a line called a (*) directrix. This figure is
equivalent to an ellipse with one focus at infinity, and it has an eccentricity of one. For ten points, identify
this conic section, whose vertical variety is the graph of a quadratic equation, one example of which has
equation y equals x-squared.
ANSWER: parabola (accept quadratic function/curve before mentioned)
This shape can be inverted to form a cissoid [SIS-soid] of Diocles [DIE-oh-klees] or a cardioid [KAHRdee-oid]. A drawing of all lines whose x- and y-intercepts have a constant sum generates this curve. This is
generated when the x y term coefficient equals four times the product of the other two second degree
coefficients when an equation contains only second degree polynomials. This also is generated by setting
the polar r equal to a constant divided by the quantity one plus cosine theta. This is also the set of all points
equidistant from a fixed point focus and fixed line directrix. Name this shape also generated by the equation
y=x2.
ANSWER: parabola (prompt on "conic" section)
A "universal constant" associated with this curve is equal to radical two plus the natural log of the
quantity one plus radical two. That constant is the ratio of the arc length between the two points
where this curve intersects the latus rectum to the semilatus rectum. This curve is the set of points
equidistant from a point called the (*) focus and a line called the directrix. This is the only conic section
with a single vertex. For 10 points, name this curve traced out by any quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c.
ANSWER: parabola
The Tschirnhausen cubic catacaustic is a semicubical example of this figure, and a segment of one of these
is a Lissajous curve. Menaechmus studied these, which were given their current name by Apollonius, in an
attempt to achieve cube duplication. Their surface of revolution is used for car headlights as they have the
property that all light originating at their focus will be reflected parallel to their axis of symmetry. All of
these have an eccentricity of one, and are thus similar. This figure is created by slicing a cone on a plane
parallel to a straight line along its surface. Identify this conic section, defined by a focus and directrix, an
example of which is the graph of y = x2.
ANSWER: parabola [prompt on "conic section" before mentioned]
One example of this curve is the polar equation "r equals one over quantity one plus cosine theta." This
curve is defined as the locus of points equidistant from a focus and a directrix. Neglecting air resistance,
this curve can be used to model projectile motion. In rectangular coordinates, the equations of these curves
are quadratic in either x or y, but not both. It possesses a vertex and an axis of symmetry. For 10 points,
name this curve, exemplified by the equation "y equals x-squared."
ANSWER: parabola
An orbit with this shape requires a velocity of square root of 2 mu over r and is called an escape orbit.
These shapes have eccentricity of one. This figure is defined as the locus of points equidistant from a focus
and a directrix. When ignoring air resistance, this is the shape of the path of a projectile. When written as a
function of x, the formula x equals negative b over two a gives the axis of symmetry for these figures. For
10 points, name this shape, an example of which is the graph of y equals x squared.
ANSWER: parabola
The intersection of two of these figures was central to Menaechmus' solution to the cube duplication
problem. When inverted about a certain point, it becomes a cardioid. These figures are all similar to each
other, because each has an eccentricity equal to 1. A mirror made in this shape can focus all incident light
onto a single point, and it is defined as the locus of points equidistant from a focus and a directrix. In a
uniform gravitational field, a projectile's trajectory takes this shape. For 10 points, name this conic section
produced by the graph of a quadratic function.
ANSWER: parabolas
In polar coordinates, this figure can be described by the equation r times the term one plus cosine
theta equals the semilatus rectum. This is the shape of an orbit for an object at the moment it reaches,
but does not exceed, the escape velocity. Because of the ability of this shape to focus light on a point, it is
the proposed shape for Archimedes "death ray". For 10 points, identify this conic section with an
eccentricity of exactly one, defined as the set of points on a plane equidistant from a line called the directrix
and a point called a focus which is exemplified by the graph of the equation y equals x squared.
ANSWER: parabola
This shape is the circular inverse of a cardioid. This curve can be approximated by connecting crossing
pairs of equally-spaced points from two intersecting lines. Archimedes used the method of exhaustion with
inscribed triangles to compute the area of segments of this shape, and supposedly used the three-dimensional
analogue of this shape to create a heat ray. The path of an object experiencing constant nonzero acceleration 
is this shape. Every point on this shape is is equidistant from the focus and the directrix. For ten points, 
name this conic section with eccentricity one, exemplified by the equation y equals x squared.
ANSWER: parabola
The inversion of a cardioid with respect to its cusp is one of these curves. This curve is obtained when
using the parametrization x equals velocity times t times cosine of theta and y equals velocity times t times
sine of theta minus half gravity times t squared. That parametrization can be used for the trajectory of a
projectile. These curves have an eccentricity of one, and they are defined as a set of points equidistant from
a focus and a directrix. For 10 points, name this conic section which is the graph of a quadratic equation.
ANSWER: parabolas [or parabolae; prompt on quadratic curve]
The curvature of one of these three-dimensional shapes can be given as four divided by the quantity one
plus four u quantity squared. A symmetric section of one of these figures divides the volume of its
circumscribed cylinder into equal halves. Though the second-order mixed derivatives of this shape are zero,
its other second-order derivatives are positive. This shape has an elliptic type and a type that is generated by
the equation z equals x times y. That type, which contains a saddle point, is the hyperbolic type. This three-
dimensional shape is taken by spinning pools of liquid, which is why spinning mercury can be used as a
telescope. Name this shape that consists of all points the same distance from a plane and a point focus.
ANSWER: paraboloids
The one stated under von Neumann definition of the ordinals is expressed as an order type associated with
each well-ordering, and is named for Burali-Forti. A reparametrization of conditional probability density
functions to show the lack of invariance under transformations lies behind the one named for Borel and
Kolmogorov. The congruence of measures for subsets and unions of subsets is one of these stated by
Hausdorff, while the another one of these assumes that a set of infinities exists, and hence must be infinite,
as stated by Cantor. A ball dissected into six pieces and reassembled to form two balls identical to the
original is a statement of this type named for Banach and Tarski. FTP a set containing sets which are not
members of themselves leads to one of these named for Russell, a statement of mathematical contradiction.
ANSWER: paradoxes
In hyperbolic geometry, two figures with the "ultra" form of this property must share a perpendicular, and
two geodesics with this property with respect to a third can intersect. Given a line and a point not on the
line, Playfair's axiom states that only one figure with this property can be drawn. If two lines intersect a
third line, and the interior angles on one side sum to less than 180 degrees, the lines will not have this
property, according to Euclid's fifth postulate. For 10 points, name this term that identifies lines in a plane
that do not intersect.
ANSWER: parallel
Playfair's Postulate states that, given a point and a line, only one object with this property can be
constructed. That postulate is logically equivalent to Euclid's fifth postulate, which is sometimes named
after this property. Corresponding angles are equal if the transverse line generating them intersects two lines
with this property. This property is exhibited by two lines that have the same slope but different intercepts.
For 10 points, give this property that is exhibited by any two coplanar lines that do not intersect.
ANSWER: parallelity
The only "stand-alone" member of Hilbert's axioms is grouped under this heading, and is equivalent to
Playfair's axiom. The side-splitter theorem requires that the side-splitter has this property. Two vectors are
linearly dependent if they have this property, and such vectors will have a dot product equal to the product
of their magnitudes. Spherical and harmonic geometries result if a postulate named for this property is
violated. In 3D, this property is distinct from skewness. Trapezoids have one pair of opposite sides with this
property. For 10 points, name this property of lines which never intersect.
ANSWER: parallel [or word forms; or parallel postulate]
The speedup gained by using this technique is limited by the time not using it according to Amdahl's
law. This technique can run into problems if operations are not atomic, because output becomes
non-deterministic when "race conditions" occur, requiring the use of synchronization. A common problem
to be avoided in this technique is deadlock. For 10 points, name this technique that differs from sequential
programs by allowing operations to happen simultaneously, as with multiple processors.
ANSWER: parallel computing [or multi-threaded computing; or concurrent computing; or distributed computing; or multiple core computing; or "processing" in place of "computing;" or multiple processor computing until it is read]
In hyperbolic geometry there are two forms of this geometric configuration, ultra and limiting. In Euclidean
geometry it is the degenerate conic section found by the limiting case as the focal distance goes to infinity
while the vertices remain constant of a hyperbola. This degenerate conic can also be seen as the intersection
of a plane and double cone when the vertex of the cone is moved to a point at infinity making the cone into
a cylinder. In projective geometry, this configuration cannot exist. Solutions in the coordinate plane to the
equation y squared equals one provide an algebraic description to this configuration. This configuration also
exists in the graph of an inconsistent system of two linear equations--that outcome arises when the two lines
have the same slope. Identify this relationship between two lines in the same plane that never intersect.
ANSWER: parallel lines
Playfair's axiom assumes their existence, which is not guaranteed in Riemannian geometry. Euclid's fifth
postulate is a way of proving that two objects do not have this property. The opposite sides of both a
rhombus and rectangle have this property. Two lines have this property if they are not skew and their
intersection is not a single point. Name the term that describes coplanar lines that do not intersect.
ANSWER: parallel lines
This mathematical statement has been shown to be equivalent to Playfair's axiom, Proclus-. Axiom, and the
Pythagorean theorem. Rewordings of the statement give rise to elliptic or hyperbolic geometries. If the
axiom is omitted from the others with which it usually associated, the non-Euclideam geometry can be
developed. Name this postulate of Euclid that assumes that given a point and a line not containing that
point that there exists only one line passing through the point that does not intersect the given line.
ANSWER: Parallel postulate (or Euclid's fifth postulate)
It follows from this result that any three non-colinear points lie on a circle, and that the summit angles of a
Saccheri quadrilateral are right angles. Beltrami proved its independence, and Klugel demonstrated the
flaws in 28 proofs of this statement. Equivalent to Proclus' Axiom and Playfair's Axiom, its rejection led to
Bolyai, Lobachevsky, and Riemann's development of hyperbolic and elliptic non-Euclidean geometries. In
Euclid's Elements, it is the fifth postulate. For 10 points, name this true statement asserting the uniqueness
of a line that never intersects another line.
ANSWER: parallel postulate [accept Euclid's fifth postulate before mentioned; accept "axiom" for "postulate"]
This statement is equivalent to Proclus- axiom and Playfair's axiom, and it is used, often implicitly, in every
known proof of the Pythagorean Theorem. This statement is also equivalent to the Triangle Postulate, which
states that the sum of the angles of a triangle equals the sum of the angles of two right triangles. Its first use
was to prove the congruence of alternate interior and alternate exterior angles. This statement is also
equivalent to the Equidistance postulate, which describes the relationship between certain lines. Name this
statement that is true for Euclidean geometry but false for elliptic and hyperbolic geometries, which states
that given any line and any point not on the line, there exists exactly one line going through the given point
that does not intersect the given line.
ANSWER: Euclid's (or Euclidean) parallel postulate [or fifth postulate; accept statements equivalent to the second half of the last sentence before it is read]
Schopenhauer discussed various attempts to prove it and claimed it's a "synthetic proposition a priori."
Klugel's doctoral thesis sought to demonstrate flaws in 28 proofs of it, and Beltrami showed that no proof
was possible. A stronger form was developed by Playfair and Brodie that showed it was equivalent to the
Pythagorean theorem. Abandoned by Bolyai and Lobachevsky in their independent development of
hyperbolic geometry, it was also discarded in an elliptical geometry developed by Riemann. For 10 points,,
give this axiom of geometry proposed by Euclid involving non-intersecting lines.
ANSWER: parallel postulate [or Euclid's Fifth postulate]
Arthur Schopenhauer criticized attempted proofs of this statement from concepts rather than using
perception, and G.S. Klugel demonstrated how 28 attempted proofs of it were wrong. It can be
equated to Proclus' axiom, and a stronger version of it is Playfair's axiom. Described in Proposition
29, it was shown to be independent of four earlier statements of the same kind. Bolyai, Lobachevsky, and
Riemann have all developed geometries in which it doesn't hold. For 10 points, name this fifth postulate in
Euclid's Elements, which deals with lines that never intersect.
ANSWER: parallel postulate [accept Euclid's fifth postulate before read]
This shape is combined with a pyramid and a wedge to find the volume of a prismatoid, and the volume of
these shapes can be found using a scalar triple product, which combines a dot product and a cross product.
This shape can be generated by adding multiples of any three independent vectors using scalars from zero to
one. Examples of this shape include a cuboid, rhombohedron, or cube, and they are a subset of hexahedra.
Name this three-dimensional figure whose six faces are all parallelograms.
ANSWER: parallelepiped (prompt on "hexahedron")
A law named for this figure is used to illustrate vector addition. The area of this figure is the
product of two adjacent side lengths and the sine of the angle between them. The diagonals of this
polygon bisect each other, but are not necessarily perpendicular. It is the most general type of (*)
quadrilateral in which adjacent angles are supplementary and opposite angles are congruent. Rectangles
and rhombi are types of this polygon. For ten points, name this quadrilateral with two pairs of parallel
sides.
ANSWER: parallelogram
The midpoints of the sides of any quadrilateral can be connected to form this type of quadrilateral. This is
the least restrictive designation for which either diagonal of a quadrilateral splits it into two congruent
triangles and for which the diagonals bisect each other. Its area can be found from a cross product. This
shape's opposite angles are congruent, and its adjacent angles are supplementary. Name this quadrilateral,
special cases of which include a rectangleor a rhombus.
ANSWER: parallelogram
A flattened Sonobe [soh-noh-bay] unit has this shape. The midpoints of any quadrilateral can be
connected to form one of these figures. Vectors may be added using a "rule" named for this shape,
whose diagonals (*) bisect each other, but not necessarily perpendicularly. If one of these shapes is
inscribed in a circle, it must be a rectangle. Congruent opposite angles, and supplementary adjacent angles
are found in, for 10 points, what quadrilateral whose opposite sides are congruent and parallel?
ANSWER: parallelogram (prompt on quadrilateral or quadrangle; do not accept or prompt on any other answer)
The area of a lattice is defined as the area of a fundamental one of these shapes. One law named for them
states that the sum of the squares of its diagonals equals the sum of the squares of its sides. Like more
specific quadrilaterals, the area of one of these shapes equals the magnitude of the cross product of two
vectors forming adjacent sides, and the other law named for it is used to add vectors. The diagonals of these
polygons bisect one another, and any two adjacent interior angles are supplementary. Name this
quadrilateral that has two pairs of congruent, parallel sides.
ANSWER: parallelogram(s) [accept unit cell before "squares"]
When applied to charts, these programs can employ Earley's algorithm, and the CYK algorithm can be used
to counter the local and global ambiguity problems these programs face. They can be created by programs
such as Yacc, provided there is a valid Backus-Naur notation. When they employ a stack to push symbols
through cycles of shifting followed by reduction, they are bottom up, and when they process input strings
from left to right using leftmost derivations they are known as predictive or top-down. For 10 points, name
these programs that typically map grammar symbols to data elements based on the rules of a particular
grammar, and are present in compilers.
ANSWER: parsers [or parsing; prompt on "compiler"]
Martin Kay developed a type of this process that uses the namesake structure to store hypotheses; examples
of that type of this process include the Earley one and the Cocke-Younger-Kasami ones, which run in n
cubed time, while packrat ones may run in linear time at the cost of far greater storage use. LL(k) ones are
examples of top-down ones, and bottom up examples include shift-reduce ones, which employ handle
pruning. The first phase of this process is enhanced by using recursive capabilities of Backus-Naur form,
but naively it will merely use a system of regular expressions to tokenize the input, followed by a syntax
analysis to ensure that the tokens form a valid expression, followed by a semantic analysis to determine
what the input does. FTP, identify this phase of program compilation that analyzes the output of a lexer for
grammatical structure.
ANSWER: parsing algorithms [accept word forms like parsers; accept "I won't say more because I know some of you parse everything I say."]
Hans Lewy gave a namesake "example" of one of these equations to show that the converse of the Cauchy-
Kovalevskaya theorem doesn-t hold. A method of solving these equations generalizes the use of Adomian
polynomials by employing a homotopy transformation; that is the HAM method. One method of solving
these equations requires finding two operators L and P such that their commutator is equal to the time
derivative of L; L and P are called a Lax pair. Another method of solving them relies on first solving along a
characteristic curve. Examples of these equations include one modelling vibrating membranes in three
dimensions and one modelling heat flow. For 10 points, name this type of equation which contains several
variables and their derivatives.
ANSWER: partial differential equations [or PDEs; prompt on "differential equations"; do not accept "ordinary differential equations" or "ODEs"]
This man invented a primitive form of roulette in his goal to develop a perpetual motion machine. His
namesake geometric theorem involves a hexagon inscribed in a conic section, whose opposite sides can be
used to derive a special line. In fluid mechanics, a principle named for him allows people to break the
bottom of a bottle by hitting the top; that principle states that pressure will be transmitted throughout an
enclosed, static fluid. A wager named for this man, although philosophical, contributed to probability
theory. Identify this French mathematician whose namesake triangle lists off binomial coefficients where
each row corresponds to a different power.
ANSWER: Blaise Pascal
This mathematician improved Pierre de Fermat's solution to the problem of points, which determines
how to decide a bet when a game cannot be completed. The rule named for this mathematician adds
two combinations together to equal a third combination: the two original combinations have the same
first number, which is one fewer than the first number in the third combination. The arrangement
named for this mathematician has diagonal sums that are Fibonacci numbers and has rows that
sum to powers of two. Name this French mathematician who arranged binomial coefficients into his
namesake triangle.
ANSWER: Blaise Pascal
This mathematician names the theorem that for a hexagon inscribed in a conic, opposite sides-
extensions- intersections are collinear. He corresponded with Pierre de Fermat [fair-mah] to develop
probability theory, although that work is unrelated to a theological (*) wager named for him. He also
lends his name to a structure whose rows add up to powers of two. Binomial coefficients are found in, for
10 points, what French mathematician and philosopher's namesake "triangle"?
ANSWER: Blaise Pascal
The line named after this person is found by extending pairs of opposite sides of a hexagon to find their
intersection points. Inspired by the Chevalier de Mere [SHEH-vahl-yay de MARE], a series of letters
between this person and Pierre de Fermat [FEHR-mah] discussing the distribution of money in an
unfinished gambling contest led to the development of probability theory. This person also used probability
in a wager to argue for the existence of God. Name this Frenchman who arranged the binomial coefficients
into his namesake triangle.
ANSWER: Blaise Pascal
Plotting the values of latter rows of this arrangement with a bar graph approximates a normal distribution.
Adding the shallow diagonals of this arrangement yields the Fibonacci Sequence and coloring the odd
numbers in this arrangement produces a Sierpinski Triangle. The nth row of this arrangement gives the
binomial coefficients of a polynomial expansion of the nth power. For 10 points, name this figure in which
every number is the sum of the two numbers directly above, named after a French mathematician.
ANSWER: Pascal's Triangle
These objects are usually acted on by MD5 or Blowfish before use. A precomputed list of these via
inverted hash is called a rainbow table. Stretching is a technique to increase the effective length of
these objects. These are usually stored only in hashed form, and their frequent mutation occurs in a
process called aging. The strength of these objects is generally proportional to their length, though poor
choices are vulnerable to dictionary attacks, in general brute force attacks occur when a black hat tries every
possible combination until one works. For 10 points, name these short strings used to restrict access to
authorized users.
ANSWER: Passwords [accept passcode]
One common way of storing these entities begins with the string $2a$ [dollar sign two a dollar
sign]. These entities are stored in shadow files. These entities comprise the values in rainbow tables.
These entities are combined with (*) salts before storing them. Modern GPUs allow for easier brute force
attacks on these entities using programs like John the Ripper. Before being stored, these entities are often
passed through the SHA or MD5 algorithms. Some of these entities are vulnerable to dictionary attacks,
even after a cryptographic hash has been applied. These entities can be "cracked", and short, lowercase
ones are among the least secure. For 10 points, name these strings of characters required to log into an
account.
ANSWER: Plaintext Passwords [prompt on "hash" before mentioned; prompt on "crypt"]
Rainbow tables are sometimes used in preparation for this kind of operation. Popular tools to
perform this operation include LCP, Cain and Abel and John the Ripper. This operation is made
more difficult on Unix systems through shadow files. Stretching is a technique to slow-down bruteforce approaches to this operation. One method for performing this operation requires a lot of precomputed data and is called a dictionary attack. This operation is easier when the salt is either known or
not used, and is complicated by the fact that a one-way trapdoor function was used to store the target of this
operation. This operation is more difficult when the target is longer and made up of non-alpha numeric
symbols. For 10 points, name this process by which one attempts to find a hidden key associated with a
login.
ANSWER: Password Cracking [accept equivalents for cracking like password guessing or password retrieving; accept "key" for "password" until mentioned]
Like Georg Cantor, this man described a fractal before the concept of fractals was developed. This person
discovered a surface which does not have a maximum despite meeting standard criteria for doing so.
Building on the work of Richard Dedekind and starting with the statement that zero is a natural number, he
formulated the now standard axioms for natural numbers. Name this Italian mathematician who is the
namesake of the most common space filling curve, a fractal path that includes all of the points within a
square
ANSWER: Giuseppe Peano
With Gosper he names a curve that is bounded by the Gosper island. His namesake space-filling
curve is self-contracting and all two-dimension (*) space-filling curves are generically known as his
curves. With Dedekind, he postulated that all numbers besides zero are the successors of other numbers and
he developed a theory of nonnegative integers that included his induction axiom. For 10 points, name this
mathematician whose axioms form the basis of a number theory known as this namesake arithmetic.
ANSWER: Giuseppe Peano
He expanded upon E.H. Moore's generalized matrix inverse, so the pseudo-inverse is named for Moore and
this man. He devised a way to map objects from Minkowski space to one with metric signature (2,2) in his
twistor theory, and he formulated both a weak and strong version of the censorship hypothesis. His
diagrams map regions around a singularity, and with Stuart Hameroff, he formulated a theory of
consciousness based on quantum computing that is espoused in The Emperor's New Mind. For 10 points,
identify this Briton whose "tiles" cover a plane aperiodically and whose "process" extracts energy from the
ergosphere around a black hole.
ANSWER: Sir Roger Penrose
The name of this person is combined with E.H. Moore to denote the pseudoinverse of a matrix, and this
person worked with his father Lionel to design a staircase optical illusion that was used in M.C. Escher's
Ascending and Descending. He is also the namesake of an optical illusion triangle which appears to be a
solid object but whose vertices cannot match up. Name this mathematician who combined kites and darts to
design a type of nonperiodic tiling.
ANSWER: Roger Penrose
Other than a triangle, this is the simplest regular polygon that can be constructed using Carlyle circles,
though before that discovery its construction had already been shown in Ptolemy's [TOLE-uh-mee-s]
Almagest. The ratio of the length of one of its diagonals to the length of one of its sides is the golden ratio.
Its internal angles are one hundred eight degrees, and it is the only polygon with the same number of
diagonals as sides. Name this polygon that has central angles of 72 degrees and that has five sides.
ANSWER: regular pentagon (prompt on "5- gon")
Numbers that are checked for this property include numbers that are one more than a multiple of twelve or
nine more than a multiple of thirty-six as well as numbers of the form n times the quantity 3n+1 divided by
the quantity 1-n quantity cubed, which are known as hexagonal numbers. The examples found so far have
recursive digital sums of one and end with a six or eight. These numbers are contrasted with abundant or
deficient numbers, and the lowest examples are six, twenty-eight, and four hundred ninety-six. Name these
numbers which equal the sum of their proper factors.
ANSWER: perfect numbers
For any natural number n, there exists only one of these numbers that can be expressed in the form "n-cubed
plus 1". Kanold was the first to show that the amount of these numbers below a given integer n had an
asymptotic form of little-O of the square root of n. With the exception of the smallest of these, all known so
far can be written as the sum of the cubes of consecutive positive odd integers. For a Mersenne prime with
exponent p, a number of this type can be found by multiplying the Mersenne prime by 2 to the power p
minus 1, according to the Euler-Euclid conjecture. These numbers are a subset of the triangular numbers,
and all numbers of this type found so far are even. For 10 points, name these numbers, such as 496 and 6,
that are equal to the sum of their proper divisors.
ANSWER: perfect numbers
The aliquot sequence is constant for these numbers, whose examples other than the first one have
digital root 1. Currently-known examples of them are in one-to-one correspondence with Mersenne
prime numbers, and there are a number of restrictions on-- but no (*) proof about--the existence of
odd versions of these numbers. Equaling the sum of its proper divisors, for 10 points, give this type of
number whose first two examples are 6 and 28.
ANSWER: perfect numbers
With the exception of the smallest of their kind, all known examples of these can be expressed as the sum of
cubes of consecutive odd numbers. Euler proved that there is a one-to-one correspondence between
Mersenne primes and even types of this number, and they form a subset of the triangular numbers. Numbers
which do not fit this category are classified as deficient or abundant, and these numbers all yield 2n when
they form the argument of the divisor function. It is unknown whether any odd ones exist. 6, 28, and 496 are
the first three examples of, for 10 points, what type of number that equals the sum of its proper divisors?
ANSWER: perfect number
These numbers can be generated by adding successive powers of two until the sum is prime and then
multiplying that prime times the last number added. That method is the only successful one ever used to find
these numbers. That method, stated by Euclid [YOO-klid], gives the relationship between these numbers
and Mersenne [mer-sen] numbers. These whole numbers, which are not superabundant or deficient, have no
known odd examples. Name these numbers that equal the sum of their proper divisors.
ANSWER: perfect numbers
Functions of this type can be represented as the convolution of a Shah function or Dirac Comb with a
function. The Laplace transform of this type of function requires a factor of 1 over the quantity 1 minus an
exponential. The complex exponential is this type of function in the direction of the imaginary axis, and
other examples include sawtooth and square wave functions. They can be decomposed into Fourier series,
and any function of this type obeys f of x equals f of the quantity x plus k, end quantity, for some nonzero k.
Identify this class of functions exemplified by the sine and cosine, which repeat their values at regular
intervals.
ANSWER: periodic functions [accept word forms of period]
The average length of the longest cycle in one of these is given by the Golomb-Dickman constant.
Cayley's theorem says that every group is isomorphic to a subgroup of the group of these functions
acting on G. The group of these functions is called the symmetric group. These functions are called
odd or even depending on the value of the Levi-Civita symbol or on the number of (*) transpositions
they are composed of. A derangement is one of these that leaves no element in its original place. In set
theory, they are defined as a bijection of a set onto itself. For a group of n objects, the number of these
using all n objects is equal to n factorial. For 10 points, name these functions of a set, in which the items are
rearranged with order mattering.
ANSWER: permutation [prompt on "bijection" before mention]
Cayley's Theorem states that every group is isomorphic to a group of these entities. They can be written
as a product of transpositions. They are bijections from a set to itself and for a set of size n there are N
factorial of them. The number of these that are of size k drawn from a group of n items is n factorial
divided by quantity n minus k end quantity factorial. For 10 points, name these items which are different
orderings without repetition of a list of items which should not be confused with combinations.
ANSWER: permutations
The collection of these transformations forms the symmetric group. The parity of one of these is
given by the nonzero values of the Levi-Civita symbol. They are classified as odd or even depending
on the number of transpositions they can be decomposed into. This is the name given to a bijection of
a set onto itself, and those that reverse the order of a pair are known as inversions. A special type of
these that leaves no object in its (*) original place is called a derangement. For n objects, the number of
these is equal to n factorial, and unlike combinations they take the order of elements into account. Shuffling
generates a random one. For 10 points, identify these arrangements of a set of objects in a particular order.
ANSWER: permutation [prompt on "bijection" or "isomorphism"]
A Hamiltonian path in the polyhedron representing these entities can be found using the Steinhaus-JohnsonTrotter algorithm. The Fisher-Yates method is used for sampling a random one of these. The pure Braid
group is the kernel of the homomorphism of the Braid group to the group of these things. Calculating a
determinant involves summing products of matrix elements over all possible ones of these. Cayley's
theorem states that a group G is isomorphic to a subgroup of the symmetric group acting on G, which is
itself a set of these. The sign of the Levi-Civita symbol determines whether these things are odd or even,
and they can be decomposed into transpositions. For a set of size n, there exist n factorial of, for 10 points,
what rearrangements of a set for which order matters?
ANSWER: permutations [prompt on "orderings"]
Groups formed by this sort of operation are subgroups of symmetric groups, notable examples of
which include Sylow subgroups. For any finite group, there is a group of this type to which it is
isomorphic according to Cayley's Theorem. Cycle notation is often used to denote these operations
that map a set to itself, examples of which include (*) shuffles. This operation is also often used to refer
to the quantity n!/(n-r)! which is the number of different ways to select r items from a group of n items. For
10 point, name this selection in which order matters, unlike combinations.
ANSWER: Permutation
The Shapley-Shubik index is computed by counting these objects in which each voter is pivotal. These
objects are the elements of finite symmetric groups. One of these functions which is equal to its own inverse
is called an involution and one with no fixed point is called a derangement. This term is used for one-to-one
correspondence from a set to itself. The number of these objects involving k elements from an n element set
is computed as n factorial divided by n minus k factorial. For ten points, identify this combinatorial function
which counts the ways to select k objects from n in which order matters, contrasted with combinations.
ANSWER: permutations
This entity is the subject of the BPP algorithm. Archimedes approximated it by inscribing and
circumscribing progressively larger n-gons. The probability that two integers are relatively prime is equal
to six divided by the square of this. This is the definite integral from negative one to one of one over square
root one minus x square dx. Lambert showed that it is irrational. This is the equal to the inverse cosine of
negative one. For 10 points, name this constant multiplied by the square of the radius to find the area of a
circle.
ANSWER: pi
Viete's formula can be used to compute this using an infinite product, and the Euler-Poisson integral is
equal to the square root of this. The Riemann zeta function evaluated at s=2 is equal to this quantity squared
over six. Barbier's theorem states that every curve of constant width has a perimeter this many times its
width. The Chudnovsky algorithm was used in calculations of this to 10 trillion digits. The Buffon needle is
notable for being able to approximate this, and e to the power of i times this number is negative 1.Name this
transcendental number, often approximated 3.14, which is used in finding the area of a circle.
ANSWER: pi [accept 2/pi before "infinite product"]
In Euler's buckling formula, the critical buckling load is equal to this number squared times Young's
modulus times area moment of inertia over length squared. Coulomb's constant equals the reciprocal of 4
times this value times the permittivity of free space. The reduced Planck constant, defined as Planck's
constant divided by two times this quantity, is useful when dealing with radians, because two times this
quantity of radians measures the angle of a full circle. It is equal to a circle's circumference divided by its
diameter. For 10 points, name this mathematical constant which is represented to three significant figures as
3.14.
ANSWER: pi
This value relates the width and perimeter of a Reuleaux triangle according to Barbier's Theorem. A spigot
algorithm like Rabinowitz and Wagon's can be used to verify the accuracy for estimates of this value.
Buffon's needle gives an estimate for this value, which is twice the inverse cosine of zero. The fact that this
number is transcendental guarantees there is no solution to the classical problem of squaring a circle. For 10
points, name this mathematical constant, the ratio of a circle's perimeter to its diameter, which
approximately equals 3.14.
ANSWER: pi
The probability that two random integers are coprime is six divided by the square of this number.
Lindemann proved that this number is transcendental after Lambert had shown it to be irrational. This value
can be approximated using Buffon's Needle, and Archimedes approximated it by finding the perimeter of a
96-gon. This is the period of the tangent function and the arccosine of negative one. This number of radians
is equivalent to one hundred eighty degrees. For ten points, name this constant multiplied by r-squared to
find the radius of a circle, and roughly equal to 3:14.
ANSWER: pi
This quantity appears in both the upper and lower limits of integration in Parseval's identity. Using
the gamma function, the square root of this quantity can be shown to be equal to negative one-half
factorial. It is multiplied by twice the natural log of the radius to give the surface area of Gabriel's
Horn. e raised to this quantity (*) times i gives negative one. Angular speed is divided by 2 times this
quantity to find rotational speed. This quantity is multiplied by the square of the radius in the formula for a
sphere's surface area. For 10 points, name this irrational number, a ratio of a circle's circumference to its
diameter.
ANSWER: pi
A method to calculate this using four variables with iteration is the Gauss-Legendre algorithm, and a shorter
set of methods is known as the Machin-Like formulas. The Archimedes recurrence formula to find this is
based on inscribed and circumscribed polygons with many sides, and this can be found experimentally with
Buffon's needle. The Gregory series finds this by finding 4 minus 4/3 plus 4/5 minus 4/7, etcetera. This
equals the integral from negative infinity to infinity of dx over the quantity one plus x squared. This also
equals the number of radians equivalent to 180 degrees. Give this irrational number about equal to 22 over
7.
ANSWER: pi
This number is the natural log of Gelfond's constant, and Ramanujan developed several approximations
for it. It is also the period of the tangent function, and the fact that its transcendental is used to show that
squaring the circle is impossible. 180 degrees is equal to this many radians. For 10 points, name this
number, the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter equal to about 3.14159.
ANSWER: pi
The square root of this number is the value of the gamma function at one half. The sum of the reciprocals of
the perfect squares is equal to this number squared divided by six. Euler's Identity relates this number to
Euler's number e and the imaginary unit i. This number, which was first proved to be irrational by Johann
Lambert, is one half of the period of the sine and cosine functions. Multiplying this number by the diameter
of a circle gives the circumference of that circle. For 10 points, name this constant, which is often
approximated as 3.14.
ANSWER: pi
This number divided by four is the sum of the sequence beginning one minus one third plus one fifth
minus one seventh. The sum of the squares of the reciprocals of the natural numbers is equal to one sixth
the square of this number. Archimedes approximated this value by calculating the area of a regular 96-gon.
This number is the period of tangent of x and half the period of sine of x. Sometimes approximated as 22/7,
for 10 points, name this number, the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter.
ANSWER: pi [prompt on 3.14159; prompt on 22/7 before it is read]
This concept is clarified in Rabbi Nehemiah's Mishnat ha-Middot, which corrects a Bible verse regarding
a ceremonial pool in the Temple of Solomon. In 1897, an Indiana mathematician attempted to pass a bill to
legislate this concept, but failed. Madhava's formula was the first known approach to this concept based on
infinite series, improving on a polygonal approach used by Ptolemy and Archimedes. The builders of the
Great Pyramid of Giza were the first known people to have awareness of this concept, which later people
approximated as 22/7. For 10 points, name this constant, the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter.
ANSWER: pi [or 3.141592653 and so on]
The maximum possible volume for the geometric figure known as Gabriel's Horn is this quantity. The
square root of two divided by two is the first product of an infinite sequence of terms named for Viete [veeET] that expresses this quantity. The value of the Riemann zeta function at two is equal to this quantity
squared divided by six. The period of the tangent function is equal to this quantity. The number e raised to
the product of i and this quantity is equal to negative one. For 10 points, name this transcendental number,
the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter.
ANSWER: pi
This number's hexadecimal representation can be computed using the BBP spigot algorithm. By applying
the method of exhaustion, Archimedes bounded this value above and below using a 96-gon. This number is
the square of the Gaussian integral. A sixth of the square of this number equals the sum of the reciprocals of
the perfect squares. This number is one-fourth the number of steradians in a sphere. This irrational number
is the period of the tangent function and also the area of the unit circle. For 10 points, name the ratio of the
circumference and diameter of a circle, whose value is approximately 3.14.
ANSWER: pi
It is the result of the BPP formula and Machin-like formulas. Divided by four, it is equal to the Gregory
series. When dividing it by two, it is the answer to Buffon's needle problem. It is multiplied times i in
Euler's identity. Lindermann proved that it is transcendental, implying that the circle cannot be squared. It
is equal to 180 degrees divided by one radian. For 10 points, name this number, equal to the ratio of a
circle's circumference and its diameter, and symbolized by a Greek letter.
ANSWER: pi
An approximation of this value performed by dropping a needle on a floor with parallel strips is named for
Buffon. The square root of two times this number appears in the normal distribution function, and squaring
the circle is impossible because this number is transcendental. It is the period of the tangent function, as
well as the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter. For 10 points, name this number which is
approximately equal to 22/7 or 3.14.
ANSWER: pi
One theorem named for this letter states that if there are n physical variables expressed in terms of k
quantities, one can create an equation in terms of n minus k different variables that recapitulates the
original expression. The nth homotopy group is symbolized by this letter followed by a subscript n.
Besides appearing in the name of a theorem named for (*) Buckingham, this letter is used to symbolize
the prime counting function. One value symbolized by this letter is taken as the exponent of e in order to
compute Gelfond's constant. Its capital version is used to symbolize repeated multiplication. For 10 points,
name this letter that also symbolizes a constant equal to the ratio of the circumference to the diameter.
ANSWER: pi
This constant can be approximated by using Buffon's needle, and the area under the bell curve
contains a factor equal to its square root. The exponential of i times this transcendental number is
equal to negative one according to Euler's Identity. It can also be approximated by picking points in
a square containing an inscribed (*) circle and finding the proportion of points that fall inside the circle,
and Archimedes approximated it with the method of exhaustion. This number is the period of the tangent
function in radians. For 10 points, name this mathematical constant equal to the ratio of a circle's
circumference to its diameter.
ANSWER: Pi
The square root of this quantity is obtained when the gamma function is evaluated at one-half, and it can be
approximated by Buffon's needle problem. The probability density function of the normal distribution has a
coefficient of two times this quantity all to the negative one-half power, and e to the i raised to this power
equals negative 1. The sine function equals zero at integer multiples of it. It is multiplied by four-thirds
times the radius cubed to find the volume of a sphere, and it is also the ratio of a circle's circumference to its
diameter. For 10 points, name this transcendental number commonly approximated as 3.14.
ANSWER: Pi [prompt on 3.14159... before mentioned]
Machin-like formulas Taylor-expand the arctangent function to yield one-fourth (*) of this value. A
polynomial function of it is the solution to the Basel problem. The infinite series 1 over n squared yields the
square of this number divided by six, and it can be estimated using a surface divided into parallel strips by
dropping Buffon's needle. This number in radians is congruent to 180 degrees. Because it's transcendental,
squaring the circle is impossible. For 10 points, identify this irrational number, the ratio between a circle's
circumference and diameter.
ANSWER: pi [accept "pi divided by four" or equivalents before (*); if someone starts saying 3.14159265358979232..., cut them off quickly by accepting their answer]
Its inverse can be determined using the Chudnovsky formula. Its Engel Expansion has 1,1,1 as its first three
digits and the first three digits of its continued fraction are 3, 7 and 15. Its square root is equal to the gamma
function of 1/2 and the square root of twice this number appears in the denominator of the formula for the
standard normal distribution. The Leibniz formula converges to this number divided by four and Euler
proved that e to this number, times the imaginary number, equals negative one. The Egyptians used 2 to the
8 divided by 3 to the 4 to approximate it, and several proofs have been formulated to show that it is less
than 22/7. FTP, name this mathematical constant equal to a circle's circumference divided by its diameter
that is often approximated as 3.14.
ANSWER: Pi
This number can be found via the Wallis Product or the Gregory-Liebniz formula, and an
approximate value can be experimentally determined using Buffon's Needle Method. e to the power
of i to the power of this number is equal to negative one, and it is sometimes referred to as (*)
Archimedes- constant. This is the smallest positive root of the sine function, and in radians is equal to 180
degrees. For ten points, what is this number, the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter,
approximately equal to 3.14?
ANSWER: Pi (prompt on 3.14159..., accept pi/2 before Gergory-Liebniz is mentioned)
It can be calculated via the Bailey-Borwein-Plouffe method, and the Salamin-Brent method is a
special kind of the Gauss-Legendre method which can be used to calculate this quantity. The limit of
Viete's formula yields it, as do several Machin like series. The solution to the Basel problem is this
squared over 6, and it is also the product of 4 and the sum of the Gregory-Leibniz series, though more
notable approximations to it were made by Newton and Ramanujan. For 10 points, identify this constant,
which can also, which is also approximated by 355 over 113 and 22 over 7.
ANSWER: approximations of pi or algorithms to find pi or word forms involving pi
Shaders of this type can perform effects such as bump mapping. Rendering "sub" this changes the
chromatic composition and is often used in font display. They are not directly encoded for in vector files,
but they are used in raster, or bitmap files. The number of these on a monitor is referred to as resolution. For
10 points, name this smallest unit of a computerized image, which are often measured in "megas" when
talking about digital cameras.
ANSWER: pixel
The stereographic projection maps a sphere onto one of these objects. The angle between two of
these objects is called the dihedral angle. These objects can be defined with a single point and a
normal vector. These objects have the general equation (*) a x plus b y plus c z plus d equals zero. If
these objects are not parallel, their intersection is a line. For 10 points, name these flat mathematical objects
that also name the coordinate system used by Descartes.
ANSWER: planes
These objects are often described mathematically in Hessian normal form. The angle between the
intersection of two of them is the dihedral angle. If one of these objects contains the point r|0| and a
normal vector n, it can be defined as the set of points r such that the dot product between n and a
vector from r to the origin is equal to the zero vector. The different conic sections can be obtained by
intersecting one or two (*) cones with one of these objects and they can be defined by using a minimum
of three points. For 10 points, name this flat surface which is the two dimensional analogue of a line.
ANSWER: plane
It's not a sphere, but a non-intersecting graph cannot be drawn on one of these objects if and only if
it has subgraphs homeomorphic to either K-sub 3 comma 3 or K-sub 5, a result known as
Kuratowski's Theorem. These entities can be defined by a point and a normal vector, and their
equations can be of the form (*) ax+by+cz=d ("ay ex plus bee why plus see zee equals dee"). The
intersection of two of these forms a line if they are not parallel, and three non-collinear points determine
one. Two lines are skew if they do not lie on the same one of, for ten points, what construct from
mathematics, a flat two-dimensional surface?
ANSWER: plane (accept word forms like planarity)
The path integral in Green's theorem is confined to one of these surfaces, but the path integral in
Stokes- theorem is not. Two lines are classified as skew if they are not contained by one of these
surfaces. The intersection of two of these surfaces forms a dihedral angle, and if two distinct examples
of these surfaces intersect, the intersection is a line. In coordinate geometry, the equation of one of
these surfaces often uses its normal vector. In space, this surface can represent the set of points
equidistant from two points. The geometry of two dimensions is often named for this surface. Name
this flat infinite surface.
ANSWER: planes [prompt on 2D surface(s) or two-dimensional surface(s)]
One classification of graphs depends on whether or not their edges cross when they are drawn on this
surface. A twisted sphere can also be referred to as the projective type of this shape, which includes a line at
infinity. These can be determined by a point and a normal vector, and they can also be determined by three
points that are not collinear [koe-LIN-ee-ur]. Unless two of these are parallel, their intersection is a line.
Name this shape, able to define a two-dimensional space, which is flat and infinite.
ANSWER: plane or planar
A related set of these kinds of objects named after Kepler and Poinsot exist but differ from this set since
they are not convex. The Swiss mathematician Ludwig Schlafli extended this set to higher dimensions and
in the process found a 24-cell variety, which has no three-dimensional analogue and are known as
polytopes. In nature, the herpes virus is shaped like the 20-sided member of this set of three-dimensional
objects. Including members like the Cube and the Dodecahedron, for 10 points, name this set of five regular
convex polyhedra named after a Greek philosopher.
ANSWER: Platonic Solids
An adiabatic invariant is an approximation to a more fundamental type of invariant named for this person.
An isomorphism exists between the Klein-Beltrami model and his namesake hyperbolic disk. His
eponymous transformation is known as an inhomogeneous Lorentz transformation, while his namesake
group consists of linear isometries of Minkowski space. Grigori Perelman may have recently proved, for 10
points, what Frenchman's namesake conjecture, which states that every simply connected closed threemanifold is homeomorphic to the three-sphere.
ANSWER: Henri Poincare
Because he further developed a method started by Anders Lindstedt to find the recurrence time it takes
certain systems to return to a previous state, that time is now named for this person. That time often is
relevant to his namesake maps, which are used to trace paths of particles in space. This mathematician's
namesake metric is used to place objects on his disk model of hyperbolic geometry. His namesake
conjecture is solved as a consequence of Thurston's geometrization conjecture and states that the threesphere is essentially the only closed, simply connected three-dimensional manifold. Name this French
mathematician whose conjecture was recently proven by Grigori Perelman, who was offered but turned
down the Clay Millennium Prize.
ANSWER: (Jules) Henri Poincare [pwan-kar-ay]
Along with Anders Lindstedt, this person is the namesake of a method to approximate periodic solutions to
certain differential equations. This mathematician is the namesake of first recurrence maps used to trace
paths in chaos theory, and he developed a disk model of hyperbolic geometry. This mathematician
conjectured what became a specific case of Thurston's geometrization conjecture: that the three-sphere is
the only type of bounded three-dimensional space that contains no holes. Name this mathematician whose
conjecture was proven by Grigori Perelman and was one of the Millennium Prize Problems.
ANSWER: Henri Poincare (poyn-kar-ay)
With Anders Lindstedt, this man names a technique for looking for regular perturbation expansions
to approximate periodic solutions to differential equations. His name is sometimes given to an
inhomogenous group and transformation more commonly named for Lorentz. A fixed, regular and
periodic orbit was proven to converge to a periodic orbit or a fixed point in a theorem named for this
man and (*) Bendixson. His namesake Lemma can be used to demonstrate that closed forms represent a
cohomology class, and a dodecahedral space is sometimes named for this man. This pioneer of chaos theory
is most famous for postulating a Millennium Problem solved by Grigori Perelman. For 10 points, name this
French mathematician who posited a namesake conjecture regarding three dimensional manifolds.
ANSWER: (Jules) Henri Poincare
John Stallings's "engulfing" method was used to solve one problem named for this man using
the notion of PL-homotopy. A problem named for this mathematician was introduced in the
same paper that showed that a certain object had a fundamental group of over 120. Michael
Freedman solved a special case of a generalized version of that problem named for this man,
which was solved for dimension higher than four by Stephen Smale. Richard Hamilton outlined
a method of using Ricci flows to solve that problem named for this man. For 10 points, name this
French mathematician who names a conjecture proven by Grigori Perelman which states that
every closed, simply connected manifold is homeomorphic to the three-sphere.
ANSWER: Henri Poincare
One attempt to prove it by Richard Hamilton utilizes the Ricci flow, the solutions to the differential
equation dg/dt = -2R for every point i and j. The Stallings-Zeeman theorem is a proof of the generalized
version of this statement for n >= 7. The Smale theorem showed that it applied to n >=5 and the Freedman
theorem further generalized it to the case n=4. It states that if a three-dimensional manifold has the property
that every simple closed curve can be continuously deformed to a point, then the three-dimensional
manifold is a sphere. For 10 points, name this topological problem solved by Grigori Perelman, the only
Millennium Prize problem with a verified solution.
ANSWER: Poincare Conjecture
Its generalized version can in general be realized as a result of the h-cobordism theorem, but, as Milnor's
exotic sphere demonstrates, it only applies to piecewise linear and topological manifolds in these cases. For
three-manifolds, the proof follows from the categorization given by Thurston geometrization. This proof
was recently finished when the finite time extinction of the Ricci flow was established. FTP, name this
recently resolved problem in mathematics which states that every simply connected three-manifold is a
sphere.
ANSWER: Poincare conjecture
It is a special case of the Thurston elliptization conjecture and Whitehead developed his namesake
prime link while trying to prove this statement. A proof for it involving the use of (*) k-handles was
developed by Smale and the Kirby-Siebenmann invariant was central to Freedmen's Fields medal winning
proof for the n equals 4 case. For 10 points, name this conjecture, which states that a compact n-manifold is
equivalent to the n-sphere if it has the same homotopy groups.
ANSWER: Poincare conjecture
The proof of one subset of cases of this theorem relies on the Stallings-Zeeman theorem, while another
special case of this statement is proved by Freedman's theorem. The Whitehead link was found to be a
counterexample to an incorrect proof of this theorem, while the Gluck twist might be a counterexample to
the 4-dimensional smooth verison of it, which remains an unsolved problem. A special case of Thurston's
geometrization conjecture, Richard Hamilton discovered the Ricci flow process used to prove this
statement. For ten points, identify this conjecture proved in 2003 by Grigori Perelman, which states taht any
simply connected and closed 3-manifold is homeomorphic to the 3-sphere.
ANSWER: Poincare conjecture
The Rego-Rourke and Rubenstein-Thompson algorithms attempted to disprove it, and John Stallings once
wrote a paper on "How Not to Solve" this problem. The method eventually used to solve it was introduced
by Richard Hamilton in 1982, but it was not until a series of papers written in 2002 and 2003 applied Ricci
Flow with "surgery" that it was considered provable to say that the namesake relationship existed between a
simply close connected 3-manifold and the three-sphere. For 10 points, name this Millenium Problem, a
conjecture named for a French mathematician, whose solution led to the declining of the 2006 Fields Medal
by Grigory Perelman.
ANSWER: The Poincare Conjecture
John von Neumann [NOY-mun] developed a topology without any of these entities, which usually
represent an element of a space. These entities are the only primitive objects in Tarski's axiomization
of geometry, which is in contrast to the use of lines, planes, and these objects as the three primitive
objects in Hilbert's system. Playfair's axiom assumes the existence of a line and one of these entities.
In Euclid's first postulate, two of these objects are joined to form a segment. A line called a directrix
and one of these entities called a focus can be used to define conic sections. Three of these entities
that are not on the same line define a plane, and any two of them define a line. Name these things
that have no area or volume.
ANSWER: points
One specialized form of these entities defined over linear data structures is an iterator. The use of postfix
iteration on iterators and other versions of these objects relies on the convention that adding an integer to
one of these is equivalent to adding the size of the associated type to its value; that convention is the
namesake arithmetic of these objects. C-like languages define arrays as a series of these without gaps. The
most basic operation on one of objects returns the value of the object to which it of these is associated; that
operation is dereferencing. These objects usually hold representations memory locations and that generally
indicate where an associated object is stored. For 10 points, name these objects, the "links" in conventional
implementations of linked lists.
ANSWER: pointers
This type of variable is returned by the C function malloc. They can cause programs to crash when they
are "wild" or "dangling". In C, linked lists are linked using these variables. The indexing of arrays is done
using these variable's namesake arithmetic. In C, these variables can be dereferenced using the asterisk
operator. Their void type can refer to objects of any type. For 10 points, name these variables that reference
the address of a function or variable in memory.
ANSWER: pointers
A "wild" one is one that has not been given a specific value. Its functionality can be duplicated with a onedimensional array. When one is "double indirect," it means there are two of these before the actual data can
be found. They are crucial in the creation of linked lists. Arithmetic with them involves moving up and
down a number of bytes depending on the data type being referenced. For 10 points, name this type of
variable whose value is a memory address.
ANSWER: pointer variable
Attempting to use a null one of these things can cause a segmentation fault. The function malloc
returns one of these things. Every node but the last one in a linked list contains a field for this thing.
In C and C++, these things are declared by using an asterisk and Java has references instead of these
things. The namesake (*) arithmetic of these things is used to index arrays. For 10 points, identify these
whose value is an address in memory.
ANSWER: pointers [prompt on reference]
Data serialization and restoring serialized data requires these objects to be "swizzled" and "unswizzled."
Nonstatic methods implement one of these called "this." Each node of a doubly linked list includes two of
these, often called "next" and "previous;" the head and tail nodes have one each of these set to NULL.
These objects are "dereferenced" to obtain the value at the address they indicate. For 10 points, name these
variables present in many programming languages, notably C and C++, that store a memory address.
ANSWER: pointers
Donald Knuth said that he "consider[ed] assignment statements and" these "variables to be among computer
science's most valuable treasures". Due to a namesake arithmetic, adding 1 to this kind of variable usually
results in a larger increase. Instead of objects, Java passes a corresponding one of these. In C, these are
dereferenced with an asterisk and an ampersand is used to assign them values. These variables are
dangerous if they are dangling or null; the latter case results in an exception. FTP, name this type of
variable which stores memory locations.
ANSWER: pointer
The "hazard" type allows memory allocated to nodes of lock-free dynamic shared objects to be
reclaimed, while "wild" ones have not yet been initialized. These entities, simpler implementations of
the reference date type, are necessary to (*) implement and control lists, queues, and trees. For high level
programming languages, they effectively take the place of purpose register. For ten points, name this data
type whose value directly refers to another value stored elsewhere in the computer memory.
ANSWER: Pointer
These objects are replaced during serialization in a process called unswizzling. Automatic garbage
collection is one feature of the smart type, although segmentation faults or general protection faults can be
the result of the dangling type. Each node of a doubly linked list contains has a forward and backward one,
and an asterisk is used to dereference them. For 10 points, name these variables that store memory
addresses.
ANSWER: pointers
The C++ Boost library contains "smart" types of these objects that work properly with
exceptions, as well as an "intrusive" example that includes an embedded reference count. A dispatch
table contains an array of these objects. When two or more of these entities have the same value,
aliasing occurs. During serialization of data for storage, these objects are (*) de-swizzled. Garbage
collection is used to free up ones that are no longer used, since those examples can cause segmentation
faults. Dynamic memory allocation uses these to store addresses. In Java, accessing nonexistent objects
throws an exception named for the null type of these. For 10 points, name these data types used to refer to
memory addresses.
ANSWER: pointer
In one recent programming language edition, these pieces of data can be weak, shared, or unique.
PRAM parallel algorithms often simplify algorithms by using a jumping technique named for these
entities. These entities are called (*) "wild" when they have not been properly initialized. Arithmetic on
these entities can be used to access different indeces of an array. These objects are returned after successful
calls to the malloc function. In C, these objects can be created by using the ampersand operator to get the
address of another variable. When these entities refer to objects that have been deallocated, they-re called
dangling. For 10 points, name these entities, often deferenced with an asterisk, that stores references to
objects in memory.
ANSWER: Pointers [prompt on "address"]
"Tombstones" and the lock-and-key method can be used to avoid errors caused by these objects. During
deserialization, data elements can be converted to them in a process called "swizzling." "Smart" ones make
garbage collecting easier by using methods like reference counting, while segmentation faults are often
caused by "wild" or "dangling" ones. Accessing the value held in these objects is known as "dereferencing"
them. In C and C++, they are denoted by an asterisk. For 10 points, name these data structures which hold
memory addresses.
ANSWER: pointers
In the stack class that is part of the STL, the operation top returns one of these data types. In many
languages, such as C, the array data type is actually one of these objects, due to the way arrays are laid out
in memory. During deserialization, it is common to swizzle these things into objects. The void type of them
can be used for any other data type, which is useful for multi-threading. In a doubly linked list, there are at
least two types of these objects for every node, a singly linked list has at least one. These structures can be
dereferenced to access to what they refer. For 10 points, identify these data types whose name reflects that
they refer to another object's memory location.
ANSWER: pointers or references until mentioned
Prefetching in LDS can be accomplished using the jump type of these objects. A dispatch table consists of
function ones. C allows arithmetic with these objects, which are used for the internal representation of
arrays. When objects in memory are deallocated, these can dangle. A segmentation fault arises when these
objects do not correspond to a valid location. Each node in a linked list contains two of these data types,
one of which can be dereferenced to return the next node. References are safer ways to handle some of the
functionality of these objects. For 10 point, name this type of variable which stores a memory address of
another variable.
ANSWER: pointers
A sequence can be related to a Newton series appearing in the Mellin transform of this man's namesake
generating function using the cycle named for this man, Mellin and Newton. Solvation effects can be
analyzed using an equation named for him and Boltzmann, while an equation named only for him is an
inhomogeneous version of the Laplace equation. The Jacobi identity is one of the relations satisfied by his
namesake bracket, and Fresnel's wave theory predicts his namesake spot. The lateral strain over the axial
strain gives the ratio named for, FTP, this Frenchman whose distribution has mean equal to its variance and
gives the probability of a certain number of independent events in a fixed period of time in terms of the
average rate.
ANSWER: Simeon-Denis Poisson
Together with Mellin and Newton, this scientist gives his name to a cycle that relates the Norlund-Rice
integral to the Mellin transform. His spot is sometimes called the Arago spot and appears at the center of a
circular screen, while Gouy-Chapman theory provides a solution to the equation named for him and
Boltzmann, which models salvation and describes electrostatic interactions in ionic solutions. The
dimensionless quantity of lateral strain over axial strain is known as his ratio. For 10 points, name this
French scientist whose name also adorns a distribution governed by a single parameter, lambda, used to
predict the occurrence of a number of events.
ANSWER: Simeon Poisson
The degrees of nodes in a large Erdos-Renyi graph are approximated by this construct. Raikov's
theorem states that if the sum of two independent random variables has this function, then both
random variables are also distributed as such. When randomly throwing (*) balls into bins, it gives a
good approximation of the number of balls in a given bin. This distribution is used for counting arrivals in
queuing when the number of arrivals in time intervals is independent and depends only on interval length,
and thus is well-modeled by its namesake process. It is the limit of the binomial distribution as the number
of events increases and the probability decreases so their product is constant. For 10 points, name this
distribution frequently used to model rare events.
ANSWER: Poisson Distribution
This distribution's moment-generating function is e raised to the product of m and quantity e to the x minus
one, where m is its mean. One application of this distribution is to a construct requiring both independent
increment and stationary increment assumptions. A related function based on the difference of variables
following this distribution is named for Skellam and is useful in describing differences in the photon noise
of two images. Fluctuation in one of its parameters is called shot noise, and its parameter denoted lambda
describes both its mean and variance. Useful in modeling copy errors and waiting times, for 10 points,
identify this distribution named after the Frenchman who introduced it.
ANSWER: Poisson distribution [or Poissonian; or von Bortkiewicz distribution early]
Dobinski's formula implies that its nth moment is given by the partitions of a set of size n when it has an
expected value of 1. The difference between two of these with different variables and parameters is given
by a function named for J.G. Skellam. This function's mean and variance are the parameter itself, which is
the product of the number of events times the expectation value, and is represented by lambda. Often used
to model the probability of rare events, for 10 points, identify this probability function, which gives the
expected probability of that event occurring within a certain time period and is named for a French
mathematician.
ANSWER: Poisson Distribution
The Anscombe transformation is used in systems which follow this distribution, and variables that follow
this distribution are subject to Robbins Lemma. When it has an expected value of 1, the nth moment of this
distribution is equal to the number of partitions of a set of n elements. If two variables follow it, their
difference follows the Skellam distribution. Used to model the number of mutations in irradiated DNA or
the number of calls to a call center, this limiting case of the binomial distribution is entirely reliant on the
parameter lambda, which is equal to its mean and variance. Usually used to model events with low
probability, FTP, name this statistical distribution named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Poisson distribution
This mathematical concept was discussed at length in Ladislaus Bortkiewicz's book, The Law of Small
Numbers, which used Prussian military data about deaths from horse-kicks to illustrate this concept. This
concept can be calculated by taking lambda, which symbolizes the expected number of occurrences, to the k
value, which symbolizes the number of occurrences, multiplied by e to the negative lambda all divided by k
factorial. For 10 points, name this mathematical distribution, governed by a single parameter, lambda,
which models the number of unlikely events within a given time interval.
ANSWER: Poisson distribution
The non-linear Anscombe transform on this type of variable sets the variance of it to 1, and Dobinski's
formula demonstrates that nth Bell number is the nth moment of this distribution. With PDF proportional
to its characteristic value to the k over k factorial, the difference between two variables with this distribution
follows the Skellam distribution, and it can be considered a limiting case of the binomial distribution. It has
both mean and variance lambda, and von Bortkiewicz used it to model deaths by horse kick in the Prussian
army, illustrating his proposed Law of Small Numbers. For 10 points, identify this probability distribution,
used to model the number of low-probability events that occur in a specific time period.
ANSWER: Poisson Distribution
When data shows over- or underdispersion with respect to this distribution, a modification named
for Conway and Maxwell is used. The Robbins Lemma is used to relate expected values from this
distribution. The difference between two variables that follow it is given by the Skellam distribution,
and its nth moment is equal to the number of partitions of a set of size n. Used to model chemical DNA
mutagenesis, calls to a call center, or horse-kicks in the Prussian army, it contains a single parameter
lambda which is both its mean and variance. For 10 points, name this distribution used to model rare events,
named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Poisson distribution
Inter-event times for this distribution follow the exponential distribution, and its moment-generating
function is proportional to e to the t, quantity minus one. The sum of variables with this distribution itself
follows this distribution; that result is its reproductive property. This distribution applies when the question
of how many events have not occurred has no meaning, and when the product of the number of trials with
the probability remains fixed as the number of trials goes to infinity, it approximates the binomial
distribution; that approximation is good for many trials with small probability of success. Its mean and
variance are both equal to its single parameter, and its mass function at x for a parameter mu is e to the
minus mu times mu to the x, over x factorial. Name this distribution used to model waiting times for
arrivals, named for a Frenchman.
ANSWER: Poisson distribution [accept Poisson processes]
This type of model can be generalized through Cinlar's inversion method or by thinning. It's not Brownian
motion, but these systems have the predictable representation property. The probability of finding two
events separated by a given time in these systems is exponentially distributed and like other systems in its
class it posses independent increments. This is a simple example of a Levy process where each jump
increments the count by one. This memoryless counting process starts at zero and the number of events n in
any length of time t is equal to e to the negative lambda t times lambda t raised to the n over n factorial.
These processes are used to describe the arrival of customers to a store or a queue. For 10 points, name
these processes that are governed a distribution of the same name where events are independent but happen
at an average rate lambda.
ANSWER: Poisson process [prompt on Levy process; prompt on exponential process]
Euler's ("oilers") formula can be used to represent complex numbers in this system. Using the
semi-latus rectum and the eccentricity as constants, conic sections can be represented directly in this
system. One coordinate in this system can be found by taking the square root of the sum of squares of the x
and y terms. Lemniscates (LEM-niss-kates) and cardioids (CAR-dee-oydz) can be represented in this
system, which uses r and theta as variables. For 10 points, name this 2D coordinate system where each
point is determined by a distance and angle.
ANSWER: polar coordinates
Fermat primes are involved in the constructibility of one type of these figures with a compass and
straight edge. These figures are convex if they have no reflex angle. The formula "n minus two times 180
all divided by n" can be used to calculate the interior angle of one type. The faces of Platonic solids consist
of "regular" ones of these figures, which means that all their angles and sides are equal. For 10 points,
identify these two-dimensional closed shapes made of straight lines.
ANSWER: polygon [or n-gon]
Polar reciprocation yields the dual of one of these. Stellation is most commonly performed on these
things. The Euler characteristic is two for the convex type of these things. There are only five examples of
these that have congruent, regular polygons for faces and have the same number of faces meeting at each
vertex; those are the Platonic solids. For 10 points, identify this term for three-dimensional solids.
ANSWER: polyhedra [or polyhedron]
If one half plus micron plus mu is an integer, then the Gegenbauer differential equation will have a
solution involving the ultraspherical form of these objects. The ones named for Schur are a special
variety of the ones named for Jack, and those named for Stirling and Friedrich Bessel form the
Sheffer Sequence. Murphy's formula can be used to represent ones generated from Gram-Schmit
orthonormalization and named for (*) Legendre. An infinite sequence of these entities bears the label of
orthogonal, while Abel's Impossibility theorem involves the severing of these that have an order higher than
five. FTP, name these mathematical expressions that do not contain numerical exponents or division by a
variable and comprise more than one term, such as x squared plus two x plus three.
ANSWER: polynomials (accept orthogonal polynomials until "Schur")
Every finitely generated projective module of a ring of these objects is free, according to the Quillen-Suslin
theorem. Classically, an algebraic variety consists of a set of solutions to a system of these functions.
Computation over these objects is simplified by the use of Grobner bases. Concatenating multiple instances
of these functions together piecewise yields a spline, which is used for interpolation. The eigenvalues of a
matrix are equal to the roots of one of these, called the "characteristic" one. A truncated Taylor series is one
of these functions, and quotients of them are called rational functions. For 10 points, name these functions
that consist of sums of variables multiplied by coefficients and raised to integer exponents, an example of
which is "x squared plus two".
ANSWER: polynomials [or polynomial functions]
Ones named for Hermite are solution to the quantum harmonic oscillator and are orthogonal, with e
to the negative x squared as their weight function. The eigenvalues of a 2 by 2 matrix can be calculated
using their trace and determinant. according to a theorem named for Samuelson. A theorem named for
Abel and Ruffini states that there is no closed form expression for the roots of one with degree five or
above. For 10 points, identify these quantities which are functions of a variable x raised to the nth
power, exemplified by ax squared plus bx.
ANSWER: polynomials
The determinant of a Vandermonde matrix is usually called one of these things. Power sums are
related to "symmetric" varieties of these things by the Newton identities. The solutions of these
things can be quickly tested with Horner's method. The elementary symmetric function for these
things are defined by Vieta's formulas. Their types of solutions can be determined by using (*)
Descartes's rule of signs. A complex solution to these functions always exists according to the fundamental
theorem of algebra. Their degree is equal to their number of roots. For 10 points, name these functions that
consist of a sum of variables raised to non-negative integer powers and multiplied by coefficients, such as
cubics and quadratics.
ANSWER: polynomials [prompt on functions until it is read]
The monic [MONE-ik] type of these is addressed by Gauss- Lemma, and Alexander and Jones types of
these are used to distinguish types of knots. Lagrange [lah-GRAHNJ] interpolation is used to create one of
these that passes through n specified points, and graphs of these must follow Descartes- [day-karts] Rule of
Signs. In simple cases, these can be divided using synthetic division, and they can otherwise, like numbers,
be divided by long division. Their degree is calculated by taking the largest of the sums of the variable
exponents of each term, and their variables- exponents must be whole numbers. Name these expressions,
examples of which include binomials and trinomials.
ANSWER: polynomials
These entities can be used to arbitrarily closely approximate a continuous function on a closed interval
according to the Stone-Weierstrass theorem. These functions intersect at knots in splines, which are
constructed piecewise from them for purposes of interpolation. A method named for Cardano
demonstrates how to find the solutions to one subclass of this family of functions, and Abel and Ruffini
proved there was no general solution to them when their degree was greater than four. For 10 points,
name these functions which consist of a sum of coefficients times powers of a variable, such as "x-cubed
plus two-x-squared minus one."
ANSWER: polynomials
One set of these objects is orthogonal with respect to a Gaussian weighting function, and another is used
to solve Laplace's (luh-PLAH-sez) equation in spherical coordinates; those sets of these objects are named
for Hermite (er-MEET) and Legendre (luh-ZHAN-druh). Writing a Taylor series attempts to approximate a
differentiable function as one of these objects. One of these is guaranteed to have a number of roots equal to
its degree by the fundamental theorem of algebra. For 10 points, name these functions of a variable and its
powers, such as x squared plus two x plus one.
ANSWER: polynomials
If a ring R is Noetherian, then the ring of these objects over R is also Noetherian according to the
Hilbert basis theorem. Given a set of these objects S, the set of values which make every element of S
vanish is an affine variety. For a ring or a field denoted K, the ring of these objects over the ring or
field is denoted K followed by x enclosed in brackets. A monic one of these objects whose roots are
the eigenvalues of a matrix is the matrix's (*) "characteristic" one. Descartes- rule of signs applies to
equations of these objects. Techniques for solving equations of these functions degree 2 include completing
the square, factoring, and using the quadratic formula. For 10 points each, name these functions consisting
of variables multiplied by coefficients and raised to integer exponents, such as "x squared minus four."
ANSWER: polynomials
The Legendre variety of these mathematical objects appears when solving Laplace's
equation, and eigenvalues can be identified via the characteristic variety of these objects.
Those that contain an infinite number of terms are known as a power series, and a fraction of
two of them is known as a rational function. Although there is no general formula to solve
quintic ones, those of smaller degree can always be solved for x via the quartic, cubic, and
quadratic equations. For 10 points, name these functions, a sum of terms with constants
multiplied by powers of x.
ANSWER: polynomial functions [or polynomials; prompt on function]
One of these objects used in knot theory is named HOMFLY [pronounced "homefly"]. This type of function
can be evaluated using Horner's method. These functions form a ring, since they can be added and
multiplied but not always divided. The quotient of two of these functions can be simplifed using the method
of partial fractions and is called a rational function. Synthetic division can be used to find the roots of this
type of function, and the number of roots is at most its degree. Formed as a sum of coefficients times non-
negative powers of x, for ten points, identify these mathematical functions exemplified by x^3 - x and x^2 + 1.
ANSWER: polynomials
The Weierstrauss approximation theorem states that any continuous function can be written in terms of
these to any accuracy, and the eigenvalues of a quantum harmonic oscillator arise from the Hermite types of
these. The fundamental theorem of algebra states that these have the same number of complex roots as their
degree, while the rule of signs can determine the number of positive roots of these. For 10 points, identify
these types of functions which are written as variables raised to non-negative integer powers, examples of
which are the quintic "y equals x to the fifth" and the quadratic "y equals x-squared plus two x".
ANSWER: polynomials
In graph theory, the "chromatic" one of these objects determines how many colors a vertex graph
can have, and the "Legendre" type are orthogonal in the integral inner product space from -1 to 1.
Though they aren-t series, the Taylor [*] type of these can be used in approximations. According to the
Abel-Ruffini theorem, there is no general solution to these of degree 5 or higher. Synthetic division can
factor, for 10 points, what mathematical objects with positive integer exponents, exemplified by 'x to the
fifth plus two- and 'x cubed plus x-?
ANSWER: Polynomials
Most computer programs use Homer's rule to evaluate expressions of this form. Varieties, the central object
of study in algebraic geometry, are defined to be the set of solutions to a system of these objects. One type
of these named after Vaughan Jones and another named after James Alexander and John Conway are used
to represent knots. Descartes- rule of signs is a method for determining the number of roots for one these,
and these can be differentiated using the power and sum rules. Niels Abel (AH-bul) proved that formulas do
not exist to find roots for these when they are at least fifth degree after Lodovico Ferrari and Gerolamo
Cardano found a formula for the quartic type. Give the name for these expressions, examples of which are
3xy and x+2y.
ANSWER: polynomials [or polynomial expressions; accept polynomial equations]
Hilbert's basis theorem states that certain rings of these objects are Noetherian, and Eisenstein's criterion
tests for their irreducibility over the rationals. The Abel-Ruffini theorem states the impossibility of a
solution in radicals for some of these expressions. Descartes- Rule of Signs can be used to find the number
of positive, negative, and complex solutions to one of these, and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
states that they have a number of roots equal to their degree. They are infinitely differentiable and cross the
x-axis at their roots. For 10 points, name these expressions composed of variables and their powers, written
as sums of monomials.
ANSWER: polynomials
All rings of these objects over countable fields are finitely generated, according to Hilbert's basis theorem.
Horner's rule is a method of evaluating these objects, and Eisenstein's criterion gives the condition for them
to be irreducible. Abel's impossibility theorem states these objects of degree five are incapable of algebraic
solutions. Descartes [dey-KART] is the namesake of a rule that relates their number of positive roots to the
number of changes of sign of their coefficients. For 10 points, name these mathematical expressions
exemplified by x squared plus four x minus six.
ANSWER: polynomials
The Hilbert Basis Theorem concerns rings of these constructs. A function of this type can approximate any
other continuous function as closely as wanted by the Stone-Weierstrass Theorem, and according to Abel's
Impossibility Theorem, formulas for solving those above a certain (*) degree do not exist. Descartes' Rule
of Signs can be used to determine the sign of their roots. By the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, their
total number of zeros is equal to the degree of their highest term. For 10 points, name this type of
expression exemplified by monomials, as well as x squared plus x plus 1.
ANSWER: polynomials
If a ring is Noetherian, this type of ring over the original is also Noetherian by the Hilbert basis theorem.
A splitting field is the smallest field extension for which a given one of these decomposes into linear
factors. The complex numbers are algebraically closed because these functions are always zero at least one
point in that field. Synthetic division is applied to these functions. No general solution exists for certain
types of these functions by Abel's impossibility theorem. Descartes' rule of signs shows how many positive
or negative roots one of these can have. For 10 points, name these functions consisting of variables raised
to integer powers.
ANSWER: polynomial [prompt on rational function]
A sufficient condition to check if one of a subset of these objects is irreducible is Eisenstein's
criterion, and Hilbert's basis theorem demonstrates that the ideals of rings of certain types of these
objects are finitely generated. The Horner scheme is a process to rapidly approximate their (*) roots,
and Abel demonstrated that closed-form roots only generally exist when these entities have degree less than
five. For 10 points, name these expressions, the sum of one or more variables and their products and
powers, such as x2 + x + 1.
ANSWER: polynomials
Every ideal of this type of ring is finitely generated according to Hilbert's basis theorem. The
multiplication of two "primitive" types of these things is itself primitive according to Gauss's lemma.
These things can be evaluated using nested multiplication or Horner's method. The Eisenstein
criterion provides a sufficient condition for these things being irreducible over the rationals. A
continuous function can be uniformly approximated on a closed interval by one of these things. Niels
Henrik Abel fully proved that there was no solution in radicals to these things when they have degree
greater than five. For 10 points, identify these things that consists of sums of coefficients multiplied by
variables raised to integer exponents.
ANSWER: polynomials
Decompositions of a type of these things are found with the Littlewood-Richardson rule; that
type is the characters of irreducible representations of general linear groups, are indexed by
partitions, and are named for Schur. A method of proving the Cayley-Hamilton theorem is
showing the minimal one of them divides another one of them. A Grobner basis is defined over
an ideal over a ring of these things. Eisenstein names a criterion that tells when these things are
irreducible. Algebraically closed fields have the property that these thingss associated with that
field can be split into linear factors, and the Abel-Ruffini theorem proved that there is no general
formula for solutions of these things of degree five or higher. For 10 points, name these functions
which consists of the sum of several terms with a variable raised to integer exponents.
ANSWER: polynomial
In base 2, these objects are designated primitive if they generate maximum period linear feedback shift
registers. The Chebyshev ones are a special case of the Jacobi ones, as are the Legendre ones. A Taylor
series of order n corresponds to one of these with degree n, and irreducible ones cannot be factored, though
the fundamental theorem of algebra guarantees they have at least one complex root. For 10 points, identify
these mathematical objects whose terms are all proportional to a power of a variable, examples of which
include 3y and x squared plus 1.
ANSWER: polynomials
Eisenstein's criterion tells if certain types of these are irreducible over the rational numbers. If they
involve only one variable, these objects will have at most n-1 ["n minus 1"] extrema and n-2 ["n
minus 2"] inflection points if they are of degree n. One over x is (*) not this type of expression, because
the exponent on the variable must be a positive integer. For 10 points, name this type of mathematical
expression, exemplified by quadratics such as x squared plus 3x minus 5.
ANSWER: polynomials (accept polynomial expressions, equations, or functions; accept polynomials with integer coefficients; prompt on expressions, equations, or functions)
In math, types of these expressions named for Chebyshev and Hermite and orthogonal. In computer science,
when followed by the word time, it describes an efficient algorithm. Niels Abel proved the insolubility of
the quintic ones, and according to the fundamental theorem of algebra, one of these of the nth degree has n
complex roots. They are defined as consisting of one or more terms, each of which is the product of a
constant and a variable raised to an integral power. FTP name these algebraic expressions, an example of
which is x squared plus five x plus nine.
ANSWER: polynomials
Hilbert's Nullstellensatz relates algebraic sets to ideals in rings of these objects. A lemma named for
Gauss says that the product of two primitive examples of these objects is primitive and Eisenstein's
criterion concerns their reducibility. The set of these objects over a field K is denoted K bracket x
and forms their namesake ring. Their quotients can be simplified by synthetic division. Eigenvalues
correspond to the values at which a matrix's (*) characteristic one evaluates to zero. Descartes- rule of
signs bounds the number of their real roots, and another theorem says that examples of degree n has n
complex roots counting multiplicity. For 10 points, name these functions which can be written as a sum
where each term is a coefficient times some power of a variable.
ANSWER: polynomials
The Tartaglia-Cardano method is used to solve one type of these equations. Abel's Impossibility
Theorem states that no algebraic solutions exist to other types of these equations. One specific type of
these equations is solved by a namesake (*) formula that includes the discriminant, which is equal to b
squared minus four a c. Finding the solutions to these equations is equivalent to finding the roots of their
namesake functions. For 10 points, name this family of equations in which a function consisting of only
coefficients and powers of a variable is set equal to zero, examples of which include cubic and quadratic
equations.
ANSWER: polynomial equations [accept cubic equations before "Abel"; accept quartic equations before "Abel"]
A definite matrix with this property has a unique Cholesky factorization and possesses
eigenvalues which all have this property. These kinds of numbers in two's complement are expressed
with a leading zero. The signum function returns a value of one for these types of numbers. With the
exception of the discontinuity, the Heaviside function returns a value of 1 for these kinds of numbers,
which is also the domain for the non-complex natural (*) logarithm function. For these kinds of
numbers the floor function is merely the truncation function. A function that is concave upwards has a
curvature that takes on these values. For 10 points, with the exception of zero, the output of the absolute
value function are what numbers, the opposite of negative numbers?
ANSWER: positive [accept logical equivalents, such as being greater than zero]
The Karlin-Rubin theorem provides a test function which has a maximum value for this quantity
among probability density functions with the monotone likelihood ratio property. Jacob Cohen wrote
a popular book about calculating this quantity while working in the behavioral sciences. The
likelihood-ratio test has the highest value of this quantity when testing between two simple
hypotheses according to the (*) Neyman-Pearson lemma. Along with significance level, this quantity is
decreased when using the Bonferroni correction method and it is often plotted against sample size when
designing an experiment. Also known as sensitivity, this quantity is often calculated by finding the
probability of not committing a Type II ("2") error. For 10 points, name this statistical quantity defined as
the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is false.
ANSWER: statistical power [accept sensitivity before it is read]
For a given threshold eta, the likelihood-ratio method uniformly has the highest value of this according
to the Neyman-Pearson lemma. A decrease in this quantity is the main cost of using a non-parametric
procedure over a parametric one. This value depends on the effect size, the sample size, and the
significance criterion used. This value is equal to one minus beta, or alternately, it is the probability of not
committing a type two error. For 10 points, name this measure of the effectiveness of a statistical test,
which is the probability that it will reject the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is false.
ANSWER: statistical power
Numbers of this type are the only ones which can not be expressed as the sum of at least two
consecutive integers. Euler proved that all even perfect numbers are equal to the difference of two of
these numbers. The sum of all the entries in a row of Pascal's triangle will always be one of these
numbers. A Mersenne prime is one less than one of these numbers, which have only a single one in
their (*) binary representation. For 10 points, identify these exponentiations of the only even prime, which
include 32, 64 and 128.
ANSWER: powers of two [or obvious equivalents, such as two to the power of n]
The Erdos-Gyarfas conjecture states that a cycle of length equal to one of these numbers exists for all
graphs with minimum degree 3. The number of vertices of an n-dimensional hypercube is equal to the nth
of these numbers, and a Mersenne prime is characteristically one less than these numbers. The sum of a
row of Pascal's triangle is equal to one of these, and in binary the nth of these numbers is simply a 1
followed by n zeros. For 10 points, name these numbers, the first few of which are 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32...
ANSWER: Powers of 2 or 2 to the nth power (Accept equivalents)
The proof of the Crochemore-Perrin two-way algorithm relies on a lemma about "short" examples of
these objects. In CIDR notation, the length of the network example of this entity is encoded after the slash.
The second case of the "good rule" in the Boyer-Moore-Algorithm tries to match one of these components
of the pattern to its counterpart in the target. The Huffman scheme creates a code that is said to be free of
these. The prebuilt table in the KMP algorithm contains the length of the longest examples of these that
obey certain requirements. In a different context, Polish notation is this type of notation because of the
ordering of the operator relative to the operands. For 10 points, name these substrings of a string that start
of the beginning of the string, unlike suffixes.
ANSWER: prefixes
The method for accomplishing this task using elliptic curves is named after Hendrik Lenstra, while the best
method for accomplishing this task for large numbers is the number field sieve. Another method for doing
this involves looking for results of modular arithmetic that are perfect squares, which is known as a
quadratic sieve. Euclid's Lemma can be used to prove the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, which states
that results of this process are unique. Name this task that writes a number as a product of whole numbers
that are not composite.
ANSWER: prime factorization [or integer factorization; or prime decomposition; accept word forms]
The most efficient classical method of performing this operation is selecting a pair of small-degree
polynomials over the rationals with a common integer root in the General Number Field Sieve. A
method of doing this which finds a cycle in a pseudo-random sequence is Pollard's rho algorithm.
Shor developed a polynomial-time algorithm for doing this on a (*) quantum computer. The ability to
perform this function quickly for large inputs would defeat RSA encryption. A simple method of
performing this operation is trial division, and this problem is somewhat more difficult than primality
testing. For 10 points, identify this operation which decomposes a number into the product of powers of
primes.
ANSWER: prime factorization [or integer factorization; accept factoring instead of "factorization"]
The Pratt certificate for this is used in the Lucas-Lehmer algorithm for testing it. The Legendre
symbol is used in the Solovay-Strassen test for this. The Miller-Rabin test for this results in many
false witnesses from Carmichael numbers. Fermat's Little Theorem gives results for taking a
modulus by a number satisfying (*) this property. A naive algorithm for testing this involves testing every
integer up to the square root of a number to see if it is a divisor of that number. For 10 points, name this
property of numbers that are only divisible by one and themselves.
ANSWER: primality [or prime number; accept equivalent word forms]
Miller's algorithm conditionally checks for this property, but Rabin modified that algorithm to make it
probabilistic, like the Fermat test. The most computationally naive way to determine if a number n has this
property is trial division which checks to see if no number less than n evenly divides it. For 10 points, name
this property possessed by non-composite numbers whose only divisors are one and the number itself.
ANSWER: primality [or prime; or primeness; or any other word forms]
This property is possessed by the constant described in Mills' theorem, and a one way of determining this
property is by the Lucas-Lehmer test. A statement about the asymptotic incidence of this property is this
property's namesake theorem, and the fact that every number can be written as the sum of two numbers
with this property is given as Goldbach's conjecture. Famously subject of a proof by Euclid showing that
there are infinitely many numbers with this property, numbers that do not have this property are called
composite. For 10 points, name this property of a number that means it is divisible only by one and itself.
ANSWER: primality [or prime]
The existence of infinitely many bounded gaps between numbers with this property was proven in an
acclaimed 2013 paper of Yitang Zhang. That result generalizes the conjecture that there exist infinitely
many pairs "n" and "n plus 2" which have this property. If every even integer greater than 2 can be written
as the sum of two numbers with this property, then Goldbach's conjecture is true. A classic method for
finding numbers with this property is the Sieve of Eratosthenes. Two numbers have this property relative to
one another if they have no nontrivial common divisors. For 10 points, name this property possessed by
numbers that are divisible only by one and themselves.
ANSWER: primality [or primeness; or word forms]
A sequence of numbers with this property contains arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions by the GreenTao theorem. If x is has this property and 2 x plus 1 also has this property, then the resultant values are
named for Germain. Carmichael numbers do not have this property even though they pass the Fermat test.
Goldbach's conjecture states that every even integer can be represented as the sum of two numbers with this
property. For 10 points, name these numbers whose only factors are one and themselves.
ANSWER: primality [or prime numbers; accept word forms]
Terence Tao used a Selberg sieve to show that this problem could not be solved in sublinear time. Agrawal,
Kayal, and Saxena proved that this problem can be solved in polynomial time. Algorithms to solve this
problem named for Miller-Rabin and for Lucas are both based on Fermat's Little Theorem. An early
algorithm for this problem checked if the input survived the (*) Sieve of Eratosthenes, while another
checks all numbers up to the square root of the input to see if they are divisors. Closely related to the
problem of factoring, for ten points, identify this problem which attempts to determine if a given positive
integer has only one proper factor.
ANSWER: primality testing (accept anything about determining whether a number is prime, do not accept finding primes or equivalents)
There exists a real number A such that the floor of the quantity A to the three to the n gives one of these
numbers for every positive integer n according to Mills' Theorem. Two to the quantity p minus one is
congruent to one modulo p squared is satisfied by the Weifrich type of these. The Lucas-Lehmer Test is
used to determine if a number fits a specific category of these and every even number can be written as the
sum of two of these according to Goldbach's conjecture. Euclid showed that there are infinitely many of, for
10 points, what type positive integers, with two being the smallest member, which are only divisible by one
and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers [accept Mills theorem until "these numbers"]
Landau's problems concern these numbers, and include Legendre's conjecture about them. A theorem
concerning the modular arithmetic of these numbers is called Fermat's little theorem. It is believed that
every even integer greater than two can be expressed as a sum of two of these numbers, a conjecture named
for Goldbach. The theorem named for this type of number states that the number of these up to x can be
approximated by the function x over the natural log of x, and these numbers remain after applying the Sieve
of Erastosthenes. This subset the of natural numbers is often contrasted with composite numbers. Name
these numbers of which two is the only even one, numbers that are divisible only by one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers [or primes; accept primality]
This property is tested for by Proth's theorem, and GIMPS is searching for numbers with this
property. A theorem about this property states that the distribution of numbers with it is
approximately n over log n, and numbers with it separated by two are called "twins." Other kinds of
these numbers are named for [*] Fermat and Mersenne, and Goldbach's conjeture states that every even
integer greater than two can be written as the sum of two numbers with this property. Euler proved that
there are infinitely numbers with this property, which can be found with the Sieve of Eratosthenes. For 10
points, name this property of numbers whose only factors are one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime [or primality; accept prime numbers; accept primes]
The AKS algorithm tests to see if an entity is one of these and Wilson's theorem gives a condition for
them. Their namesake theorem states that the probability of a number being this is about one over the
natural log. They can be found using the Sieve of Eratosthenes (air-uh-TOSS-thuh-neez). Euclid proved
there were infinitely many of them and types of these are named for Fermat and Mersenne. For 10 points,
name these numbers that have no divisors other than one and itself.
ANSWER: prime numbers
According to the Green-Tao Theorem, the sequence of these numbers contains arbitrarily long
arithmetic sequences. Each of these numbers larger than 3 is congruent to either 1 or 5, modulo 6.
Whether even numbers larger than 2 can be written as a (*) sum of two of these is the subject of
Goldbach's Conjecture. The Sieve of Erathosthenes [air-uh-TOSS-thuh-neez] can find, for 10 points, what
kind of number whose only divisors are itself and 1?
ANSWER: prime numbers
One way to find them is with a Sieve of Eratosthenes, and Golbach's Conjecture states that every number
greater than 2 can be written as the sum of two of these numbers. Euler proved that the sum of their
reciprocals diverges, while the fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that all natural numbers can be
uniquely factorized into them. For ten points, name these numbers divisible only by one and themselves.
ANSWER: Prime numbers
A theorem about these entities states that the number of them below x is grows as x over l-n of x.
Goldbach's Conjecture asks whether every even number can be written as a sum of two of these numbers. A
famous proof involving these numbers involves assuming there are only finitely many of them, then asking
what divides the number one greater than their product. That proof by contradiction was used by Euclid to
demonstrate their infinitude. For 10 points, identify these numbers like 11, 13, and 17, which are only
divisible by one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers
A non-zero element of a ring R is one of these elements if it is not a unit, and, for any elements x and y in
R, if it divides x times y, it also divides x or y. A number n is one of these numbers if and only if "n minus
one factorial" is congruent to "negative one modulo n", according to Wilson's theorem. An integer
raised to the power of one of these numbers and that integer are congruent modulo the exponent,
according to Fermat's little theorem. When they are equal to "one less than a power of two", these
numbers are named for Mersenne. These numbers can be found using the sieve of Eratosthenes. For 10
points, name these numbers divisible only by themselves and one.
ANSWER: prime numbers [or prime elements]
Tests for identifying these include the Miller-Rabin test and the AKS test, and they can also be
found using the sieve of Eratosthenes (air-a-TOSS-the-nees). The Riemann (REE-mawn) hypothesis
has implications regarding their distribution. According to (*) Goldbach's conjecture, any even number
greater than two is the sum of two of them. Euclid famously proved that there are an infinite number of
them. For 10 points, name these numbers which are divisible only by one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers
These numbers are the subject of the bounded gap theorem proved by Tom Zhang in 2013. Their
spaces are darkened when drawing an Ulam spiral, which demonstrates that several quadratics with
a leading coefficient of four generate several of these numbers. Pairs of these numbers are added
in Goldbach's conjecture, and pairs that differ by two are called twins. Unique products of these
numbers are the basis of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. Name these numbers left by the
Sieve of Eratosthenes that are not composite, meaning that their only factors are one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers or primes [accept twin primes]
Eight of the nine Heegner numbers have this property, and numbers with this property are produced
by a polynomial named for Euler of the form n squared plus n plus 41. The Ulam spiral shows
diagonal patterns of these. The Goldbach conjecture states that every integer greater than two is the
sum of two of these, and the (*) Mersenne variety of these take the form 2 to the n minus one. Euclid
demonstrated that an infinite number of them exist. By marking all multiples of different integers, the Sieve
of Eratosthenes is a method to find these numbers. For 10 points, name these counterparts of composite
numbers.
ANSWER: prime numbers
The AKS and Miller-Rabin tests are used to find these numbers. In the asymptotic limit, the
number of them less than a given number x is approximately equal to x divided by the natural
logarithm of x. Goldbach's conjecture states that every even number can be written as the (*) sum of
two of these. Euclid showed that there are an infinite number of them, and a type that is one less than a
power of two is named for Mersenne (mer-SEHN). 2 is the only even one. For 10 points, name this type of
number whose only factors are one and itself.
ANSWER: prime number
A specific type of these entities x obey a relation in which x squared divides the x minus Legendre symbol x
over fifth Fibonacci number. Another type satisfies the conditions of Wolstonholme's theorem for the fourth
power, though all of them satisfy that result for the third power. If x is one of these and 2x plus 1 is also,
they are named for Germain. In addition to the Wall-Sun-Sun ones, these numbers divide themselves minus
one factorial plus one according to Wilson's theorem. Their count is asymptotic to x over the natural log of
x, and Goldberg's hypothesis states that every even number can be expressed as the sum of two of these.
Fermat and Mersenne give their names to varieties of, for 10 points, what kind of number whose only
factors are one and itself?
ANSWER: prime numbers
The Ulam Spiral is used to visually represent patterns in these numbers. The polynomial n squared minus n
plus forty-one outputs these numbers for the first forty positive integer inputs. When n is this type of
number, one less than the factorial of n minus one is divisible by n according to Wilson's Theorem, and
a to the n power minus a is divisible by n by Fermat's Little Theorem. Euclid supposed that there were
finitely many of these numbers and then multiplied them all and added one to demonstrate their infinitude.
The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic guarantees unique factorizations into these numbers. For ten
points, name these integers whose only proper factor is one.
ANSWER: prime numbers (or primes)
Paulo Ribenboim proved in 1991 that the set of these is Diophantine, and in 1912 Edmund Landau
proposed four "unattackable problems" dealing with them, none of which have yet been solved. The
theorem named for them states that the number of them less than or equal to n is approximately equal to n
divided by the natural logarithm of n. The GIMPS project seeks to find examples of the Mersenne type of
this number, ordinary examples of which can be found using the sieve of Eratosthenes. For 10 points,
identify these numbers whose only two factors are 1 and itself.
ANSWER: prime numbers
There are approximately n over log n numbers of this type that are less than n. Euclid proved that
there are infinitely many of these numbers. Goldbach's conjecture states that every even integer
larger than 2 is the sum of (*) two of these numbers. The fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that all
positive integers larger than 1 can be expressed as a product of this type of factor. 2 is the only even
example of, for 10 points, what numbers contrasted with composites?
ANSWER: prime numbers or primes
If there were a solution to the equation x to the n plus y to the n plus z to the n equals zero, it
would be an example of the Wall-Sun-Sun type of these numbers. An elementary proof that the
quantity of these numbers less than x divided by x over log x is equal to one was provided by Paul
Erdos and Alte Selberg. In 2013, Yitan Zhang found that the number of pairs of this type of number
differing by less than 70 million was infinite. By considering all of them multiplied together and then
(*) adding one, which is not divisible by the heretofore multiplied numbers, Euclid proved that there are an
infinitely many of them. That every number greater than one can be factored into a unique representation
with these numbers is the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. For 10 points, name this type of number
divisible by only one and itself.
ANSWER: prime numbers
Fermat's [fehr-mahs] little theorem uses this type of number as a modulus. When one more than twice one
of these numbers shares their property, then they are classified as the Germain type, and raising two to the
power of one of these numbers and subtracting one gives a Mersenne number. When these numbers differ
by two, they are classified as twins, and two large numbers of this type are multiplied in RSA cryptography.
Name these numbers left behind by the sieve [siv] of Eratosthenes [eh-rah-TOS-thuh-nees], the integers
greater than one that are not composite.
ANSWER: prime numbers
One theorem about these numbers states that a sequence of them contains arbitrarily long arithmetic
sequences. That theorem is the Green-Tao Theorem. One type of these numbers are of the form 2 to
the nth power minus 1, where n is also one of these numbers. An infinite number of the
aforementioned (*) Mersenne kind would also imply an infinitude of the Germain type of these numbers.
Euclid used a proof involving a product of these numbers to show that there are an infinite number of them.
They can be found by the Sieve of Eratosthenes, and the first few are 2, 3, 5, and 7. For 10 points, name
these numbers that are evenly divisible only by 1 and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers
In RSA encryption, two of these numbers are multiplied together to create a public key. Proof of the
Riemann hypothesis would link the distribution of these numbers to solutions of the Riemann zeta function.
The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic states that every positive integer greater than one is a unique
product of these numbers. For 10 points, name these numbers that are only divisible by themselves and one.
ANSWER: prime numbers
A theorem named after these numbers states that n divided by the natural logarithm of n approximates
how many of these numbers are less than n. The Sieve of Eratosthenes can be used to determine if a
number is of this type. All integers greater than one can be written as a unique product of this king of
number according to the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. Two is the only even number of this type,
which is the opposite of composite. For 10 points, name this type of positive integer whose only factors are
itself and one.
ANSWER: prime numbers [or primes]
Paul Erdos created a proof showing that the count of these numbers less than or equal to x asymptotically
approaches "x over the natural logarithm of x." Goldbach's conjecture proposes every even integer can be
written as the sum of two of these. Euclid proved there were infinitely many of these, and the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic states all natural numbers can be uniquely factored into these numbers. For 10 points,
name these numbers divisible by only one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers
All four of Landau's "unattackable" problems concerned these entities. One of those problems,
Legendre's conjecture, claims that for all positive integers n, one of them is found between n squared
and quantity n plus one squared; another states that any even integer greater than two can be
written as a sum of two of them and is known as the (*) Goldbach conjecture. Many encryption methods
rely on multiplying two of them, and they can be found using the sieve of Eratosthenes. For 10 points, name
these numbers whose only factors are one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers [or primes]
A series of these values is the output generated by Shor's algorithm, which works in polynomial time on
quantum computers. The Miller-Rabin algorithm determines whether an input is one of these values. A
modulus that is the product of two of these values is computed in both the public and private keys in RSA
encryption. Carmichael numbers fool probabilistic algorithms that try to find these values using Fermat's
Little Theorem. For 10 points, the Sieve of Eratosthenes is one method of finding what numbers whose only
factors are one and themselves?
ANSWER: prime numbers [or primes; accept prime factors before "Miller-Rabin"]
According to Goldbach's Conjecture, every integer greater than 2 can be expressed as the sum of two of
these numbers. These numbers, which are used in finite field theory and public key cryptography, can be
found using the Sieve of Eratosthenes. They are the subject of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic,
which states that every positive integer has a unique factorization into these numbers. For 10 points, name
these numbers which are only divisible by one and themselves, often contrasted with composite numbers.
ANSWER: prime numbers
If you multiply two of these values and find the Euler totient function of the product, you can create public
and private keys symbolized d and e. Whether a given number is one of these values is tested using an
algorithm named for Miller and Rabin. One naive test for these values, named for Fermat, gives false
positives called Carmichael numbers. The difficulty of factoring composite numbers composed of two of
these numbers is the basis of RSA encryption. For 10 points, name these non-composite numbers with only
two divisors, one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers [or primes]
Carmichael numbers are a set of false positives for these, while a theorem of Green and Tao states that these
contain arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions. Bertrand's postulate shows that there is always one of these
between n and 2n, while Euler showed that the sum of their reciprocals diverges. These numbers satisfy
Euclid's lemma, while the fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that every natural number has a unique
factorization into these. For 10 points, name these numbers that have exactly two positive divisors.
ANSWER: prime numbers
For an integer input, the totient function gives the number of integers that are "co"-this. When Gauss
was only 15 years old, he approximated their count by n over the natural log of n. The subject of the
Goldbach conjecture and the [*] Riemann Hypothesis, Eratosthenes developed a so-called "sieve" to find
them. According to the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, any positive integer greater than one can be
written as a unique product of, for 10 points, what type of number that has no divisors other than one and
itself?
ANSWER: Prime number [accept coprime until "Gauss" is read]
When properly optimized, the Sieve of Atkins is a modern method for finding them that is faster than
the ancient Sieve of Eratosthenes. There are infinitely many of them, and the Riemann hypothesis
and Goldbach conjecture speculate on their distribution and the expression on integers as pairs of
them, respectively. Really large ones factor into the RSA encryption method commonly used for secure
internet transactions while special ones identified by Mersenne are equal to one less than 2 raised to certain
powers. 2 is the only even example of, for 10 points each, what numbers whose factors consist only of 1 and
themselves?
ANSWER: Prime numbers
Its namesake counting function, pi of n, is approximately given by n over the natural logarithm of n. 1024
bit versions of these are used in Diffie-Hellman key exchange, and its distribution is linked to the zeros of
the Riemann zeta function. The sieve of Erastosthenes is used to find small ones of these, and there are 47
known Mersenne ones of these. Goldbach's conjecture states that all even integers greater than 2 can be
expressed as sum of two of these numbers. For 10 points, identify these numbers that can be used to factor
larger numbers and have no divisors other than 1 and itself.
ANSWER: prime numbers
n has this property if and only if the Euler phi function evaluated on n equals n-minus-one. Bertrand's
postulate and Goldbach's conjecture concern the existence of these objects, whose Mersenne examples
are always one less than a power of two. They can be detected via the Sieve of Eratosthenes, and every
integer can be written as a product of them via the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic. For 10 points,
name these integers that are only divisible by themselves and one.
ANSWER: prime numbers
This word prefixed by "pseudo" describes n to a base a if a to the n-1 power and 1 are congruent modulo n.
Carmichael numbers are examples of those numbers which pass a test described by Fermat's little theorem.
Adding 1 to the product of a finite amount of these was how Euclid proved that there are infinitely many of
these numbers. Any positive integer can be uniquely represented as a product of these numbers in a
namesake factorization, and 2 is the only even example of these. For 10 points, name these numbers
contrasted with the composites, which are only divisible by themselves and 1.
ANSWER: prime number
The Green-Tao theorem states that there exist finitely long arithmetic sequences of these numbers,
and the function pi of n denotes the nth one of these numbers. The Lucas-Lehmer test identifies
whether or not (*) Mersenne numbers have this property, and they can be identified by the Sieve of
Erastosthenes. Euclid proved that there were infinitely many of, for ten points, what numbers, which are
only divisible by one and themselves, the only even one of which is two?
ANSWER: Prime Numbers
The theorem named for them states that the number of these less than a given number n is approximately
equal to n divided by the natural logarithm of n. Specific types of them are named after Sophie Germain and
Marin Mersenne, and the fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that any positive integer greater than one
can be uniquely expressed as a product of these. They can be found using the sieve of Eratosthenes, and the
first four examples of them are two, three, five, and seven. For 10 points, name this type of number, whose
only divisors are one and itself.
ANSWER: prime numbers
A congruence class Zn (zee en) is a field if and only if n is a member of the set formed by these numbers
The existence of arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions of them was proven by Green and Tao. One
theorem about these numbers states that a number a is congruent to a to the n mod n if n has this distinction.
If n divides a times b and n is one of these, then n divides a or b according to Euclid's Lemma. They can be
found using the Sieve of Eratosthenes, and another result by Euclid states that there are an infinite number
of them. For 10 points, name these positive integers which have no positive integer divisors other than
themselves and 1.
ANSWER: prime numbers
Robert Carmichael names the set of false-positives in testing for this. Distributed asymptotically, a random
number near a large number N has about a one over natural log of N chance of having it. Landau's
problems, two of which are the Legendre and Goldbach conjectures, concern this property. Most
algorithmic tests for this property are probabilistic, such as the Miller-Rabin test. The Sieve of Atkin is an
optimized method of computing numbers with this property, based on the ancient Sieve of Eratosthenes.
The infinitude of such numbers was proven by Euclid in his Elements. For 10 points, name this property of
natural numbers with exactly two divisors, itself and one.
ANSWER: prime number or primality (accept word forms)
Hadamard and de la Vallee Poussin independently proved this theorem in 1896, and a proof of this
involving only real numbers led to a dispute between Selberg and Erdos (AIR-dawsh). The Hadamard and
de la Vallee Poussin proofs used the zeta function and were followed by a J.E. Littlewood proof that this
theorem is not an inequality that used the Riemann hypothesis. A concise way to state this theorem is that pi
of n equals the logarithmic integral of n, where the logarithmic integral is dx over the natural log of x from
two to n, which is approximately n over the natural log of n. Name this theorem which approximates how
many numbers less than a given number have only one proper divisor.
ANSWER: prime number theorem
The creators of this work aimed to stratify the types seen in Frege's Begriffsschrift. Kurt Godel
combined the formal systems in this work with the Zermelo-Fraenkel axiom system. Based on Peano
Arithmetic, it states that it is impossible to speak of the "set of all sets," an idea expanded into one of
its creator's namesake (*) paradoxes. Godel's two incompleteness theorems were necessitated by its
shortcomings, and it contains a proof of the statement "1+1 = 2". For 10 points, name this foundational
work in mathematics by Russell and Whitehead.
ANSWER: Principia Mathematica
Anatole Rapaport used a four-line algorithm to analyze this setup after Robert Axelrod organized a
tournament where people designed algorithms for this setup, determining that its iterated type is usually best
solved by tit-for-tat. Human players in this setup usually use the formally irrational strategy likely because
reputation factors into the iterated version. Its Pareto-optimal outcome is "both cooperate". For 10 points,
the Nash equilibrium involves both namesake people defecting to the police in what super-basic game
theory game involving two convicts?
ANSWER: iterated prisoner's dilemma
In a book subtitled "the Puzzle of the Bomb," William Poundstone applied this construct to nuclear
warfare. The iterated form of this construct was the subject of a tournament held by Robert Axelrod, which
held that "tit for tat" was the best strategy for approaching it. The only Nash Equilibrium in the iterated
form of this game is to defect every time. In the most common formulation of this game, players receive six
months if both stay loyal but ten years if their partner enters a plea bargain. For 10 points, name this
common situation in game theory.
ANSWER: prisoner's dilemma
Anatol Rapoport came up with the best strategy to solve one version of this
problem developed by Merrill Flood, Melvin Dresher, and Albert Tucker. Robert
Axelrod discussed it in The Evolution of Cooperation and confirmed Rapoport's "tit
for tat" strategy as optimal for its iterated case. It has been applied to such
economic concepts as two-firm price wars and the free rider problem. For 10 points,
name this classic problem in game theory in which two of the namesake people
must choose whether to keep quiet or rat each other out.
ANSWER: prisoner's dilemma
Robert Axelrod wrote about this thought experiment in his The Evolution of Cooperation, and noted
that the best strategies in this situation were those that were "nice", "forgiving", "retaliating", "nonenvious." It was originally posed by Merrill Flood and Melvin Dresher, and the best response to the
(*) iterated version of this problem is the "tit-for-tat" solution. Contrasting the value of altruistic versus
selfish actions, this is, for ten points, what thought experiment, in which two suspects are each offered a
chance to confess to lighten their jail sentence?
ANSWER: Prisoner's Dilemma (accept equivalents)
Developed in 1950 by two employees of the RAND Corporation, its end result is the reason why, in several
countries with civil legal codes, plea bargaining is not allowed. In "Metamagical Themas," Douglas
Hofstadter describes "superrational" players in this game who either know that they are playing with other
superrational players or with those who are only rational or of unknown description. The equilibrium in this
game is Pareto-suboptimal as rational players tend to defect rather than cooperate. FTP what is this game in
which two players, usually described as criminals, either cooperate or betray one another to get a better
payoff from captors?
ANSWER: prisoner's dilemma
Merrill Flood and Melvin Dresher formulated this concept while at the RAND Corporation in 1950.
Richard Dawkins suggested that alternate strategies could be more successful than tit for tat in
situations that can be modeled with this concept. William Poundstone related this problem to nuclear
detente in the cold war, while another example described by it included two competing cigarette
advertisers who reached a (*) Nash equilibrium. In the most common formulation of this game, players
receive six months if both cooperate but ten years if their partner defects. For 10 points, name this common
situation in game theory involving two would-be convicts.
ANSWER: The Prisoner's Dilemma
Anatol Rapoport created a simulation of this concept using four lines of BASIC code, while another
simulation is called Pavlov. A related problem posited by Rousseau is the stag hunt, and this concept was
first described by RAND Corporation employees Melvin Dresher and Merrill Flood. Two strategies for a
repeated application of this problem are "tit-for-tat" and "win-stay, lose-switch." One example with multiple
players is the tragedy of the commons, and the only Nash equilibrium for this is when both players defect.
For 10 points, name this situation from game theory in which two players have the option to remain silent or
"rat out" the other.
ANSWER: prisoner's dilemma
Members of the think tank RAND Corporation, Melvin Dresher and Merrill Flood, first outlined this
scenario. Thirty years later, the formulator of the related "tit for tat" strategy, political scientist Robert
Axelrod, created a large tournament concerned with this game, formalized by Albert Tucker. This situation
notably appears in sellers- price collusion and among foreign nations, where impatience with delayed
rewards often breeds cheating and retaliation. FTP, name this game theory "dilemma" dealing with two
criminals- strategies for cooperation or not.
ANSWER: Prisoner's Dilemma Prompt on PD
Changing this situation to make the reward worth more than the temptation creates a stag hunt, which has
two Nash equilibria as compared to one for this situation. Merrill Flood, Melvin Dresher, and Robert
Axelrod were among the scholars who studied this scenario as applicable to nuclear arms. The "tit for tat"
strategy is one approach to this situation. For 10 points, identify this fundamental game theory problem, in
which two suspects must each choose to defect or cooperate.
ANSWER: the prisoner's dilemma
Hardin's tragedy of the commons is sometimes said to be an example of a multi-player generalization
of it. It demonstrates that in a non-zero-sum game, the Nash equilibrium isn-t necessarily Pareto
optimal. In its iterated form, successful strategies tend to be nice, (*) retaliating, forgiving, and nonenvious, making tit-for-tat one of the best deterministic algorithms. In its payoff matrix as described by
Douglas Hofstadter, the sucker's payoff must have the lowest value and the temptation to defect payoff
must have the highest value. FTP, name this game in which each of two players can choose to either
cooperate or defect.
ANSWER: prisoner's dilemma
This scenario was used to model the evolution of reciprocal altruism in a 1971 paper by Robert
Trivers. Proposed by Merril Flood and Melvin Dresher, this scenario tends to be defined by the
conditions T greater than R greater than P greater than S, though related variants relax some of
those conditions. A tournament of its iterated variant was proposed by Robert (*) Axelrod and won by
Anatol Rapoport's "tit for tat" strategy. For 10 points, name this zero-sum problem of game theory, whose
title characters must agree either to stick to their story or to rat each other out.
ANSWER: prisoner's dilemma
Edwin Jaynes and John Maynard Keynes have argued this field should be thought of as an extension of
logic, and Keynes used Bertrand's paradox as an example of how assuming the "principle of indifference"
in this field could lead to confusion. Andrey Kolmogorov used concepts from measure theory in
formulating axioms of this field. John Venn was an early proponent of the frequentist interpretation of it.
Christiaan Huygens wrote the first modern book on it, though it had been discussed earlier in letters
between Pascal and Fermat. An alternative to the frequentist approach in this field is the Bayesian. For 10
points, name this mathematical study of chance.
ANSWER: probability
This function is estimated using window functions in Parzen's method. It is equal to one over two pi times
the Fourier transform of the characteristic function. Performing a double-sided Laplace transform-like
operation on this function, but without the negative sign in the exponential, yields the moment-generating
function. For a random variable x, integrating x times this function of x over the sample space gives the
expectation of x. The integral of this non-negative function over all possible inputs must equal one. This
function can be found by differentiating the cumulative distribution function. For 10 points, name this
function for a continuous distribution whose integral from a to b gives the probability that x lies between a
and b, and thus can be thought of as giving the relative probability that a random variable has value x.
ANSWER: probability density function [or pdf; prompt on probability function]
In category theory, pullbacks are the fiber type of this operation. Performing it on an empty family
will give a terminal object. Modding out the tensor algebra by the ideal generated by every vector
tensor itself gives a space whose elements are formed by the exterior type of this operation. This word
names a topology that preserves compactness by (*) Tychonoff's theorem. For two groups, the direct
sum is isomorphic to the direct type of this operation, where the elements are ordered pairs of elements in
each group and so the underlying set is given by its Cartesian form. One variety of it can be used to find the
volume of parallelpipeds or construct normal vectors and another gives the projection of a vector. For 10
points, name this operation with cross and dot forms.
ANSWER: product
The influential paper Fundamental Concepts in [these things] was written by Christopher Strachey. A
division used in the definition of these things comes in three primary types: operational, axiomatic, and
denotational. These things can have explicit or implicit and static or dynamic type systems. They can
implement namespaces to encapsulate items. One category of these things can be viewed as syntactical
variations of the lambda calculus. Another category of them typically implements subtype polymorphism
and inheritance. Those categories are functional and object-oriented. Compilers work on source code
written in one of these things. For 10 points, identify these things that include Java and are used to write
programs.
ANSWER: programming languages [do not accept or prompt on specific programming paradigms]
A popular one of these constructs was designed by Thomas Kurtz and John Kemeny at
Dartmouth. One sub-class of these entities lack side effects and are exemplified by Miranda and
Clean; those are the "purely functional" types. They-re not context-free grammars, but the
Backus-Naur Form is often used to define syntax in these entities. One of these constructs is named
for (*) Haskell Curry. Type conversion is easy in examples of these constructs that have weak typing.
These constructs are usually supplemented by a standard library. Low level examples of these constructs
include Assembly, while higher-level examples include PHP and Python. For 10 points, name these
constructs that include C, BASIC and Java, used to write programs.
ANSWER: Programming Languages [accept Functional Programming Languages or Purely Functiona Programming Languages before mentioned; accept computer language; prompt on "languages"]
These entities may be typed or untyped, depending on which operations they allow on certain
types of data. Many of these entities are based on Alonzo Church's lambda calculus. These entities
can be classified as logical, (*) functional, or imperative. They typically have an associated standard
library. They are differentiated by their syntax and their grammar. For 10 points, name these constructs that
can be used to express computations on a computer, examples of which include Perl, Fortran, and
JavaScript.
ANSWER: programming languages [prompt on languages]
Guy Steele is a noted creator of these and their grammar is often described in Backus-Naur form. Alan
Kay created one called Smalltalk and they can be classified by their typing and by such paradigms as
imperative, functional, and procedural. They can be object oriented and require an interpreter or compiler.
For 10 points, name these constructs allowing one to tell a computer what to do, examples of which include
C++ and Java.
ANSWER: programming languages [prompt on languages]
Interactive and Zero Knowledge ones are recent additions to computational theory, while Appel and
Haken's work on the four color theorem used a computer assisted one. Types include direct, by exhaustion,
and by contradiction which is also refered to as reductio ad absurdum. Starting with known facts and
axioms, they use inductive and deductive reasoning to reach a conclusion followed by the phrase QED. For
10 points, identify these arguments from math and logic that attempt to show that something is true.
ANSWER: proof [accept word forms]
One way to create these things is to use Fermat's [fehr-mah-s] method of infinite descent, which was
applied by Euler [OY-ler] to Fermat's theorem on the sum of two squares. One type of these things has a
strong, or complete, variant in which an assumption applies to a set of numbers instead of just one. That
type, which includes a basis step, is induction. The indirect type of this uses reductio ad absurdum, building
a contradiction. Name this argument establishing a truth that can come in the form of a paragraph or two
columns.
ANSWER: proofs (accept inductive proof or proof by induction, prompt on "induction")
Gerhard Gentzen showed that for each of these entities that uses the cut rule there is another one that does
not use the cut rule. One form of these entities is classified as "by construction", which generally is a subset
of the existence type of these, which can be contrasted with the uniqueness type. Another existence type of
this entity, which is used for limits, is the delta-epsilon type. A common type of this entity starts by
establishing that a statement is true for a particular value and then establishing that whenever the statement
is true for one value, then it is true for the next value, which is known as induction. These statements often
end with the phrase "quod erat demonstrandum", and to organize these entities, some students use two
columns labeled Statements and Reasons, respectively. Name these entities which use deductive logic to
show that their conclusions are true.
ANSWER: proofs
Vardi and Immerman showed that this class can be defined as the problems which can be expressed
in first-order logic plus a least fixed point operator, in the presence of linear order. This class is
equivalent to AL, the class of problems which can be solved in a logarithmic amount of memory
space on an alternating Turing machine. Agrawal, Kayal and Saxena showed that determining the
(*) primality of a number is in this class, and another problem in this class is the decision version of finding
the greatest common divisor. Cobham's thesis states that this class contains all the problems which are
feasibly computable, or "easy" and fast. For 10 points, name this complexity class consisting of all those
problems which can be solved in polynomial time on a deterministic Turing machine, which may or may not
be equivalent to NP.
ANSWER: PTIME
A proof of this theorem by President James A. Garfield involves the calculation of the area of a right
trapezoid by different methods. Another common method of proving this theorem is by inscribing a square
at an angle inside of a larger square, and calculating area of the square both as a whole and as a sum of the
component triangles and smaller square. A special case of the law of cosines, FTP name this theorem
describing the relationship between the length of the legs and the hypotenuse of a right triangle.
ANSWER: Pythagorean theorem
James Garfield used trapezoids to prove this result, which is also proven in Euclid's Elements. With
integral values for its three variables, it gives rise to namesake "triples," which cannot be found for
exponents greater than two, according to Fermat's Last Theorem. It is a special case of the cosine law,
where the angle is ninety degrees. For 10 points, name this theorem which is stated as "A squared plus B
squared equals C squared."
ANSWER: Pythagorean theorem
Applicable when the spread equals one, this statement can be formulated in terms of addition using rational
trigonometry. A generalization of it to inner product spaces is known as Parseval's identity, while a threedimensional generalization is de Gua's theorem. The parallelogram law simplifies to this statement in a
special case, and one proof of this theorem constructs congruent triangles whose areas are half those of a
square and a rectangle. It is generalized by the law of cosines to triangles with any three angles. For 10
points, name this theorem used to find the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle, stated as A squared
plus B squared equals C squared.
ANSWER: Pythagorean theorem
This statement can be extended to three-dimensional figures, according to de Gua's theorem. Its solutions
always include two odd numbers. This statement cannot be proven trigonometrically, because
trigonometric identities are proven using it. It is a specific case of the law of cosines, in which one of the
involved angles is ninety degrees. For 10 points, identify this theorem used to find the hypotenuse of a right
triangle, commonly expressed as "A-squared plus B-squared equals C-squared."
ANSWER: Pythagorean theorem
One generalization of this theorem to three dimensions is known as de Gua's Theorem, and when
Hippasus of Metapontum applied this he was drowned at sea, for he had discovered irrational
numbers. It is a special case of the law of cosines, and (*) triples of this kind include (48, 55, 73), (20, 21
,29), and (5, 12, 13). Generalizing into the distance formula, for ten points, what is this famed geometrical
theorem, stating that a squared plus b squared equals c squared?
ANSWER: Pythagorean Theorem or Pythagorean Triples
One extension of this theorem relates the areas of the faces of a shape in three dimensional space
and is called de Gua's Theorem. One proof of this theorem makes use of three squares in a figure
sometimes called the bride's chair or windmill. This theorem can be obtained from a reduction of (*)
Heron's Formula. Its namesake "triples" can be calculated from this theorem's relation of leg lengths to the
hypotenuse length. For 10 points, name this theorem whose formula is a squared plus b squared equals c
squared, and which is used with right triangles.
ANSWER: Pythagorean Theorem
There are over 367 known proofs for this, including a proof by differential equations, a proof using
similar triangles, a proof by rearrangement, and Euclid's proof which appeared as Proposition 47 in
Book 1 of the Elements. However, there cannot be any (*) trigonometric proof for it because the
trigonometric identities are themselves proven using it. By its converse, which is also true, tying 12 equallyspaced knots in a loop of rope may have allowed ancient Egyptians to construct right angles. A more
general form of it is the law of cosines, which holds true for all triangles. FTP, name this theorem of
Euclidean geometry which states that the square of the hypotenuse of a right triangle is equal to the sum of
the squares of its legs.
ANSWER: Pythagorean theorem
A proof of this is nicknamed Dulcarnon [dul-KAHR-non], meaning the owner of two horns, and its diagram
is nicknamed the bride's chair or peacock tail. Another proof involves the dot product of the quantity x plus
y with itself. This is used to prove the British flag theorem, which addresses the distances from a randomly
chosen point in a rectangle to the vertices [VER-tih-sees]. Dependent on the parallel postulate, this is
equivalent to the most basic relationship between sine and cosine, and this is a special case of the law of
cosines. Name this theorem that allows a person to find the length of the third side of a right triangle if they
know the other two, often expressed as a2+b2=c2.
ANSWER: Pythagorean Theorem (accept Pythagoras- Theorem, prompt on "Law of Cosines" or "a^2+b^2=c^2")
A three dimensional analog of this law is De Gua's Theorem. The solutions to the equation associated with
this law always features two odd numbers, and those numbers are called primitive if their greatest common
factor is 1. Euclid proved this relation by using a line that divides a square into two rectangles. It is a
specific
case of the law of cosines in which one of the angles is ninety degrees. For 10 points, name this theorem,
which states that the square of a hypotenuse is equivalent to the sums of the squares of the legs of a right
triangle.
ANSWER: Pythagorean Theorem
E.S. Loomis published a compendium about this statement, which Edsger Dijkstra generalized using the
signum function. Generalized to inner product spaces, this statement is Parseval's identity, while its analog
in three dimensions is de Gua's theorem. Euclid's proof of it, like many others, uses a figure known as the
bride's chair. This statement is logically equivalent to Euclid's parallel postulate, and its generalization to
powers higher than two, proved unsolvable by Andrew Wiles, is Fermat's last theorem. For 10 points, name
this special case of the law of cosines, a statement which states that the sum of the squares of the two legs of
a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: the Pythagorean theorem
This theorem is generalized by de Gua's Theorem. The traditional proof of this statement made
use of the "windmill." When using only integers, it is the highest possible case allowed by Fermat's
Last Theorem. Many proofs of it are based on the dissection of shapes. This formula is also used to
determine the norm of a vector in Cartesian space. It is the general case of the law of (*) cosines. For
10 points, name this theorem used to determine the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle, written a
squared plus b squared equals c squared.
ANSWER: Pythagorean theorem
Each of these entities has a product divisible by 60, and primitive examples contain exactly one multiple of
five. One method to generate them involves finding numbers whose product is half of a perfect square, and
a method named for Euclid uses the difference of two squares and the sum of the same two squares. These
sets always have an even sum, and their existence makes it necessary to include the requirement that n be
greater than two in Fermat's [fair-mah-z] last theorem. In any one of these sets all three numbers must be
integers, even though the equation they satisfy often gives an irrational third value when the first two are
integers. Name these sets of integers that can be the side lengths of a right triangle.
ANSWER: Pythagorean triple(t)s
They can be generated using a basic Platonic sequence and the Greeks had a formula for generating them
which required two relatively prime numbers of opposite parity. They can be generated using Euclid's
formula and the largest numbers in each set are odd and have prime factors of the form 4n+1. These groups
of numbers are referred to as primitive if they are coprime, although they can all be multiplied by a common
factor. Fermat's Last Theorem can be seen as an attempt to find these kinds of numbers to a higher power
and adding a fourth number generates a namesake quadruple, of which one example is 2,3,6,7. FTP, name
these groups of numbers that include 8,15,17 and 3,4,5.
ANSWER: Pythagorean triple/numbers (prompt on things like sides of a right triangle)
In December 2005, Google hired the creator of this programming language, Guido van Rossum, who serves
as this language's Benevolent Dictator For Life. This language uses duck typing, so the expression "Ni!"
times 2 evaluates to "Ni!Ni!". It stresses readability, exemplified by its use of whitespace to delimit blocks
of code. A popular development environment for this language is named IDLE, which can run in either a
compiling or on-the-y mode. Including the data types of lists, dictionaries, and tuples, FTP, name this
object-oriented and scripting language named for a British comedy troupe.
ANSWER: Python
Version 3.0 of this language, released in December 2008, is notably incompatible with previous versions.
Code examples in this language often use the variable names "spam" and "eggs." In this language, one can
use a negative index to count backwards from the end of a list. This language uses the Tkinter (T-K-"enter")
package to provide graphics and implements a dynamic but strong typing system called duck typing. This
interpreted language, which spells out the keywords "and" and "not" instead of using symbols, is designed
to have easily readable syntax. For 10 points, name this programming language named for a sketch comedy
show whose name begins with "Monty."
ANSWER: Python
Wingware produces an IDE for this language, which relies heavily on "Duck typing." There are two
different operators used for inequality in this programming language, which also has a feature used for
serialization called "pickle." It can be converted into Java bytecode, and makes use of a lambda construct to
provide support for first-class anonymous functions. The original bittorrent client was written in it, and
matplotlib is its plotting library. IDLE has been bundled with it since its 2.3 release, and ABC and Modula3 were particularly influential in the development of this language, which employs "whitespaces" to delimit
blocks. It is heavily used as a scripting language in web applications, and was developed at CWI by Guido
van Rossum in the 1980s. FTP, name this high-level scripting language that takes its name from a British
comedic troupe rather than a serpent.
ANSWER: Python
While studying imaginary fields described by this adjective, Dirichlet used the class number formula
to prove that certain arithmetic sequences contain infinitely many primes. The signature of a form
described by this adjective is invariant under a change of coordinates, according to Sylvester's
inertia theorem, and the (*) Hessian form can be used to generate one of these forms. A theorem whose
name contains this adjective states that a certain monomial's congruency to "p mod q" is only solvable if
"q-star mod p" is solvable, for distinct odd primes p and q. That theorem is named for this kind of
reciprocity. Polynomials described by this adjective can be graphed based on a focus, directrix, and
eccentricity, and, for 10 points, can be described by what adjective that means "of degree two"?
ANSWER: quadratic
This term refers to a sieve with running time of Ln(1/2,1) ["ell sub n of one half comma 1"]. Gauss
proved a theorem about this type of reciprocity (reh-sih-PRAH-sih-tee) for modular arithmetic.
Functions of this type produce a shape in which all points are equidistant from the directrix and
focus. The derivative of this type of function is linear. The roots of this type of equation are given by
a formula including a (*) discriminant of b2-4ac ["b squared minus four a c"]. For 10 points, name this
term referring to polynomials of degree two.
ANSWER: quadratic
The Legendre symbol has value one whenever an argument is this kind of residue, and the law of
this type of reciprocity was proved by Gauss. This kind of polynomial is the simplest to have a vertex,
and equations of this type can be solved by completing the (*) square. Equations described by this
adjective can be solved by applying the formula negative b plus or minus square root b squared minus 4 a c
all over 2 a and include parabolas. For 10 points, name this term describing equations in the form a x
squared plus b x plus c.
ANSWER: quadratic [accept degree two after "polynomial"]
The rate of convergence of Newton's method is described with this adjective. The existence of
solutions for two particular congruence relations of odd primes p and q is determined by whether
both p and q are congruent to 3 mod 4, according to a reciprocity theorem of this name solved by
Gauss. The discriminant of this type of polynomial is b squared (*) minus four ac, which is found under
a square root to find the roots of this type of equation. For 10 points, name these polynomials of order two,
meaning that they are equal to a times x squared plus b times x plus c.
ANSWER: quadratic [or order two before mentioned]
Euler created a function of this type that generates primes for its first 40 inputs, and, when the inner
product is the standard one, the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality in Rn states that the product of two
functions of this degree is greater than or equal to a third one squared. All conic sections can be
expressed as two-variable functions of this type, while a single-variable function of this type has a
third derivative of (*) zero. These functions- largest root is negative b plus the square root of b-squared
minus 4ac all over 2a, which can be found by completing the square. For ten points, identify these parabolic
degree-two polynomials like x-squared minus x plus two.
ANSWER: quadratic functions/polynomials/equations (accept degree two or second degree functions before mention, prompt on parabolas or polynomials)
The graphs of these types of functions are used to approximate integrals in Simpson's rule. The
discriminant of this type of polynomial determines the number of real and imaginary roots in the
polynomial, and has the form (*) b squared minus 4ac. For 10 points, name these second-degree
polynomial functions with parabolic graphs, which can be written in the form a x squared plus b x plus c.
ANSWER: quadratic polynomials or quadratic equations (accept degree 2 polynomials or degree 2 equations until "second-degree")
The area of one of these figures can be found with Bretschneider's formula, which reduces to
Brahmaguptra's formula for special cases. In general, their area is "one half the length of the cross
product of the diagonals," and Van Aubel's Theorem shows that the lines connecting the centers of
squares constructed on one's sides are perpendicular and equal. A relation for the side lengths of a
cyclic one of these is given by Ptolemy's theorem. Specific examples of them include kites, trapezoids,
and parallelograms. For 10 points, name this figure which denotes any object with four sides.
ANSWER: quadrilateral [do not accept or prompt on any specific type of quadrilateral]
The radius of a circle circumscribed around one type of these objects is given by Parameshvara's Formula.
The areas of those objects are given by Brahmagupta's Formula, and for cyclic versions, the product of the
lengths of the diagonals can be written in terms of side lengths in Ptolemy's Theorem. Two different types
of these objects can be used to approximate integrals. When pairs of adjacent sides in them have equal
lengths, they have perpendicular diagonals and are called kites. They have two diagonals, and the sum of
their angles is 360 degrees. For 10 points, name these polygons that include trapezoids, parallelograms, and
rectangles, all of which have four sides.
ANSWER: quadrilaterals [Accept cyclic quadrilaterals before "Brahmagupta's.]
These devices- error-correction methods must necessarily take the no-cloning theorem into account, and
the complexity class BQP describes problems that can be solved with these devices. Factoring can be done
in polynomial time on these devices using Shor's algorithm. These devices rely on entanglement between
qubits. For 10 points, identify this type of computer which uses atomic spins or some observable of an atom
to process data, rather than electricity.
ANSWER: quantum computer
The Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm was the first one to use these devices to deterministically solve a
problem faster than classical methods, and critical components of them are modeled by Bloch
spheres. Using Grover's algorithm, these devices can search an unsorted database in sub-linear time,
and they are difficult to make and maintain due to the phenomenon of (*) decoherence. Shor's
Algorithm can be run on these devices to factor integers in polynomial time, ruining RSA encryption, and
their namesake objects can be 0, 1, or a superposition of the two. For ten points, identify these not-yet-built
devices, computing engines that make use of qubits.
ANSWER: quantum computers (accept qubits or quantum bits before mentioned)
These objects can undergo amplitude amplification, and they use unitary matrices instead of
stochastic matrices. Simon's algorithm uses one of these to solve a black-box problem. One of them is
used in the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm and they can undergo a Fourier transform using Hadamard
gates. They can search an unsorted database in less than linear time and can perform prime
factorization in polynomial time. Those are known (*) as Grover's and Shor's algorithms respectively.
For 10 points, identify these objects which store information in qubits.
ANSWER: Quantum Computers [prompt on computers, I guess]
These devices use the Hadamard gate and other unitary matrix operators to manipulate their inputs. The set
of problems practically solvable by these devices is BQP, which is thought to be a subclass of P. In 2001,
one of these devices was used to show that "15 equals 3 times 5". To do so, a technique developed by Peter
Shor was used, and that technique could one day allow these devices to break RSA. D-Wave has built one
type of these devices, which performs annealing using 128 qubits ("Q-bits"). For 10 points, name these
devices, first proposed by Richard Feynman, that use distinctly non-classical phenomena to execute
algorithms.
ANSWER: quantum computers [prompt on "computers"]
These entities can be used in a form of interpolation called slerping. Every finite p-group that has
every abelian subgroup cyclic is either itself cyclic or is a generalized group of these entities, and the
dicyclic group of order two is isomorphic to the group of them. The factor group of the group of
these entities with their center is isomorphic to the Klein four-group. Those with norm one are called
versors, and these entities follow the complex numbers in the (*) Cayley-Dickson construction.
Symbolized by a blackboard H, they are often used to implement three-dimensional rotations. They consist
of three elements, i, j, and k, whose square is negative one and whose products with each other are
anticommutative. For 10 points, name this four-dimensional number system created by Hamilton.
ANSWER: quaternion
The conjugate of these objects can be found by simply inverting the sign between all four terms. In
computer graphics, Ken Shoemake formulated two ways for handling interpolation between them, one
called Squad and another an adaptation of Bezier curves called a Slerp. One way to create them is to use
the Cayley-Dickson construction. The cross product of these quantities is sometimes referred to as the odd
product, while one mechanism to do non-commutative multiplication with them makes use of the Grassman
product. Unlike their matrix equivalents, they do not run into the problem of Gimbal Lock where a degree
of freedom is lost. Their formulator identified four rules that they must follow, such as the requirement that
the individual square of the i, j, and k components all equal negative one. FTP, identify these extensions to
complex numbers formulated by William Rowan Hamilton that are useful in doing rotations.
ANSWER: Quaternions
An automaton named for one of these structures with an infinite amount of memory is equivalent to a
Turing machine. If this data structure has a limited size, it can be implemented to operate in constant time
using a circular buffer. This structure is used to store the elements to be visited in a breadth-first search.
One type of this data structure is often implemented with a heap, and retrieves elements of highest priority
first. That is its "priority" type. This structure retrieves elements in the opposite order from that of a stack.
For 10 points, name this first-in, first-out data structure, which can be used to model a checkout line.
ANSWER: queue [or priority queue before "priority"]
The Pollaczek-Khinchin formula is used to analyze the M/G/1 type of them, and Kendall's notation is
used to classify them. "Pagoda" and "leftist tree" are names is given to types of one variety of these,
implemented with binary trees, and the van Emde-Boas tree is one of these for which the cost of all
operations is based on the number of keys. A double-ended one of them, also known as a head-tail
linked list, is called a deque [DECK]. Discrete event simulations often make use of the "priority" variety of
this data structure, which is essentially the opposite of a stack. For 10 points, name this first-in-first-out data
structure, used to model lines of waiting people.
ANSWER: queues
Kendall notation allows one to characterize models based on actual instances of this structure. Multilevel
feedback scheduling uses these data structures. Double ended ones are possible while heaps and their
variants are typically used to implement priority ones. This data structure supports a front operation and
this data type is usually contrasted with a stack. For 10 points, name this data structure that is first in first
out and are exemplified by lines at grocery stores.
ANSWER: queue [prompt on FIFO]
A graph-searching method that implements one of these data structures minimizes the number of nodes
visited, and is called breadth-first search. Circular buffers and linked lists are typically implemented using
this type of data structure. Dijkstra's (DYKE-strah's) algorithm uses their priority type. A deque (DECK) is
a double-ended one of these structures. They store data such that the first element inserted is the first
element removed. For 10 points, name this data structure which resembles a ticketing line.
ANSWER: queue
Doug McIlroy described a way to find the worst inputs for this algorithm in "A Killer Adversary
for" it. Switching from it to an in-place algorithm at a sufficiently deep level of recursion results in a
logarithmic worst case runtime in an algorithm developed by David Musser. The complexity of this
algorithm increases as its workload decreases, which is why running it on an ordered list has
complexity O(n^2) ["big oh of en squared"] even though its average runtime is O(n log n) ["big oh of
en log en"]. First developed by (*) C. A. R. Hoare, its second step partitions elements of a list which are
greater and smaller than a pivot. For ten points, name this algorithm, the fastest sorting algorithm known.
ANSWER: quicksort (prompt on sorting algorithm)
This algorithm is sometimes implemented with a switch to a heap-based approach at a sufficiently deep
level of recursion. This solves the problem that when operating on an array that is already in order, this
algorithm degenerates to n squared running time. It works by sorting elements based on whether they are
greater or less than a selected pivot and then recurring for each of those halves. For 10 points, give this O(n
log n) [big-oh of n log n] sorting algorithm named for its rapidity.
ANSWER: quicksort
There are balanced and external variants of this algorithm which is used in the initial steps, but not
for worst case scenarios, in a process developed by David Musser. C.A.R. Hoare developed this
algorithm which chooses an initial pivot value and then separates the list based on their relation to the
pivot value, the algorithm works by continually choosing pivot values from each sub list. With big O
notation, its average performance is n log n, making it advantageous to bubble sort and comparable to
merge sort. For 10 points, name this classic divide and conquer sorting algorithm that is named for its
speed.
ANSWER: Quicksort
A multikey version of this algorithm employs a three-way radix, and the introsort variant switches to
heapsort when a bad case is encountered. In-place implementations of this algorithm requires only O (log n)
[big oh of log n] space. Its quadratic worst case, which occurs when a single element is partitioned in each
step, is much worse than a similar algorithm whose namesake operation joins two sorted sublists, mergesort,
though both perform an average case of O (n log n) [big oh of n log n] comparisons. This algorithm's
essential step picks a pivot element and places only smaller elements to the left of it. For 10 points, name
this divide-and-conquer sorting algorithm developed by C. A. R. Hoare.
ANSWER: quicksort
In 1994, Blair Spearman and Kenneth Williams showed that they could be successfully dealt with only if
two of their coefficients satisfied certain constraints. Three of their other terms can be eliminated before
solving them by using Tschirnhaus transformations. Charles Hermite showed that they could be solved
using elliptic functions, familiar from their use in solving lower-degree analogues of these equations. The
proof of an important theorem concerning these equations depends on finding a subfield of a certain degree
whose splitting field over the rationals has a Galois group isomorphic to a certain symmetric group. For 10
points, name these equations which can be solved if their corresponding Galois groups are solvable, and for
which no general radical solution exists, as shown by the Abel-Ruffini theorem.
ANSWER: quintic equations [accept fifth-degree polynomial or fifth-degree equation before mentioned; also accept quintic formula or quintic expression]
An equation equivalent to one of these equations but with only three terms can be expressed using the
Bring-Jerrard normal form, which uses the Tschirnhaus ["CHURN-house"] transformation. These are the
simplest equations addressed by the Abel-Ruffini [AH-bul roo-FEE-nee] theorem, also known as Abel's
impossibility theorem, and they are also the simplest equations for which Galois [gal-wah] theory can be
used on a case-by-case basis to determine whether or not they are solvable. The graph of one of these
polynomials can have at most four critical points, two local maximums, and two local minimums, and when
simplified these equations can have at most six terms. Name these polynomials with degree five.
ANSWER: quintic polynomials [or quintic equations; accept fifth-degree polynomials or degree-five polynomials before "five"]
A common proof of this rule involves subtracting f of x times g of x and adding the same quantity in
between two terms. That step allows g of x to be factored from the first two terms and the opposite of f of x
to be factored from the last two terms, and the differences those terms are multiplied by can then be divided
by h to follow the general form for simple derivatives. The entire quantity gets divided by g of x times g of
the quantity x+h, which approaches g squared of x. Another method to prove this rule uses the chain rule
and the product rule. Name this rule for finding a derivative when one function is divided by another
function.
ANSWER: quotient rule
This unit must be used for one of the quantities so that the small oscillation restoring force of a pendulum
can be approximated as mass times little g times theta. This unit also must be used for the common Taylor
series approximation x minus x cubed over six plus x to the fifth over one hundred twenty, etcetera. One
way to define this unit is arc length divided by radius, which is why numbers measured in these units can be
multiplied by numbers in other units without changing those other units. This unit can be thought of as the
number of radii that would fit along the arc inscribed in an angle, and it equals approximately 57.3 degrees.
Give this unit that can be converted to by multiplying pi over one hundred eighty times the number of
degrees.
ANSWER: radians
In November 2007, in an interview, Google CEO Eric Schmidt asked then-Senator Barack Obama a
computer science question to which this is the correct answer. It dates back to 1887 to Herman Hollerith's
work on tabulating machines for censuses, and an old IBM 80 series machine used to use it to sort punched
cards at a rate of up to 2000 per minute. The most intuitive way to implement it starts from the most
significant digit, but only the version starting from the least significant digit is a stable sort. For ten points,
name this sorting algorithm, related to bucket sort, which by knowing bounds on the range of its data is able
to sort in linear time, and whose name is also a synonym for a number base.
ANSWER: radix sort
The Manchester Small Scale Experimental Machine utilized an early form of this entity known as the
Williams Tube. If CPU performance improves faster than this entity can function, a disparity in speed
known as a memory wall may arise. One type of this entity must be refreshed periodically and makes use of
capacitors; in addition to that dynamic type, this has phase change and static varieties. Modern computers
often possess a few gigabytes of storage of this entity, which mainly comes in volatile types that lose the
information they contain when a system loses power. For 10 points, name this type of storage that permits a
user to retrieve data in any order.
ANSWER: RAM [or random access memory]
One type of this construct transfers data on both the rising and falling edges of the clock signal and is
known as the "double data rate" variety of this. One of the two most basic varieties of this item stores bits as
the states of flip-flops while the other variety stores each bit in a unique capacitor. Coming in static and
dynamic varieties, for 10 points, identify this volatile type of memory used for temporary data storage, often
contrasted with read-only memory.
ANSWER: RAM [or random-access memory; prompt on memory; accept DRAM or dynamic random- access memory until "flip-flops" is read]
The DDR3 type of this device supports triple-channel architecture. Its most common type stores data by
charging and discharging capacitors in an integrated circuit. Both that dynamic type and its static variety
require a constant power supply to function. Unlike x86 architecture, 64-bit processor architectures support
more than four gigabytes of this storage. For 10 points, name this volatile computer memory in which
programs and data are stored while they are being run.
ANSWER: RAM [or random-access memory]
Placing a register between this structure and the controller creates the "registered" or "buffered" form of
it. Attempting to read data not currently stored in this triggers a page fault. Flip-flops are used to implement
the static type of it, while capacitors are used in the dynamic type. Its main benefit is that reading or writing
to any spot is done in constant time. For 10 points, identify this type of volatile memory, used in modern
computers as the main storage for running programs.
ANSWER: RAM [or Random Access Memory; prompt on partial answer]
An important measure of this thing's performance is CAS latency. The individual cells of this thing
consists of a transistor-capacitor pair. If the capacity of this thing is not enough, one can supplement it with
a page file or swap partition. Portable computers, like laptops, typically use it in its "SO-DIMM" form. It is
primary storage and its most common type is the third version of its double data rate, synchronous dynamic
type, or DDR3. For 10 points, name this quick, volatile memory that comes in namesake "sticks."
ANSWER: RAM [or random-access memory; prompt on volatile memory; prompt on primary storage; do not accept "ROM" or "read-only memory"]
One factor in the performance of this technology is the timing of the RAS and CAS signals. In
smartphones, this technology is what is usually stacked on top of a SoC to make a PoP. This technology is
composed of constantly refreshing capacitor containing cells. This computer component is based on the
DDR family of standards and comes in physical DIMMs. Unlike SSDs or hard drives, this subsystem
forgets its content when shutdown. For 10 points, name this computer component used to store active
information and programs.
ANSWER: DRAM [or dynamic random access memory; prompt on partial answer]
One type of this device stores data in circuits having two stable states known as flip-flops such that the
device need not be externally refreshed, while another type uses single capacitors. Flash is a nonvolatile
type
of this device, which can come in dynamic or static types. If this device is insufficient for a certain task, a
computer will use some hard drive space in a process known as swapping. For 10 points, name this
temporary type of storage in which data can be retrieved at some constant time regardless of its relation to
other data.
ANSWER: RAM [or random access memory; prompt on memory]
One kind of this device consists of a grid of magnetic tunnel junctions. Besides the magnetoresistive type,
another kind of this device has one word-line and two bit-lines per charge storage cell. CAS latency is the
time needed to access one of this device's modules. Its capacity can be increased by creating a paging file.
Both its dynamic and static versions are volatile, meaning loss of power causes loss of information. For 10
points, what type of computer memory allows reading and writing in any order?
ANSWER: RAM [or random-access memory; accept more specific answers like MRAM, DRAM SRAM, etc.]
Just before he died, this mathematician introduced what he called mock theta functions, which in 2012 were
confirmed to be mock modular forms. The prime numbers named for this mathematician signify twofold
increases in the prime counting function. A conjecture named for this person led to a conjecture named for
him and Hans Petersson. Name this person who immediately recognized that 1,729 is the smallest number
expressible as two different sums of cubes, an Indian whose talent was discovered by G.H. Hardy.
ANSWER: Srinivasa Ramanujan
Using a primitive polynomial, this type of output can be obtained from a linear feedback shift
register. An algorithm that produces an output with this property has a period of 2 to the 19,937th
power minus one. Running this kind of quicksort can bound the worst-case runtime against
malicious inputs. This kind of output is produced by the Mersenne Twister, and it is often necessary
to "seed" functions that produce this type of output when using said functions. These kinds of inputs
are necessary to perform (*) Monte Carlo algorithms, and this kind of process can be modeled using a
Markov chain. The N in NP describes this type of polynomial. For 10 points, name this synonym of
nondeterministic that describes numbers with no predictable pattern.
ANSWER: pseudorandomness [or nondeterministic until it is read]
This synonym of stochastic describes the type of numbers that seem to be the output of the Mersenne
twister. Though that algorithm does not produce an output useful in cryptography, the output of Blum Blum
Shub does. Those algorithms output the "pseudo" type of these numbers, meaning that they are actually
deterministic despite appearing otherwise. Walks of this type are used to simulate certain situations,
including Brownian motion. Name these numbers used in Monte Carlo simulations, sequences of which can
be generated by spinners or dice.
ANSWER: (pseudo)random numbers [prompt on non-deterministic]
These entities are produced by Park and Miller's MINSTD method. One way to produce these entities is the
middle-square method of John von Neumann. These entities are often created using a linear congruence
method. Suboptimal ones of these exhibit serial correlation, whereas optimal ones pass the next-bit test.
Nuclear decay or shot noise can form the basis of hardware methods for these objects, and software
methods use generation from an initial seed. Often used for cryptographic or statistical purposes, for ten
points, identify these unpredictable quantities.
ANSWER: random numbers (accept pseudorandom numbers)
As nonces, these entities are used to prevent replay attacks. One way to find these is the Mersenne
twister and these are used in Monte Carlo simulations. Unless an outside source of entropy is present,
the algorithm producing them is seeded with the current time or similar value. A collection of these
numbers should follow a (*) statistical distribution and be free of patterns allowing one to determine the
next one produced based on the previous ones produced. For 10 points, name these numbers that are
usually generated using the rand function.
ANSWER: pseudo-random numbers [or pseudo-random number generators before "numbers should"]
A popular algorithm for performing this action uses a recurrence relation in which x sub n plus 1 is
set equal to x sub n squared. Another popular method of doing this has a period of two to the power
19937 minus 1, and is a variant of the generalized feedback shift register. The Diehard tests are used
to evaluate the efficacy of these programs, which include the Blum Blum Shub method and the
Mersenne Twister. The input from performing this process is obtained either from digits in the internal
clock or some physical input like radioactive decay to obtain seed values. For 10 points, name this process
used to simulate coin flips and dice rolls, in which a computer spit out integers according to some statistical
distribution
ANSWER: pseudorandom number generator
A function that defines these things can be found by taking the Radon-Nykodym derivative of the
induced measure with respect to a counting or a Lebesgue measure. The properties of these things
can be defined by taking the first and second derivatives of the moment-generating function and
evaluating them at zero. The joint CDF for these things is given by the convolution of each one's CDF.
For one of these denoted capital X, the expected value of X squared minus the expected value of X, all
squared is equal to the variance. For 10 points, identify these "variables" that assign a numerical value to
events in a sample space and are used to calculate probabilities.
ANSWER: random variables [or r.v.'s; or stochastic variables; or probability distributions; prompt on measure spaces]
Gerard Desargues (deh-SAR-g-) used this term to refer to the number of labeled points on a line segment.
By a more common definition, this value is equal to two times the standard deviation for either/or situations
such as coin tosses and greater than twice the standard deviation otherwise, and this is a non-robust
dispersion statistic. By another definition, this term has a similar meaning to codomain, though it refers to
only the set which the output values of a function take on rather than the set of possible values. Give this
term which with respect to sets is the difference between the largest value and the smallest value, and which
with respect to functions is to "output" as domain is to "input".
ANSWER: ranges
The type of function described by this adjective has no singularities other than poles in the complex
plane. Each of these numbers has a unique p-adic expansion, and a p-adic number is an extension of
this set. The Farey sequences list all of these between 0 and 1. Dedekind cuts are made strictly
between two of these. The Dirichlet function applied to one of these equals 1. Cauchy sequences
consisting of these can be used to complete the field of these to the reals. A polynomial with these
numbers as coefficients has roots which are algebraic numbers. Often symbolized Q, for 10 points, name
this set of numbers which can be represented as the quotient of integers.
ANSWER: rational numbers [prompt on "Q" before mentioned, accept rational functions on the first sentence]
Heronian triangles have these numbers for both side lengths and areas. A spiral can be used to show that
these numbers are countably infinite, and they are an unusual combination of countable and dense.
Functions named for this set can have at most one oblique or horizontal asymptote but may have many
vertical asymptotes or removable discontinuities. When coefficients of a polynomial are integers, a list of
possible zeroes in this set can be generated by its namesake root theorem. The set can be represented as
ordered pairs with the latter number in the pair not allowed to equal zero. When its numbers are represented
as decimals, the digits must either terminate or repeat. Name this set whose elements can be written as an
integer divided by a nonzero integer.
ANSWER: rational numbers [or rationals; accept Q]
Members of this set of numbers form the widest steps on the Devil's Staircase. G.H. Hardy allegedly
offered his chair at Oxford to the person who could prove that the Euler-Mascheroni constant was not a
member of this set of numbers. Farey sequences can be used to count this set of numbers, which can be
expressed as the set of all algebraic numbers of degree one. One way to define this set of numbers is to use
Cauchy sequences, which do not necessarily converge for this set. This set of numbers is acted upon by
Dedekind cuts. Diophantine approximation uses this set of numbers to approximate the reals. For 10 points,
name this set of numbers, indicated by a doublestruck Q, which can be represented as a fraction of two
integers.
ANSWER: rational numbers
This property must be possessed by the "a over b" parameter of a Lissajous curve for it to be
closed. A theorem with this word in its name lists possible zeros of a polynomial using the factors of
the leading coefficient and constant term; that is the this term's root theorem. Functions of this type
are written as (*) quotients of polynomials, while the set of numbers of this type is denoted Q. For 10
points, give this term that describes numbers that can be written as a simple fraction.
ANSWER: rational
The raindrop function is discontinuous at inputs that are members of this set, which is extended with
the use of Dedekind cuts and forms the smallest field with characteristic zero. This countable subset
of the (*) real numbers contains numbers whose decimal expansions terminate or repeat. Symbolized Q,
give this set of numbers whose members can be expressed as an integer divided by a nonzero integer.
ANSWER: rational numbers (accept Q before mentioned)
The first and last coefficients of an integer polynomial can be used to guess solutions to the polynomial
with this property. Dividing one polynomial by another gives a function described by this adjective. The
Greeks proved that the square root of two did not have this property. It is possessed by any number with a
terminating decimal expansion, and any integer, but not any real number. For 10 points, identify this type
of number which can be expressed as a fraction of two integers.
ANSWER: rational [or rational number; or rational function]
This set of numbers is the set of all inputs that give discontinuous points on Thomae's [TOE-may-s]
function. This set of numbers is partitioned by a Dedekind [DEH-deh-kihnd] cut, and a so-called spiral is
used to show that this set of numbers is countable. Euclid [YOO-klid] demonstrated that assuming that the
square root of two is in this set leads to a contradiction. Name this set of numbers, each of which can be
represented by repeating or terminating decimals and also can be represented as the quotient of two
integers.
ANSWER: rational numbers
Niven's theorem states that if "x over pi" and "sine x" are both of this type, then sine x equals positive or
negative 0, 1, or 1/2. A Farey sequence consists of these numbers, which are generalized by the p-adics. The
set of these numbers is topologically dense and their algebraic closure is the set of algebraic numbers. They
are countably infinite and form a subset of the real numbers. These numbers have either terminal or
repeating decimals, and the set of these is symbolized by a bold letter Q. For 10 points, name these numbers
that can be expressed as quotients of two integers.
ANSWER: rational numbers
This set of numbers has the least cardinality greater than that of the integers, according to the
continuum hypothesis, and is the union of the algebraic and transcendental numbers. This complete
totally ordered field can be constructed by Cauchy sequences, and this set is (*) uncountable according
to Cantor's diagonal argument. The union of the rationals and irrationals, for 10 points, name this set of
numbers denoted R.
ANSWER: real numbers (accept R before the end)
The long line is path connected and locally homeomorphic to this set in the standard topology, but cannot
be embedded in it. Paul Cohen used forcing to prove the independence of the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms
and a hypothesis regarding the cardinalities of this set and one of its subsets. Hilbert defined this system
with 18 axioms that imply it is the largest Archimedean field, and up to isomorphism it is the only ordered
field with the least upper bound property. Dedekind cuts and equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences
provide two methods for constructing this system, which was proved to be uncountable by Cantor's
diagonal argument. For 10 points, name this set that can be decomposed into algebraic and transcendental
numbers, or into rational and irrational numbers.
ANSWER: the real numbers or R
In a system based on these numbers, any non-empty set bounded above has a least upper bound. These can
be constructed by taking Dedekind [DEH-duh-kund] cuts of a smaller set. These numbers form the only
complete totally ordered field, and, as it did with the irrational numbers, Cantor diagonalization [die-AGnull-i-ZAY-shun] demonstrated that this set is uncountable. The set of imaginary numbers can be generated
by multiplying the members of this set by the square root of negative one. Name this set equal to the union
of rational and irrational numbers, often represented by the letter R.
ANSWER: real numbers (accept reals or continuum, prompt on "R")
A group action of this space on the phase space giving the solutions of an ODE is called a flow. Up to
homeomorphism, this space is the unique connected non-compact 1-manifold without boundary, and
its one-point compactification gives the homeomorphic to S1. In this space bounded monotone
sequences converge, implying the (*) Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem. Every non-empty subset of this space
has a supremum, and, up to isomorphism, it is the unique Archimedean complete ordered field. The
elements of this space can be constructed using Cauchy sequences or as partitions of the rational numbers
called Dedekind cuts. Its elements are the fixed points under complex conjugation. For 10 points, name this
space composed of the rational and irrational numbers.
ANSWER: real numbers [or real line; or R; or R1]
The Lebesgue measure assigns lengths to subsets of these, and these are both separated and formed by
Dedekind cuts. Every monotone sequence of these converges if and only if it is bounded, and every
sequence of these is Cauchy if and only if it is convergent. These contain no infinite or infinitesimal
elements and satisfy the least upper bound property; consequently these form the only complete
Archimedean ordered field. Georg Cantor used a diagonal argument to demonstrate the uncountability of
these numbers that can be represented by infinite decimal expansions. For 10 points, name this set
containing the algebraic and transcendental numbers, contrasted with the imaginary numbers.
ANSWER: real numbers [or reals, or R]
These numbers can be defined as the members of the only complete, ordered Archimedean field. One way
of constructing them is by dividing a certain subset of these numbers that is dense in them into two disjoint
subsets, one of which has no greatest element. The conjecture that there is no set with cardinality between
that of these numbers and that of the integers is inconsistent with ZFC set theory. That conjecture is the
continuum hypothesis. These numbers are not algebraically closed, since polynomials with these numbers as
coefficients can have roots such as "i", the square root of negative one. For 10 points, name these numbers
which have no imaginary part.
ANSWER: real numbers
The Vitali Set is a non-measurable subset of this class. Axiomatized by Alfred Tarski, this class can be
considered as equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences which can be used to see that each Cauchy sequence
converges. It has the least upper bound property in that any set bounded above has a supremum, and this
complete metric space can be constructed using Dedekind cuts. As shown in Cantor's diagonalization
argument it has an uncountably infinite number of elements. These numbers that contain the irrational
numbers can be written using infinite decimals. For 10 points, name these numbers that are not imaginary,
represented by a capital R.
ANSWER: real numbers (accept R before mentioned)
An estimate for certain functions on collections of these is given by Ingham's theorem. Richard's paradox
arose out of attempts to define these mathematical entities in natural language. Abraham Robinson's theory
extended these by creating a new system where each item consisted of one of these and a halo. These make
up the only complete ordered field. One method for defining these uses Dedekind cuts. The question of
whether there was another set smaller than it is the subject of the Continuum hypothesis and the size of this
set was shown to be greater than one of its subsets by Cantor's diagonalization argument. For 10 points,
name these numbers, which include both rationals and irrationals.
ANSWER: Real numbers [prompt on Dirichlet series before end of "Abraham Robinson's theory extended these"]
The Archimedean property is a key property of these numbers as they are an ordered field. These can be
constructed using Cauchy sequences or Dedekind cuts. The fact that they are uncountable can be
demonstrated using Cantor's diagonal argument. They can be divided into the rational numbers and the
irrational numbers. They can be written as decimal representations with an infinite sequence of digits after
the decimal point. For 10 points, name these numbers, the set of which is represented by a capital R.
ANSWER: real numbers
Every complete ordered field is isomorphic to this set of numbers. These numbers can be defined as
equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences or they can be constructed as intervals of rational numbers called
Dedekind cuts. Georg Cantor showed that no list could contain all of these numbers, which showed that the
set of these numbers is (*) uncountable. Another way to define these numbers is as those with decimal
expansions. For ten points, identify this set of numbers, consisting of all rational and irrational numbers,
symbolized R.
ANSWER: real numbers (accept R before mention)
The Erd}os-Graham Conjecture concerns when 1 is expressible as a sum of these entities. A commutative
ring in which all nonzero elements have one of these is called a field. All positive rational numbers can be
expressed as a sum of these entities corresponding to positive integers. The harmonic series is the sum of
these entities over the positive integers. Division by a number x can be achieved by multiplying by this
function of x. Also called a multiplicative inverse, for ten points, identify this term for 1 divided by a given
number.
ANSWER: reciprocals of integers (accept multiplicative inverses before mention, accept Egyptian fractions or unit fractions and prompt on "fractions" before "field", prompt on "1 over x" or "1 divided by x")
This is the least restrictive quadrilateral for which the sum of the squares of the distances from any point in
the interior to two opposite diagonals equals the same sum for the other opposite diagonals. It is also the
least restrictive quadrilateral for which the intersection of the diagonals is the same distance from each of
the four vertices. Its four angles are all congruent, but its sides are not necessarily congruent. Name this
quadrilateral with four right angles.
ANSWER: rectangle
The British Flag Theorem deals with sums of squares of distances from an interior point in this
figure. Cutting a square off the "golden" variety of this figure yields another "golden" one, and
gluing two opposite edges of this figure after giving it a half-twist yields a (*) Mobius strip. This
figure's diagonal has length equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its two perpendicular sides,
a consequence of all of its angles being right. For ten points, name this type of quadrilateral which has four
90-degree angles, whose area is equal to its base times its height.
ANSWER: rectangles (prompt on quadrilateral, trapezoid, or parallelogram, do not accept or prompt rhombus or square)
If a call is the "tail" variety of this, a functional language will not add that call to the stack. Memoization
provides a faster alternative to this concept, which is exponentially slow in the case of computing the
Fibonacci numbers. This idea is the basis for divide-and-conquer algorithms, which break a problem down
into smaller sub-problems until either a stack overflow occurs or a base-case problem is reached. This
concept is also used by the relation that defines the Fibonacci sequence and by the factorial function. For 10
points, identify this concept in computing, wherein a function references itself.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms; do not accept "INCEPTION"]
The"mu" type of this property contains all examples of the "primitive" subtype; one non-primitive entity
which cannot be expressed without this property is the Ackermann function. In computer science, tail calls
can create one form of it, and divide-and-conquer algorithms such as the quicksort use it on large problems.
Relying on a base case, examples of it in math include solutions to the Tower of Hanoi problem, the
factorial, and the adding of two Fibonacci numbers to get the next one in sequence. For 10 points, name this
form of iteration, by which a function calls back prior values of itself to generate new ones.
ANSWER: recursion [or recursive function; prompt recursion or recursive function]
This property is utilized in the most common alternative to a table-based parser in context-free
grammars, a certain type of "descent parser." This property is central to the Kleene-Rosser paradox in
the original lambda calculus, and the Ackermann function has the mu form of this property, but not the
primitive type. For 10 points, name this property used to solve the Tower of Hanoi problem, defined as
the application of a function within its own definition.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms]
The use of this technique to solve optimization problems is evaluated by the Bellman equation and is known
as dynamic programming. This programming technique has a tail form that can always be converted to
loops. Functions that are effectively calculable by this process via the lambda calculus are the subject of the
Church-Turing thesis. A method for finding the factorial of n uses this technique by multiplying n by the
factorial of n - 1 until the function hits its base case. For 10 points, name this programming technique
invoked when a function calls itself.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms, accept dynamic programming before mention]
Fixed point combinators can be used to implement this concept anonymously. Lazy evaluation means
this concept can be used to create lists whose values are generated only as they are needed, and data types
often defined using this concept include linked lists and trees. The "tail" variety can be optimized and it's
commonly illustrated with the Towers of Hanoi or the factorial function. Often defined using one or more
base cases, for 10 points, name this computer science technique wherein a function calls itself.
ANSWER: recursion [or recursive functions; or word forms]
One function exhibiting the "mu" type of this technique that isn't also of the "primitive" type is the
Ackermann function. The stack space used by this technique can be decreased by using the "tail" type of it.
It is often used to implement the factorial function, solve the Towers of Hanoi problem, and calculate the
Fibonacci sequence. For 10 points, name this programming technique, often contrasted with iteration, in
which a function calls itself.
ANSWER: recursion [or recursivity; or recursive functions; accept word forms]
If a grammar has the left form of this concept, parsing it may result in shift-reduce conflicts, while functions
which exhibit the tail form of this do not build up any deferred operations. A naive algorithm which utilizes
this process to calculate Fibonacci numbers can result in exponential time complexity. Data structures
utilizing this concept include binary trees and linked lists, as the dynamic positioning of nodes may
theoretically go on infinitely and the positioning of child nodes depends on previously allocated parent
nodes. For ten points, identify this concept in computer science, exhibited by functions which call
themselves.
ANSWER: recursion (Accept recursion.)
Determining a relation of this type is the first step in finding generating functions, and one non-primitive
function of this type is the Ackermann function. In computer science, the divide and conquer algorithm
solves a problem by forming two problems of half the size and solving each half-problem via this method.
This method can be used to generate the factorial because the factorial is n times the factorial of n-1, and the
Fibonacci sequence is also defined as this type of sequence because its terms are found from previous terms
in the sequence. For 10 points, identify this method, which defines a function's values based on its previous
values.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms]
The Ackermann function must be expressed using this concept, and it is often used to define fractals such as
the Sierpinski triangle. This technique is employed by the fastest algorithms for computing factorials, and
its "tail-" form can emulate iterative processes. The operation of an algorithm of this kind continues until
encountering a base case. For 10 points, name this technique from computer science employed by functions
which call themselves.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms such as recursive]
One function that cannot be expressed without using this technique is the Ackermann function. This
technique is used to divide a list in half repeatedly in a binary search. This method can also be used to solve
the Towers of Hanoi problem and to find elements of the Fibonacci sequence. For 10 points, identify this
programming technique contrasted with iteration, the act of a function calling itself.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms]
This concept is invoked to resolve the Kleene-Rosser paradox. Divide and conquer algorithms are
based on the multi-branch type of this strategy, and all functions of this type can be transformed into
iterative functions using a stack. Examples of this method include the solution to the (*) Towers of
Hanoi problem and defining the Fibonacci sequence. For 10 points, name this method of defining function
in which the definition applies the function itself, also a means of solving problems in computer science by
solving many smaller instances of the same problem.
ANSWER: recursion
This type of method can be optimized by reusing the stack frame of the previous function call; that is
known as tail optimization. Functions that commonly use this method include the divide-and-conquer
solution to Towers of Hanoi and mergesort. A function that uses this procedure without a base case will run
forever. Commonly used in binary tree traversals, for 10 points, name this method where a function
references itself in its definition.
ANSWER: recursion [or recursive functions]
A process known as dynamic programming that uses the Bellman equation makes use of this
technique to find solutions to optimization problems. Its "mu" type is expressed in the Ackermann
function, and it is applied in lambda calculus to fix the Kleene-Rosser paradox. Its "tail" type can be
expressed in (*) iteration, and use of this technique is present in the solution to the Towers of Hanoi
problem. The Fibonacci sequence is often identified as this because it applies past terms. For 10 points,
name this programming method in which a function calls itself.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms like recursive]
Functions that are of the mu form of this correspond to the functions that are computable by a Turing
Machine, while an example of a function that is not of the primitive form of this is the Ackermann function.
Instances where no deferred operations have to be done is known as the tail form and is often optimized by
compilers. Often used in divide and conquer algorithms like tree traversal, a base case is used to create a
point where the functions start returning thus ending an infinite series of dependencies. For 10 points,
identify this concept in mathematics and computer science seen in the Fibonacci sequence in which a
function is defined in terms of itself.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms like recursive]
The Ackermann function cannot be expressed without using this procedure, and every effectively
calculable function is general this by Church's thesis. All functions defined by course-of-values this
are primitive this, and operations expressed using the "tail" form of this may easily be translated into
(*) iteration. Binary search uses this process to repeatedly divide a list into halves. Often used to calculate
elements of the Fibonacci sequence or values of the factorial function, for 10 points, name this process
wherein a function calls itself.
ANSWER: recursion [or word forms such as recursive]
The tail version of this process can be used to save space on the call stack. Used in functional computer
languages, this technique can be found in divide and conquer algorithms like merge- and quicksort. This
process is also used in solving problems like the Towers of Hanoi and in the Fibonnacci sequence. For 10
points, name this method which describes an implementation where a function calls itself within a program.
ANSWER: recursion [accept word forms]
In a strongly normalizing language, functions with this property would have infinitely long types. The "tail-"
form of this property allows looping constructs and operations like GCD to be run in constant stack space.
Definitions of this sort describe a tree as a structure whose leaves are trees and a Peano numeral as zero or
the successor of a Peano numeral. The Ackermann function is a computable function that does not satisfy
the "primitive" form of this property. FTP, identify this computer science concept, closely related to
mathematical induction, that is often demonstrated with the Tower of Hanoi, the factorial function, or the
Fibonacci series.
ANSWER: recursive (accept word forms)
Under the substitution model, processes of this type build a chain of deferred operations. Languages
like Ada, Pascal, and C require an unbounded amount of memory to realize these procedures,
necessitating use of "looping constructs" like "for" and "while". The IEEE Scheme standard
requires the "tail-" form of this property, so procedures like Euclid's algorithm will never exhaust the
stack space. For ten points, identify this class of procedures exemplified by the natural solution to Towers
of Hanoi and by Merge sort, which contrasts with iterative and in which a function is defined in terms of
itself.
ANSWER: Recursive
In addition to being constant, McCarthy 91 is this type of function for all inputs less than or equal to 100.
Kleene's theorem relates these functions to computable functions. As long as x does not equal zero, the
Ackermann function is of this type, but it is not primitively so. In computer science, these functions are
sometimes classified based on whether they use only tail calls or whether they build up values. The simplest
types of these functions are defined inductively, and definition via this technique is useful for some
functions that cannot be expressed explicitly. Name these functions calculated in terms of themselves.
ANSWER: recursive functions [accept word forms of recursion]
In Euclidean geometry, the finite groups formed by this type of mapping are equivalent to the finite Coxeter
groups. In computer science, this term refers to the ability of a program to treat itself as data, allowing the
program to modify itself. Matrices that perform this operation in two-space often take the form with top row
cosine two theta, sine two theta and bottom row sine two theta, negative cosine two theta; those matrices
have a determinant of negative one. This term also refers to certain relations that relate f of the quantity a
minus x end quantity to f of x. When this type of transformation is combined with a translation, the result is
its glide type. For even functions, this transformation can be found over the y-axis without changing the
graph. Name this transformation that finds a mirror image.
ANSWER: reflection [accept word forms]
The Briggs method for making decisions about these units includes a coalescing phase. One class of
algorithms for controlling these considers deleted nodes to be spilled and nodes in general to be live ranges.
Second chance bin-packing is an algorithm designed to handle these units. The linear scan algorithm
manages these in a greedy fashion, and many other algorithms for managing them are based on graph
coloring. The number of general instances of these components were doubled in x86_64 architecture over
x86, and in x86 examples of these include ax and bx. In load store architectures like MIPS, in order to
perform arithmetic or logical operations on the data, the data must be placed in these. For 10 points, name
these fast stores of temporary data on a CPU that are separate from the main memory, unlike caches.
ANSWER: registers
One assumption this method relies on is the preservation of homoscedasticity, which can be confirmed
using a residual plot. An important value for this technique is equal to the r-value times the quotient of the
standard deviations of the dependent and independent variables. The square of the correlation coefficient is
a measure of the accuracy of this technique, and it is often computed with the "least squares" method. For
10 points, name this statistical technique used to fit a trendline to data.
ANSWER: Linear Regression [accept Least Squares Regression; prompt on Line of Best Fit or Trendline before mention]
A non-parametric method of performing this technique is the Theil-Sen estimator. The
Gauss-Markov theorem gives the best linear unbiased estimator when error terms from this
technique fulfill certain criteria. For a type of this process, the sum of squares total minus sum of
squares error all divided by sum of squares total yields the r-squared value, which is also called the
coefficient of determination and gives the percentage of variance explained. That type of this
technique minimizes the sum of squared (*) residuals and is the least-squares method. "Influential"
outliers unduly influence the slope obtained from the linear form of this process. For 10 points, name this
process which gives a mathematical model for the association between a dependent and one or more
independent variables.
ANSWER: regression analysis [or least-squares regression; or simple linear regression]
For Sturm-Liouville problems to be of this type, the two boundary conditions must be linearly
independent. This word also describes points at which all coefficient functions in a standard form
differential equation are analytic. In both of those definitions, this word contrasts with singular, as it also
does to describe matrices that have inverses. All vertices have the same degree in this sort of graph. This
word also describes expressions that, like grammars, can define the languages of finite automata; those
expressions are often used in string matching. For 10 points, identify this word that also applies to polygons
in which the side lengths and angle measures are all equal.
ANSWER: regular
Omega languages with this property consist of infinite words which are equivalent to Buchi automata. This
property describes sets of strings which correspond to DSPACE of big O of one; such languages must have
a finite number of "distinguishing strings" such that each appended string forms an equivalence class. These
languages are the subject of the Myhill-Nerode theorem and correspond to type-3 languages, right-linear
grammars, and left-linear grammars. Concatenation and the Kleene Star are two operations that can be
applied to a tool described by this adjective, which can be used to search for strings. For 10 points,
expressions that are used by Linux's "grep" can be described by what adjective?
ANSWER: regular [accept type-3 before mention]
By evaluating one over n prime times the integral from a to x of quantity x minus t to the n plus f n plus
one of t dt, this amount can be found for the Taylor series. Performing the modulo operation yields this
value. A story about a woman who loses a basket of eggs is often used to introduce a method to work
backwards given several of these values; that is the "Chinese" theorem about them. This number is obtained
alongside a quotient. For 10 points, name this amount left over during a division.
ANSWER: remainder [or residual]
If a plot of these values has an uneven envelope, it is a sign that data is
heteroscedastic [HET-uh-roh-skeh-DAAS-tik], which means that different parts of the data have
different variances. If these numbers follow a "U"-shaped pattern on a graph, it is an indication that
a poor model has been chosen for the data. Regression methods minimize the sum of the squares of
these values. These values apply to bivariate data in a way that is similar to the way deviations are
used with single-variable data. Identify these values, sometimes confused with errors, that are equal
to the difference between an observed value and the predicted value from a best-fit curve.
ANSWER: residuals [prompt on deviations; do not accept "standard deviation(s)"]
The Ahlfors-Bers theorem proved a "moduli problem" named for this man. Along with Christoffel,
he names a four index tensor whose trace gives the Ricci tensor. Infinitely many sheets often cover
the complex plane in his "surfaces" that can represent multiple-valued functions. Functions which
satisfy the Laplace equation in two dimensions satisfy equations named for him and Cauchy because
they're analytic, and he proposed that the non-trivial zeros of a namesake function lie along a "critical strip."
For 10 points, identify this namesake of a zeta function, who developed an integration method involving
summing the areas of very small rectangles.
ANSWER: Georg Frederich Bernhard Riemann
A type of differentiable manifold in which each tangent space has an inner product that varies smoothly is
named for this man. His namesake sphere is an extension of the complex plane, while his namesake surface
is a one-dimensional complex manifold. With Cauchy, he lends his names to a set of equations which
determine whether a function is holomorphic, though his namesake hypothesis about the distribution of the
zeros of a namesake function has yet to be solved. FTP, name this German mathematician whose
aforementioned zeta function gives the distribution of prime numbers and whose eponymous sums are a
method of numerical integration.
ANSWER: Bernhard Riemann
Any open proper subset of C can be put into an analytic isomorphism with the open unit disk as a result of
this man's namesake Open Mapping Theorem. Conditions for the differentiability of a function of complex
variables are given by equations named for Cauchy and this man. An object co-named with Stieltjes is a
generalization of an object named for him, but is less general than the Lesbesgue one. This man's
hypothesis is connected to the distribution of prime numbers and concerns the location of the nontrivial
zeroes of this man's Zeta function. For 10 points, name this German mathematician whose namesake
integral is the limit of his namesake sums.
ANSWER: Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann
This man extended Gauss's ideas about curvature in three-dimensional space to surfaces in higher
dimensional space. In an 1859 paper, he used a complex variable to analyze a function whose zeroes he
posited are on the critical line, meaning they have a real part of one-half. He names a method in which
points are taken on a function to create rectangles, which are added together to approximate area. For 10
points, what German man who names a zeta function has "sums" that can evaluate a definite integral?
ANSWER: Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann [or George Frederick Bernhard Riemann]
One theorem named for this person states that if a series converges but the absolute value of its
terms diverge, then the series can be made to converge to any number. The reciprocal of the gamma
function is multiplied by an integral in a function named for this person that was used to prove the
prime number theorem; it is believed that all of the zeros of that function have real parts equal to
one half. The complex plane together with a point at infinity are called the "sphere" of this person.
Identify this mathematician whose name is given to a technique of using rectangles to approximate
an integral.
ANSWER: (Georg Friedrich) Bernhard Riemann [REE-mahn]
Soon after Lobachevsky [loe-bah-CHEV-skee] developed hyperbolic geometry, this person developed
elliptic geometry. This person's namesake geometry is differential, allowing for the use of his namesake
metric and manifolds. This person's paper "On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude"
introduced a function named his zeta function. Name this German mathematician whose name is used for
the integral approximation method that uses rectangles.
ANSWER: Bernhard Riemann
One theorem named for this man means that for any simply connected open proper subset of the complex
plane, there exists a bijective analytic map from it to the open unit circle about the origin. Manifolds with a
smooth inner product are named for him. He and Cauchy name a set of differential equations used in
determining whether a function is holomorphic. He is also known for a function for which a namesake
hypothesis states that all trivial non-zeros of the function have real part one-half. For 10 points, name this
formulator of a zeta function and a method of integration which involves using his namesake sums.
ANSWER: Bernhard Riemann
A lemma stating that if a function is integrable, the magnitude of its Fourier [for-ee-ay] transform tends to
zero at infinity is named for Lebesgue [l--behg] and this man. He also names a class of objects whose
tangent bundles- inner products vary smoothly, his namesake manifolds. A limit of a sum of terms like
f(x_k*) (delta x)k ["f of xsub k-star, times delta x sub k"] over subintervals defines his namesake "sums". Identify
this mathematician whose namesake hypothesis on the zeta function remains unproven, and who names a
rectangular approximation method for integrals.
ANSWER: (Georg Friedrich) Bernhard Riemann [REE-mahn] [accept Riemann and Lebesgue o Riemann-Lebesgue lemma]
This man gave his name to a differintegral modified by Caputo, a formula linking Euler
characteristics involving a ramified surface, a lemma that relates Fourier transforms and L1
functions, a curvature tensor for modifying his namesake manifolds surfaces that can define
holomorphic functions, a problem about the number of 0s and their occurrence in his namesake zeta
function, and a sum which gives the area under the curve. For ten points, name this mathematician, who
gave his name to a famous mathemtatical hypothesis.
ANSWER: George Friedrich Bernhard Riemann
This man defined a collection of inner products defined on a tangent space at each point on a manifold as
his metric, a key concept in the branch of geometry he developed. He also developed a function of n equal
to the infinite sum of one over k to the n and hypothesized that one half is the real part of all nontrivial
zeroes of that namesake zeta function. A student of Gauss, For 10 points, name this German mathematician
whose namesake sums are used to approximate definite integrals.
ANSWER: Bernhard Riemann
This mathematician is the namesake of a sphere formed by mapping points from the plane and adding a
point at infinity, and he is also the namesake of objects which locally look like the complex plane but as a
whole can be a curved surface. A function named after him is related to functions named after Dirichlet
using simple proportions and has no zeroes of the form one plus i times t, which is used to prove the Prime
Number Theorem. That function, which sums from one to infinity the number one over n raised to the input
power, is his zeta function. Name this German, also the namesake of a sequence of rectangles used to
approximate the value of an integral.
ANSWER: Bernhard Riemann
He described transformations onto the open unit disk in his "mapping theorem." A geometric object with an
inner product for all tangent spaces, a curvature tensor, and differentiability is his "manifold." He co-names
a set of conditions for analytic complex functions with Cauchy. He also names a construct that possesses a
critical line on which all zeroes might have real part one-half; that "zeta function" helps find the distribution
of primes in his unsolved hypothesis. Another method named for him uses right-handed or left-handed
rectangles under a function. For 10 points, name this German mathematician whose namesake "sums" help
define the integral in calculus.
ANSWER: Bernhard Riemann
This technique can be replaced with a more accurate technique calculated by taking one third the
difference of the right and left end points, multiplied by the sum of f of a plus f of b plus four times f
of a plus b over two; that technique is called Simpson's rule. Applying this method from the *right
will give an overestimate for a monotonically increasing function and an underestimate for a
monotonically decreasing function; using both the right and left side of this method will give a better
estimate in a variation of this technique known as the trapezoid rule. For 10 points, name this method of
estimating the area under a curve by dividing it into a group of rectangular blocks, named for a German
mathematician.
ANSWER: Riemann sum (prompt on integration before "right")
The most useful algorithm for computing it is named after Odlyzko and Schonhage, and is far more
computationally efficient than the algorithm named partly after Siegel. Beukers' integral is used to
approximate one value of it; that value was proven to be irrational and is known as Apery's constant.
Trivial zeroes exist at every even negative integer, while if its nontrivial zeroes have real part equal to one
half, and thus lie on the critical line, its namesake hypothesis is satisfied. FTP, name this function from
number theory, linked to the prime number theorem, named after a German mathematician who was also the
namesake of a method of summation in calculus.
ANSWER: Riemann Zeta Function
The Montgomery-Odlyzko Law relates this function to the distribution of eigenvalue spacings in a
GUE operator, and the limit of this function applied to s minus one over quantity s minus one yields
the Euler-Mascheroni constant. The Dirichlet eta function, sometimes referred to as its (*)
"alternating" form, is equal to this function of s times quantity one minus two to the quantity one minus s,
and Euler's gamma function can be defined using a power series with nth coefficients defined as this
function of n. Most famous for its relevance to the distribution of prime numbers and the prime number
theorem, FTP, name this function associated with a German mathematician defined as the infinite series one
over k to the nth power for k equals one to infinity, whose zeros are the subject of a namesake conjecture.
ANSWER: Riemann zeta function
When the parameter is set to one, it can be expanded as a series whose coefficients are Stieltjes constants,
and it can be evaluated using Parseval's theorem. A generalization of it is called the Hurwitz function, and it
resembles a p-series. When evaluated at 2, it gives the solution to the Basel problem, and Ramanujan
showed that it is equal to minus one twelfths when evaluated at negative one. 1.5 million roots have been
shown to lie on the critical strip, but it is not known whether all roots have a real part 1/2, and this function
is closely associated with the prime number theorem. For 10 points, identify this function named for a
German mathematician who has a namesake hypothesis
ANSWER: Riemann zeta function [prompt on partial]
This function can be expanded around 1 into a Laurent series whose constant coefficients are the Stieltjes
constants. Zipf's law uses this function to determine the frequency of words over an infinite language.
Though it converges at 0, it diverges at 1 due to the divergence of the Harmonic Series. The study of this
function is often focused on the Z-Function, which is restricted to the critical line. Hardy showed that this
function has infinitely number of zeroes on the critical line, but the distribution of these solutions are still
open in the hypothesis that the all non-trivial zeroes of this function have a real part equal to 1/2. For ten
points, identify this function named for a German mathematician.
ANSWER: Riemann zeta function
This function's value at 3/2 is useful for calculating the critical temperature of a Bose-Einstein
condensate, while using Weierstrass's factorization theorem on it gives the Hadamard product
expansion. Borwein and Hrass developed a convergent series approximation for this function, and
the polylogarithm reduced to it when k = 1. Its value at 3 is equal to Apery's constant, while it can be
expanded into a Taylor series using Stieltjes constants. Rapidly converging series for odd values of the
input were created by Ramanujan, while its value at 2 is equal to pi squared over 6. A famous problem asks
whether all of its zeroes lie on the line with real part one-half. For 10 points, name this function intimately
connected with the distribution of prime numbers, the subject of its namesake's unsolved hypothesis.
ANSWER: Riemann Zeta Function
Karatsuba proved one conjecture regarding this entity posited by Atle Selberg, and the reciprocal of
this function gives a Dirchlet series involving the Mobius function. Apery's constant is defined using
this function, and expanding this function out as a Laurent series around s equals 1 gives the Stieltjes
constants. The Bernoulli numbers form a useful recurrence to define this function, which is equal to pi
squared over 6 at 2. This function is equal to the sum from one to infinity of one over n to the s. The real
part of the zeros of this function all appear to lie on a critical line, though this has not been proven. For 10
points, name this function at the center of its namesake's unsolved hypothesis about the distribution of
primes.
ANSWER: Riemann zeta function
The development of etale cohomology by Pierre Deligne made possible the proof of analogues of this result
describing the number of points on certain projective varieties over finite fields, and in addition to these
Weil conjectures, this result is associated with criteria named for Riesz and Li. Like a disproven conjecture
of Mertens, it may be interpreted as a growth bound on a function related to partial sums of the Mobius
function, and it also implies a strong error bound on the prime number theorem. For 10 points, identify this
conjecture formulated in the 1859 paper On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude, which
asserts that all the zeroes of a certain function lie on the "critical line" of complex numbers with real part
one half.
ANSWER: Riemann zeta hypothesis
The Lambert quadrilateral is a quadrilateral which possesses three of these things, while a Saccheri
quadrilateral has two of them. Euclid's fourth postulate states that all of these things are congruent. The area
of a triangle in spherical geometry which has three of these things is equal to one-half pi times the radius of
the sphere squared. Thales- theorem states if a triangle inscribed in a circle has a diameter for one side, one
of these things will be located opposite that diameter. The Pythagorean theorem applies to triangles that
have one of them. For 10 points, name these angles formed by the junction of two perpendicular lines and
found in the corners of rectangles.
ANSWER: right angles [or 90 degree angles]
This adjective describes the only type of scalene triangle for which the angle-side-side congruence
conjecture holds. Triangles of this type have an orthocenter at the vertex joining the two smallest sides. The
length of a side of this kind of triangle can be found by the Pythagorean Theorem. For 10 points, give this
adjective that describes triangles that, because they contain an angle with measure ninety degrees, are
neither acute nor obtuse.
ANSWER: right triangles
If there exists a number n greater than one such that for every element x in this construct, x to the n equals x,
then it is a Jacobson one. If every element in it is idempotent for multiplication, it is a boolean one. The
Wedderburn-Artin theorem specifies when this construct is both artinian and lacking nonzero proper ideals;
in that case it is called simple. FTP, name this algebraic structure with two compositions, multiplication
and the abelian group addition, which is also not a field.
ANSWER: ring
The Dedekind example of this is commutative and is equivalent to a set of algebraic integers in its
field of fractions. Schur's lemma states that a specific type of these for an irreducible module is a
division algebra. Another example of this structure follows the equivalent statements that certain
subsets of it each contain a maximal element and follow the ascending chain condition. That type is
termed Noetherian. Commutative examples of this structure with no zero divisors are termed integral
domains. All modules are defined over this structure, and subsets of this structure that form abelian groups
under addition and absorb products are termed ideals. For 10 points, name this algebraic structure
consisting of a set with two operations, usually addition and multiplication, where the set forms an additive
abelian group.
ANSWER: ring
One measure of the dimensionality of these objects is the least upper bound on the heights of its
closed, additive group-forming sub-modules. The unmixedness theorem holds for examples of these
objects in which the aforementioned dimensionality measure is equal to the depth. That
dimensionality measure is the Krull dimension, which is equal to the depth in the examples of these
named for Cohen and Macaulay. The major classifications of these objects are in terms of chain
conditions. The aforementioned closed, additive group-forming sub-modules of these objects are
know as prime (*) ideals; an ideal is a sub-module of one of these that commutes with all its elements.
These algebraic structures are closed under both an associative, commutative addition, identity-bearing
invertable addition, and a left- and right-distributive, associative multiplication. For 10 points, name these
algebraic structures that may be Artanian or Noetherian.
ANSWER: rings [prompt on fields or modules]
Euler's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem for the n equals 3 case involved extending integer arithmetic
to one of these structures, which contain numbers of the form a plus b times the square root of
negative 3. Dedekind defined an ideal complex number based upon a property related to these
structures and Hilbert utilized (*) polynomial ones to solve his Basis Theorem. The advent of quaternion
algebra and the extension of the axioms of this structure to square matrices led to the formulation of its non-
commutative theory and the first single theory of the abstract commutative variety of these structures was
proposed by Noether. FTP, what are these mathematical objects defined as a set containing two operators
that satisfy a collection of axioms.
ANSWER: ring
Two of these objects are said to be Morita-equivalent if there is an equivalence between their module
categories. Every local example of one of these objects has a finite Krull dimension and modules are
defined over these objects. Examples of these objects satisfying the descending chain condition are known
as Artinian ones. The ascending chain condition, the requirement that all ideals be finitely generated and
that every ideal contain a maximal element are criteria that are satisfied by Noetherian ones of these. .
Commutative examples of these objects have no zero divisors and are called integral domains, of which
fields are a subset. For 10 points, identify these algebraic structures exemplified by the integers which
unlike groups consist of a set and two binary operations, usually addition and multiplication.
ANSWER: rings
The use of this concept often requires the use of a "scoreboard" to prevent hazards that result in
stalling. Implementations employing this paradigm rely on restricting data movement to load and
store(*) operations and employ a fixed-length rather than a variable length format. A namesake 5stage (*) pipeline is designed to increase the number of instructions that machines employing it can execute
and processors employing this architecture assume that operands are contained in the internal registers
rather than memory, unlike their counterparts which do not impose this restriction. Examples of this
architecture include the SPARC processor as well as the MIPS architecture developed at Stanford. For ten
points, identify this processor architecture which relies on a smaller number of basic commands than its
counterpart, the CISC architecture.
ANSWER: RISC or Reduced Instruction Set Computer (accept pipeline before *)
Cardano's method is used to find these, and Vieta's formulas give results for summing and multiplying over
all of these values. Repeatedly subtracting the quotient of a function and its derivative is used in Newton's
Method for approximating these. Another formula for finding these involves the discriminant "b squared
minus 4ac." The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra says that a polynomial of order n has n of these, and for
order two polynomials, they can be found with the quadratic formula. For 10 points, name these values that
when input to a polynomial result in an output of zero.
ANSWER: polynomial roots [accept zeros before it is read]
Niels Abel showed there was no general way to find these values when the order is five or more. For
quadratic equations, there are no real instances of these if the discriminant is negative. The number of
positive or negative real ones can be bounded by Descartes' rule of signs. The fundamental theorem of
algebra states all non-constant complex polynomials has at least one complex one of these. They can be
found for quadratic equations by factoring or by using the quadratic equation. For 10 points, name these
values for a polynomial that make the expression equal to zero.
ANSWER: roots [or solutions; or zeroes before mentioned]
One computational robust algorithm for doing this has no shift, fixed shift, and variable shift stages.
For complex values, the Lehmer-Schur algorithm does this. In addition to the Jenkins-Traub method,
a common false position approach is Ridder's algorithm. Using Horner scheme to quickly evaluate a
polynomial via synthetic division and Rufini's algorithm to deflate the polynomial is helpful in this
task. Laguerre's method can do this for polynomial, but in general this can be achieved by a (*) fixed
point method where the function and its derivative are subtracted from the function variable. The simplest
method is based on the intermediate value theorem and repeatedly divides and interval in half to see where
the function changes sign. For 10 points, name this task that can be achieved by bisection method and
Newton's method and involves finding where a function is equal to zero.
ANSWER: root finding [accept solving for a root of a function; accept finding a zero of a function or word forms before mention; accept word forms; accept accelerating the convergence of a sequence before Horner scheme, prompt after; prompt on anything involving a fixed point]
Wilkinson's polynomial was formulated to show the problem of doing this action, while Edmund
Laguerre provided an exact solution for this task. The false position method will do this action, as
will the Secant method and splitting the circle method. More simply, the Abel-Ruffini Theorem
expresses impossibility of doing this with higher-order polynomials, but for polynomials of degree 2,
it can be done by completing the square, or using a certain formula. For ten points, name this process in
which the zeros to a polynomial are sought.
ANSWER: Root-Finding accept stuff like finding the zeros of an equation
Brent's method combines three algorithms for this process, one of which is inverse quadratic
interpolation. A finite difference method for this process has order of convergence equal to the
golden ratio and was generalized to multiple dimensions by Broyden. A cubic algorithm for this
process is the second member of a class derived from the Pade approximation; that class is named for
Householder and its first member is equivalent to inverting a first order Taylor expansion. For
polynomials, this process is equivalent to factorization, and for general function this can be performed using
the Newton Raphson method of sliding along the tangent line. For 10 points, name this process which
results in the solution to the equation F of X equals zero.
ANSWER: Finding a root of an equation [accept solving an equation, finding a zero of an equation, accept logically equivalent answers, accept "polynomial" in place of "equation" before mentioned]
A particularly difficult example of performing this action was illustrated by James Wilkinson, and
the number of outputs for this action within a given interval is given by Budan's theorem. Several
methods of performing this action are outgrowths of Vincent's theorem, including the VAS method
used by Mathematica. Several different methods of doing this relies on a combination of finding the
Sturm sequence and counting the number of (*) sign changes within it. One common method of
performing this action involves repeatedly iterating x sub n plus one equals x sub n minus f of x sub n over f
prime of x sub n; that method repeatedly finds the x-intercept of a tangent line. For 10 points, name this task
done via Newton's method, which consists of finding the points at which the graph of a polynomial
intersects the x-axis.
ANSWER: finding the roots of a polynomial [or solving a polynomial, or finding the zeros of a polynomial; accept equivalents]
A debate between Tartaglia and Ferrari was prompted by a paper by Girolamo Cardano explaining
how to find these objects. The Abel-Ruffini Theorem states that no general process exists for finding
these objects given a quintic equation, and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra guarantees that an nth
degree polynomial has exactly n of them. They can sometimes be found by factoring a polynomial or,
with quadratic polynomials, by using the quadratic formula. For 10 points, name these solutions to an
equation stating that a polynomial is equal to zero.
ANSWER: roots of a polynomial [accept roots of a cubic polynomial or equation until "Abel"]
Greg Hoglund and James Butler's text on these details "fusion" ones that communicate by issuing
IOCTL commands. The best ones issue commands like "cli" and "out" to writes to a hardware port,
made possible because they run on (*) Ring 0 on Intel x86 processors. One called Blue Pill could serve as
a hypervisor and was only detectable if there were flaws in virtualization code. Comparing low level and
operating system calls run from a read-only CD before startup to the same calls on the actual machine is the
most reliable way to detect them. For 10 points, name these types of malware that grant the namesake high
level access, most famously included with Sony DRM CDs.
ANSWER: Rootkits
Symmetric matrices identical to the identity except at two diagonal and two off-diagonal positions
cause this transformation; those matrices are named for Givens and see use in Jacobi's algorithm for
eigenvalues. In the complex plane, this transformation can be achieved by the action of members of
the unitary group of degree 1, or by multiplication by complex (*) exponentials. Axial vectors pick up a
minus sign under the composition of one of these transformations with a reflection. In two dimensions,
multiplication by a matrix consisting of cosines and sines corresponds to this transformation. For 10 points,
identify this type of transformation that moves a question through a fixed angle.
ANSWER: rotation
In R3, the sum of these operations is specified using SO(3). One operation of this type transforms
a problem in Minkowski space to one in Euclidean space by replacing imaginary parts with real
parts; that type is named for Wick. Slerping is a process of interpolating unit quaternions that are
used in representing this action. Any displacement of a rigid question with one fixed point is one of these
(*) transformations. In 2D, this operation is performed using a 2 by 2 matrix with entries cosine, negative
sine, sine, cosine. Gabriel's horn is generated by taking the equation y equals one over x and performing
this action with respect to the x-axis. For 10 points, name this mathematical operation of revolving a
geometric entity around a given axis.
ANSWER: rotation [or revolution before "revolving" is read; accept any word forms]
In Euclidean spaces of n dimensions, this operation is represented by the special orthogonal group of order
n. Along with translations and boosts, operations of this kind make up the Lorentz group of special
relativity. In quantum mechanics, the angular momentum operator is the generator of the infinitesimal
operations of this kind. The plane of polarization will undergo this action in light propagating along a
magnetic field, and for a rigid question, any action of this type can be decomposed into three actions of this
kind performed with respect to the Euler angles. In two dimensions, performing this operation by some
angle theta involves multiplying by a matrix whose four entries are cosine-theta, sine-theta, minus-sinetheta, and cosine-theta. For 10 points, identify this operation which involves displacing an object along an
angular, rather than a linear coordinate.
ANSWER: rotation
The Wick type of this process multiplies the temporal dimension by i in order to make Minkowski
space look Euclidean. The Lorentz group includes these transformations and boosts, and one Lie
group representation of them is the group SO(3). An asymmetric rigid question has six degrees of
freedom: three from translation and three from this transformation. Euler angles describe this
transformation. The (*) matrix for this transformation is [cosine x, negative sine x; sine x, cosine x] in 2D.
This transformation preserves the length of a vector. For 10 points, name this transformation that turns an
object around a point.
ANSWER: rotation
The space of all operations that correspond to these motions is called SO(3). Phasors can be interpreted as
vectors undergoing this motion. Gradients of scalar fields do not do this, as evidenced by the vanishment of
the curl operator on those vector fields. Any motion of this type can be decomposed into three orthogonal
uniaxial motions, perhaps using Euler angles, or by specifying the yaw, pitch, and roll. In spherical
coordinates, these motions correspond to those in which the radius coordinate is unchanged. Where this
motion exists, angular momentum is nonzero. For 10 points, name this type of motion in which a question
moves about an axis but not along it.
ANSWER: rotation [accept circulation; or word forms; do not accept "circular motion"]
In numerical algorithms, machine epsilon measures the degree to which this operation affects the outcome
of floating-point operations, and the degree to which the resulting errors are amplified is described by the
condition number. For a variable x, x minus this function of x yields a sawtooth wave. To express an
arbitrary-precision number using a given number of significant digits, one must perform this operation. One
form of it is written using square brackets with the bottom part removed and is called "ceiling". For 10
points, name this operation, contrasted with truncation, in which a number is approximated by a less-precise
number, and which might convert 3.7 to 4.
ANSWER: rounding (up or down) [or floor; or ceiling before it is read; prompt on "truncation" or word forms before it is read]
One source of failure in doing this action can be mitigated by poisoned reverse. One low complexity
way of doing this is called hot potato. Data structures used in doing this can be compacted through
aggregation based on (*) CIDR. Accomplishing this between autonomous systems is aided by BGP. This
is an application of an algorithm that iteratively adds the unfinalized node with minimum metric to a set of
finished nodes. That link state algorithm is known as Dijkstra's algorithm and contrasts with distance vector
approaches. To accomplish this, a namesake table is created with columns like mask, interface, and
gateway. The entries in that table will have MAC or IP addresses corresponding to destinations. For 10
points, name this act of determining the path a packet will take within a network, which is done by similarly
named devices made by companies like Netgear and Cisco.
ANSWER: routing
This algorithm is often paired with OAEP, which makes it probabilistic by adding random oracles. Now
implemented via the PCKS scheme, modern versions use the Carmichael function. One pair of values
generated have a product congruent to 1 modulo lambda of n. One step involves computing the totient of
the product of two numbers and finding an integer that is coprime to that result. Another step in this
algorithm is to find the modular multiplicative inverse of e, and the efficacy of this algorithm is proven by
Fermat's Little Theorem. Its secure because of the difficulty in factoring large primes. For 10 points, name
this public key encryption algorithm pioneered at MIT by the three scientists whose initials give it its name.
ANSWER: RSA encryption [or Rivest, Shamir and Adleman]
A 1990 paper by M. J. Wiener showed that it could be made more efficient by using values like F0,
F2, and F4, while PSS implementations are typically less favored over the PKCS#1.15
implementation of it. Another way to implement this algorithm, discouraged by (*) ANSI X9.31, sets
the two highest and one lowest bits of a number, and increments by two until the Rabin-Miller test returns
true. Its speed is increased with a quintuple storing information like the coefficient of the Chinese
Remainder Theorem. Its key step computes an exponent, e, from the product of two large prime numbers.
For 10 points, name this public-key encryption method, named for its three formulators.
ANSWER: RSA Encryption [or Rivest-Shamir-Aldeman Encryption]
To ensure the correctness of one of the inputs to this procedure, the Miller-Rabin or Solovay-Strassen tests
were used, though they have recently been superseded by the AKS criterion. An improved version of this
procedure was invented by Rabin and requires the use of redundancy to disambiguate between four possible
outcomes. This algorithm can be defeated if Dixon's algorithm or the quadratic sieve or the elliptic curve
algorithm are successful. This algorithm employs the Chinese remainder theorem to compute congruences
modulo the product of two large primes to both encode a message using a public key and decode it using a
private one. For 10 points, identify this encryption procedure whose security is based on the difficulty of
factoring large integers, named for its three discoverers.
ANSWER: Rivest-Shamir-Adleman encryption [or RSA encryption]
If programs written in this language call a method that doesn't exist, it automatically invokes the
method_missing function. Arrays in this language have an each method that can be passed in a code block
and, although not Objective C, it treats the special value nil as false. It was described by its creator,
Yukihiro Matsumoto, as "more powerful than Perl, and more object-oriented than Python." For 10 points,
name this programming language which has a namesake application framework "on Rails" and is named
for a gem.
ANSWER: Ruby
In asymptotic analysis, a method sometimes named for these locations generalizes Laplace's method
for non-oscillatory complex contour integrals. That method considers the dominant contribution to
the integral to occur at the boundaries or at these locations. In a zero-sum two player game, locations
of this type are (*) Nash equilibria. They are the focus of the method of steepest descent and these
locations are often described as mountain passes connecting valleys in one direction with peaks on either
side. If the determinant of the Hessian is negative, then one of these points results by the second derivative
test. In one dimension, a stationary inflection point is, for 10 points, what kind of critical point that isn-t a
local maximum or minimum, but where the first derivative is zero?
ANSWER: saddle points
These points exist where the Hessian determinant of a function is negative, which is the determinant of the
matrix of second partial derivatives. Contour lines seem to cross each other at these points, and one of these
points can be found on a hyperbolic paraboloid. Name these points on surfaces in threedimensions
characterized by zero first derivatives which increase in some directions and decrease in others.
ANSWER: saddle points
The basis for most modern approaches to this problem is the DPLL algorithm. A nearly identicallyposed PSPACE-complete problem is TQBF. By considering a tableau of sequential Turing-machine
configurations, the Cook-Levin theorem can be proven, making this the first problem to be
demonstrated (*) NP-complete. The special case of this problem for Horn clauses is P-complete and can
be solved by using constraint propagation after having all assignments start as false. A variant of this
problem with the input in conjunctive-normal-form and three variables per clause is also NP-complete. For
10 points, name this problem of assigning truth-values to variables in a propositional formula such that the
formula evaluates to true.
ANSWER: Boolean satisfiability [or 3-sat; or k-sat]
One type of this visualization method checks for publication bias and is supposed to look like a triangle. In
addition to that type, called a "funnel", another type-which shows random noise when a correct model has
been chosen-uses the residual as the dependent variable. This can be used to select a type of smoothing
spline or regression curve, and it can also be used to approximate the correlation coefficient before that
value is calculated. Identify this graph of data points through which a line of best fit is often drawn.
ANSWER: scatter plot [accept words like "diagram", "chart", or "graph" in place of "plot"; prompt on any of those words alone]
Rabin and Karp give their names to a "fuzzy" one of these, useful in the detection of plagiarism. The
Galil rule was an important optimization for the commonly used Boyer-Moore type, while the oft-
used Knuth-Morris-Pratt one performs this operation on a set of strings. The efficiency of quantum
computers allows Grover's algorithm to perform this operation on an enormous (*) database in very
little time. Dijkstra's algorithm performs this on a tree, allowing for the shortest path to be found. China's
Baidu and Altavista are notable utilizers of this type of algorithm. For ten points, what is this class of
algorithms, the main interest of Bing and Google?
ANSWER: search (Accept string search early, grudgingly accept search engine)
One algorithm for performing this operation in square-root-of-N time initializes the system into N states
with equal probability distributions, applies a diffusion transform, and samples the resulting superposed
state. Another algorithm to perform this operation has time of order equal to number of edges plus number
of vertices and marks each node in a graph with a discovery and finishing time as it travels the maximum
distance down a graph branch before retracing its steps. For a sorted list, this operation can be performed in
logarithmic time by recursively subdividing the list into halves and eliminating half of the items. It can also
be performed in linear time by sequentially checking the key against every element in the target list. For 10
points, name this operation which involves locating a specified key in a collection.
ANSWER: search [accept the names of actual algorithms, including Grover's, binary search, depth-first search, linear search, etc.]
One algorithm that does this in square root of N time uses a quantum computer and is named for
Grover. Finding shortest routes on a graph often involves the A star method for doing this. One
algorithm for it runs in log N time by splitting the data in half at each step; that is the (*) binary
algorithm for doing this. Switching between using a stack and a queue will switch between depth-first and
breadth-first methods for doing this, while the simplest way to perform this action on a list is to iterate
through the list, comparing each element encountered to the desired element. For 10 points, named this
computer science problem that involves finding a desired item from among a collection.
ANSWER: searching
Grover's algorithm performs this action on a database in big O to the one-half N time. This action can be
performed on a graph using a depth-first or breadth-first algorithm. Red-black trees are considered one of
the self-balancing binary types of trees that perform it. One website that accomplishes it uses PageRank and
recently introduced a new Instant service. For 10 points, name this action possibly performed by using a
Boolean query and pressing the "I-m Feeling Lucky" button on an engine such as Google.
ANSWER: searching
One method of doing this process introduced by Jack Kiefer takes into account non-uniform memory access
time and is named for Fibonacci, while a probabilistic quantum algorithm for this is named after Lov
Grover and takes big O of square root of n time. Poor implementations of one algorithm fail for large sets,
as adding two interval endpoints then dividing by two can give an overflow error. For ordered lists it can be
completed in big O of log n time, while the best general algorithm takes big O of n time as it requires
looking at each element. For 10 points, identify this process that has "linear" and "binary" versions used to
find an element in an array.
ANSWER: search
A quantum algorithm that performs this operation in Big O of N to the one half time is called Grover's
Algorithm. Heuristic approaches to these algorithms include the Beam type, and one of the simplest
examples recursively divides the dataset into two along a median and is known as the binary type.
Examples of this type of operation on a graph include Breadth-First and Depth-First. FTP name these types
of algorithms, famous examples of which include those that power Bing and Google to help you find things.
ANSWER: Search Algorithms [accept equivalents like Lookup Algorithms]
This action is done by a well-known quantum algorithm that applies to databases, Grover's algorithm.
When doing this action to a graph, a stack or queue can be used, respectively, in the depth-first and
breadth-first varieties. The binary type of these algorithms can only be performed on a list that is sorted.
"Engines" named for this action are designed to retrieve information from the Internet. For 10 points,
identify this action that involves attempting to find a particular value in a list.
ANSWER: search algorithms [or word forms]
Variants on one algorithm of this type include one algorithm that uses iterative deepening and a
Beam variant, while another variant of one of these algorithms is named after Fibonacci. Examples of
these algorithms include one used in quantum computing include ones that can be used in the selfbalancing data structure called Red-Black trees as well as Grover's algorithm. One of these algorithms
continuously calculates the midpoint of an array does the same algorithm on a certain half; that type is the
"binary" type of these algorithms. For 10 points, name these algorithms that compare an element to a
target, which are used by websites such as Bing and Google.
ANSWER: search algorithms [or pathfinding, shortest path, or finding shortest path until "Grover's algorithm" is read]
Grover devised a quantum version of one of these algorithms and admissible heuristics are used in the
A*(A star) type of this algorithm. Another form of this process starts in the middle of a list and only
considers the half that might have a certain value. Both the interpolation and binary form of this algorithm
can only be run on ordered lists. The linear form of this algorithm can be run on any list and runs through
every value. For 10 points, name this algorithm named for its function of looking through lists for a certain
key element.
ANSWER: search algorithms
One type of this algorithm in quantum computing operates in Big O of square root of n time, and is named
for Lov Grover. The process of backtracking is associated with the depth-first, but not breadth-first, type of
this algorithm. The divide-and-conquer strategy is used in the binary type of this algorithm. For 10 points,
name this type of algorithm that is used to locate a desired object.
ANSWER: searching algorithm
Joshua Bloch famously admitted that his implementation of an algorithm to do this for the Java
Development Kit could lead to an integer overflow error because of a line that added low and high
values and dived by two. This operation can be performed with a high probability of success in Big O
of N to the one half time using a quantum computing algorithm called Grover's Algorithm. One form
of this operation can be performed on strings using the (*) Rabin-Karp algorithm. One of the simplest
ways to perform this operation runs in Big O of log N time and works by continually calculating a midpoint
and determining if the midpoint is lower or higher than the desired value; that is the binary form of this
operation. For 10 points, name this type of algorithm at the heart of websites like Bing and Google.
ANSWER: searching algorithms [accept binary searching algorithms before "probability" is read]
One algorithm that accomplishes this purpose is the Bees algorithm, which mimics the behavior of a
swarm of bees. The A-star algorithm accomplishes this purpose in a best-first manner. Algorithms that
accomplish this purpose on a tree do so in a depth-first or breadth-first manner. An exhaustive method of
accomplishing this task is called the brute-force type, which is contrasted with the "informed" or "heuristic"
type. For 10 points, name this task that takes an input and returns a solution, exemplified by the Google
algorithm.
ANSWER: search algorithms [accept word forms of "search"]
Although it is not traversal, for trees, this operation can be performed depth-first or breadth-first. The
edit distance is often incorporated when performing this operation on strings. The binary type of this
operation reduces an array by half on every iteration, and is performed on a sorted array. In the worst case,
the naive linear type of this operation has to compare every element in a list. For 10 points, identify this
basic computer operation that attempts to find a specified item in a list.
ANSWER: searching [do not accept "sorting"]
A data structure used to efficiently perform this operation can use linear probing to implement open
addressing or implement chaining to resolve collisions. That data structure used to perform this operation is
a hash table. The linear, or serial, form of this operation simply steps through an array one item at a time
while its binary form requires an array that has already been sorted. For 15 points, identify this operation in
which an algorithm looks for a specified piece of data.
ANSWER: searching [or obvious equivalents, such as lookup; prompt on hashing]
Quantum computers perform this action through the use of Grover's Algorithm. The simplest way to
perform this action is linearly, though a more efficient method that improves upon "brute-force methods"
involves a divide-and-conquer strategy that eliminates half of a sorted list. "Depth-first" and "breadth-first"
are types of algorithms for this action on graphs and there is also a "binary" method of performing it. For
10 points, identify this action that involves finding an element or item in a data structure.
ANSWER: searching
The shortest path algorithm A-star is one type of these algorithms. Two of the most useful examples of
these algorithms are the Boyer-Moore and Knuth-Morris-Pratt ones. The depth-first and breadth-first form
of this operation can be used to traverse trees. The binary form of this operation requires that the data
already be sorted. For 10 points, name this operation whose linear form consists of checking every element
in a list until the desired one is found.
ANSWER: searching [accept "string search"]
This procedure is accomplished in square-root-of-n time using base-two-log-n space on a quantum
computer via Grover's algorithm. Varieties of this algorithm on graphs include best-first, breadth-first, and
depth-first. A great improvement on naive methods for doing this assumes that the list is sorted and
eliminates half the list on each pass, the "binary" algorithm. For 10 points, name this class of algorithms, the
simplest of which simply reads through a list from top to bottom and compares each element to the target.
ANSWER: searching
The first one of these entities was created by McGill students and was named "Archie," thus
inspiring later ones such as "Jughead." They have been manipulated as part of jokes involving the
phrase (+) "miserable failure." The most notable one of these entities was founded by Stanford
students Larry Page and Sergey (*) Brin and uses the slogan "Don't be evil." Defunct examples of them
include Excite and AltaVista. For 10 points, name these online services which include Yahoo! and Google.
ANSWER: Web search engines
A method of root-finding named for this word is identical to Newton's method, but is used when no
analytical derivative exists for the function. When two of these lines are drawn from a single point to a
circle, then the length of the segment times the length of the external segment is constant. The derivative of
this function of x equals this function of x times the tangent of x. This word refers to any line that passes
through a curve twice, and in a right triangle, this function of an angle equals the hypotenuse divided by the
side adjacent to the angle. For 10 points, name this reciprocal of the cosine.
ANSWER: secant
For increasing altitude, it can be replaced by the Chapman function when finding atmospheric absorption
and this word or Euler is used to describe the numbers on the left-hand border of a zigzag triangle. A rootfinding method of this name does not need the formula for the derivative and can be generalized by
Broyden's method. Related to cosh by the Gudermannian function, its derivative is secant times tangent.
Equal to the ratio of the hypotenuse to the side adjacent to a given angle, its value is always equal to or
greater than one. For 10 points, identify this word used to describe a line intersecting a curve at two points,
equivalent to the reciprocal of the cosine.
ANSWER: secant
The aliquot type of these constructs can be used to identify perfect numbers, and the BolzanoWeierstrass theorem states that every bounded one has a convergent subset. Ones in which the terms
eventually become arbitrarily close are named for Cauchy. In any complete space, these are
guaranteed to converge to a fixed limit. Many are defined via a (*) recursive formula, as is the case
with the ones named for Lucas. For 10 points, identify these ordered lists of numbers, the most famous
example of which begins one, one, two, three, five, eight and is named for Fibonacci.
ANSWER: sequences [accept infinite sequences; prompt on number before "Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem"]
The Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem guarantees that each bounded one of these in Rn has a convergent subone of these, and Conway found a polynomial one of these whose roots predict the next number of digits in
the look-and-say one. In a Hausdorff space one of these may have only one limit. A condition named for
Cauchy mostly applies to complex ones, as real examples of these, such as the Fibonnacci one, cannot be
Cauchy without being convergent. For 10 points, name these mathematical objects, the sum of whose
elements is a series, an ordered list of elements like one, two, three.
ANSWER: sequences
The look-and-say one was introduced by Conway in 1986 and grows indefinitely for almost all seeds, while
the Farey one of order n consists of completely reduced fractions which have denominator less than or equal
to n. A metric space in which every Cauchy one is has a limit is called complete. The Lucas one is
constructed from a linear second-order recurrence relation, while one type of these has a constant ratio of
successive terms. For 10 points, name these mathematical constructs consisting of ordered lists of numbers.
ANSWER: sequences
One of these things describes homology groups of a space in terms of the homology groups of two
subspaces and their intersection and is named for Mayer and Vietoris. A commutative diagram of Rmodules with two exact rows yields one of these things by the snake lemma. Carmichael's theorem describes
prime divisors in ones named for Edouard Lucas, which are described by a rational generating function. The
Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem states that every bounded one in R-n has a subset that converges to a finite
limit. A complete metric space is defined by the convergence of ones named for Cauchy. Although not
functions, the squeeze theorem can be used to find their limit. These things can be defined by a recurrence
relation, such as the one F-sub-n equals F-sub-n-minus-one plus F-sub-n-minus-two. For 10 points, name
these ordered lists of numbers that include one named for Fibonacci.
ANSWER: sequence [accept sequential; accept "long exact sequence" before John Farey, Sr.]
One class of these may be analyzed by a condition named for Dini. Considering one of these objects
named for Dirichlet as a function of the exponent in the denominator gives the Riemann zeta
function. One of these objects named for Grandi illustrates a restriction to a method of analyzing (*)
"telescoping" examples of these objects, while a set that may be analyzed with Abel's criterion includes
alternating ones. Geometric ones will converge for all r between minus one and one, and arithmetic ones
will always diverge. For 10 points, name this type of object, whose terms are summed rather than listed.
ANSWER: infinite series [or Fourier series before "Dirichlet"]
One of these entities used to model functions that are analytic within an annulus is named after Laurent. The
Weierstrass M-, ratio, and comparison tests are used to analyze the behavior of these mathematical entities,
and functions of a real variable can be modeled with varieties of these named after Maclaurin and Taylor.
Some alternating ones are said to converge conditionally, and divergent ones of these include the harmonic
as well as any arithmetic one. For 10 points, name these entities whose types include arithmetic and
geometric, the sum of the terms of an infinite sequence.
ANSWER: infinite series
Abel's test and Dirichlet's test are both used when analyzing these mathematical entities, as is the
Weierstrass M-test. The difference between one of them and the natural logarithm defines the EulerMascheroni constant. Leibniz defined one that gives pi divided by four while the Maclaurin one is
used to represent functions. The ratio test is used on them by taking the limit of the n+1 term divided
by the n term. These entities can possess absolute or uniform convergence and they are denoted using an
uppercase sigma with the starting point on the bottom and the ending point on the top. For 10 points, name
these mathematical entities that are the sum of the terms in a sequence.
ANSWER: series
The virial equation is written as one of them. Riemann's theorem relates the "conditional" and "absolute"
versions of one of their properties. The Fourier (FOR-ee-ay) type can be used to decompose periodic
functions into combinations of sines and cosines. The MacLaurin variant of them arises if a certain type is
centered at zero. The power and Taylor varieties converge while others diverge. They are typically denoted
with an an uppercase sigma. For 10 points, name these entities, the sum of the terms of a sequence.
ANSWER: series
The Cauchy condensation test is used to test for one property of these entities. Joseph Fourier defined
one which can be used to approximate periodic functions, while those in which the individual entities
cancel each other out are known as telescoping. The ratio test can be used on them by taking the limit of the
n+1 term divided by the n term and the Taylor can approximate a polynomial function. For 10 points, name
this mathematical term denoted with an uppercase sigma which gives the sum of the terms in a sequence.
ANSWER: series
A branch of mathematics that deals with these things was developed by Georg Cantor. The number of
elements in one of these is its cardinality. One of them that contains all those that are not members of
themselves leads to a contradiction in Russell's paradox. A backslash is used to represent the complement
of two of these things while an "O" with a slash through it represents the empty one. For 10 points, name
these mathematical collections that can be subject to union or intersection.
ANSWER: sets
Two groups of axioms for handling these entities are Kripke-Platek and Zermelo Fraenkel. When these are
created from a countable number of operations, they are named after Emile Borel, and under certain
circumstances these entities can be a ring. One of these can be combined with two operations to form a field
or with one operation to form a group. The universal example includes all objects within the given axioms,
including possibly itself, while the complement of one of these entities includes everything except what is in
that entity. Name these unordered lists which can be combined using union or intersection.
ANSWER: sets
In the study of these objects, the technique of forcing can be used to prove independence, while one
theorem states that any of these can be given a well-ordering. One statement about these says that the
Cartesian product of non-empty ones is non-empty, and the "power" one of these has higher cardinality than
the underlying one of these. One named after Cantor is formed by recursively removing the middle thirds of
intervals, and they often are studied using Zermelo-Frankel axioms, which do not include the axiom of
choice. For 10 points, identify these mathematical objects which can be combined using unions and
intersections and are collections of distinct objects.
ANSWER: sets
These objects form the von Neumann Universe, and the Axiom of Choice can be used to show that these
objects can always be well-ordered. These objects are described by axioms of Zermelo and Fraenkel. An
example made up of these objects which do not contain themselves is the core of Russell's Paradox. One of
these objects is called countable if there is a one-to-one function to the natural numbers with it as the
domain. Symmetric difference is an operation on these objects, which are more commonly operated on by
intersection and union. For ten points, name these mathematical collections of elements.
ANSWER: set
One way to define equality for two of these things is the axiom of extensionality. Operations on these
entities include the Cartesian product, which combines these entities to make one of these comprising
ordered pairs. A notation used to "build" these entities uses a vertical line or colon that is read as
"such that". The number of elements in one of these entities is its cardinality. Relationships between
these entities can be shown with a Venn diagram, and their operations include union and intersection.
Name these collections whose elements are listed between curly braces.
ANSWER: sets
Pairs of these things are subject to the Axiom of pairing, which in turn is subject to the Axiom schema of
replacement. A commonly used set of axioms for handling these was developed by Abraham Fraenkel
[FRANE-kul] and Ernst Zermelo. The quantity commonly thought of as their size is called cardinality.
Name this unordered collections of elements that can be operated on by union and intersection.
ANSWER: sets
A theorem named after this many tangent circles produces three concurrent lines. Aside from three,
this is the only number of dimensions in which a vector cross product can be defined. This is the
smallest positive number which cannot be represented as a sum of at most three squares, and there
are this many (*) Millenium Prize Problems. This is the smallest number of sides a non-constructible
regular polygon can have. The most likely-rolled sum of a pair of six-sided dice is, for ten points, what
number of sides in a heptagon, the positive square root of 49?
ANSWER: seven
This is the number you get when you plug one into the formula from Heawood's Conjecture, so this
number is the upper bound on the minimum number of colors needed to color a torus. It is the
smallest number which cannot be expressed as the sum of (*) three squares, and this is the number of
Millenium Prize Problems. Like three, this number forms a twin prime pair with five. For ten points, give
this number, equal to three plus four.
ANSWER: seven
This is the first double Mersenne [mer-sen] number, and this is the highest possible number of regions
formed by three lines in a plane. It is also the smallest number of sides for a regular polygon that cannot be
constructed with straightedge and compass, and that is also the first polygon whose interior angles are not a
whole number of degrees. Dividing a whole number by this one-digit number gives a decimal with a
sequence of six digits that repeats. This is the most likely sum that results from a roll of two dice, and it is
the sum of the numbers on opposite sides of a die. Give this number equal to the number of sides of a
heptagon.
ANSWER: seven
The discovery of exotic spheres of this dimension earned John Milnor the 2011 Abel prize. This number,
the smallest double Mersenne prime, is also the fewest number of sides of a regular polygon that cannot be
constructed with a compass and straightedge. This is the largest number of dimensions for which a vector-valued 
cross product can be defined; the cross product in this many dimensions is related to the octonions.
The interior angles of a regular polygon with this many sides equals five pi radians over this number, or
around 128 degrees. For 10 points, give the number of sides of a heptagon.
ANSWER: seven ( 7)
The first solution to this problem was published in the journal Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum
Imperialis Petropolitanae, and that article's title indicated that its author was aware that its solution was
independent of distance. Two of the namesake objects of this mathematical problem no longer exist,
though it is still impossible for an Eulerian circuit to be traversed. For 10 points, name this problem that
asks if it is possible for a traveler to cross each of the seven namesake objects exactly once and return to
his starting point, answered by Leonhard Euler in the negative.
ANSWER: Bridges of Konigsburg problem
In this scientist's classified report A Mathematical Theory of Cryptography, he mathematically showed
that all unbreakable ciphers are equivalent to one-time pads. This scientist showed that the
probability of error can be made arbitrarily small if the rate of transmission is less than the capacity
of a "noisy" channel. He's the alphabetically latter namesake of a result showing that an analog
signal can be reconstructed - without aliasing - from a digital signal as long as the (*) sampling rate
for the original analog signal is greater than or equal to twice the signal's bandwidth. This scientist's source
coding theorem sets the limit for lossless compression, requiring that the average number of bits per symbol
not be less than his namesake entropy. He names the previously mentioned sampling rate result with Harry
Nyquist. For 10 points, name this father of information theory.
ANSWER: Claude Shannon
These mappings are also known as transvections or row-addition transformations. Like dilations,
contractions, and coordinate swaps, they can be represented by elementary matrices, which are matrices one
row operation from the identity matrix, so they have ones on the main diagonal and exactly one nonzero
value off it. These functions preserve volume, and also preserve exactly one line. The factors named for
these transformations are the ratio of the distance a point moves divided by the distance that point is from
the fixed line. Name this mapping that transforms the point (x,y) into the point (x+ky,y).
ANSWER: shear transformations [or shear map(ping)s; accept word forms of shear]
An algorithm to solve this problem in local area networks is implemented in IEEE 802.1aq. A heuristic
approach to this problem popular in video games is called A* ["A-Star"]. One of the most popular
algorithms for solving this problem does not work on graphs with negative edge weights and can be
implemented by taking a node out of a queue and seeing if any neighbor of that node has a better alternative
cost to traverse to it. For 10 points, name this problem solved by Dijkstra's algorithm, which finds the
minimal distance between two points on a graph.
ANSWER: finding the all-pairs shortest path [or shortest path problem; prompt on "search algorithms"]
Fibonacci heaps are used in Johnson's Algorithm to determine this, and an efficient way to determine it via a
best-first method is A* [A-STAR]. One variety of this class of algorithms runs in N cubed time in the size
of the graph and is the all-pairs approach, which is slower than the Bellman-Ford algorithm of this type. The
simplest algorithm for determining this involves a single source and a single destination with nonnegative
edge weights and is named for Dijkstra. For 10 points, name this class of algorithms which determines the
minimum sum of the weights between two nodes of a graph, exemplified by the quickest way to get between
two cities given the time spent on roads between them.
ANSWER: shortest-path algorithms [accept clear equivalents; prompt on "graph search", "tree search", or anything else involving searching]
Zhan and Noon tested algorithms for solving this problem, finding approximate or double bucket
modifications to one algorithm and Pallattino's algorithm with two queues were fastest on actual data.
Johnson's algorithm solves this problem in the sparse case faster than the cubic Floyd's algorithm, both of
which solve this for all pairs. Another approach uses dynamic programming, and checks all edges n times;
that algorithm also detects negative cost cycles, and is named for Bellman and Ford. A Fibonacci heap is
used to speed up a greedy approach, which works only for positive-weight edges, while if an admissible
heuristic is available, the A* algorithm can be used. For 10 points, identify this problem in graph theory,
most famously solved by Dijkstra's algorithm, which asks for a fast route between two nodes.
ANSWER: shortest path algorithms [accept with any of the following modifying the ANSWER: all-pairs, single-source, or single-source single-destination]
Two matrices A and B have this property if there exists a matrix P such that P equals C times P times
the inverse of P. Objects that display the "self-" form of this property include the Sierpinski triangle and the
Mandelbrot set; those objects are called fractals. Two triangles have this property under the AA, SSS, or
SAS conditions. For 10 points, name this property that holds for any two polygons that have congruent
corresponding angles and proportional corresponding side lengths.
ANSWER: similarity
This relation is held by two matrices A and B if there exists a matrix P such that A equals P times B times P
inverse, meaning that the matrices represent the same transformation. The "self" variety of this is held by
non-trivially repeating patterns such as the Sierpinski triangle, which contains many figures that have this
relation to each other. A transformation that preserves this quality is one that scales the sides of a figure,
also called a dilation. For triangles, this property can be proved by the AAA theorem. Name this property
held by a pair of figures whose corresponding sides have the same ratios, meaning that the figures have the
same shape but possibly different sizes.
ANSWER: similarity [accept variations that include similar]
This was discovered by Johannes Kepler about 200 years before its namesake, and it is also known as
Keplersche Fassregel. A variation on this rule, the 3/8 [three-eighths] rule, uses cubics rather than quadratics
to achieve a similar result. This rule can also be determined by a combination of the midpoint rule and the
trapezoid rule of integral approximation. Similar to the trapezoid rule in that it uses known curves to
approximate the definite integral of an unknown curve, this is, FTP, what rule of calculus which uses
parabolas to approximate definite integrals.
ANSWER: Simpson's Rule
When this function is divided by its input, a new function results that acts as the ideal reconstruction filter.
That filter exhibits the Gibbs phenomenon, and this function is used in Fourier series representations of odd
functions. In Euler's formula, this function represents the imaginary part and as such is multiplied by i. The
Taylor series for this function consist of alternating terms of the form X to N where N is odd, divided by N
factorial. Its derivative is cosine, a function that is this function shifted by 90 degrees. For 10 points, name
this trigonometric function that for an angle is equal to the length of the opposite side divided by the
hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
Niven's theorem concerns the rational values of this function, which has an n-dimensional analogue
used for calculating parallelepiped volumes. This function was used in Euler's solution to the Basel
problem and its Taylor series contains only odd powers of alternating sign. This function, which is
the negative of its own second (*)derivative and equal to zero when x equals zero, has an imaginary
coefficient when expressed with DeMoivre's theorem. Name this trigonometric function equal to one over
cosecant that, for 10 points, is represented on a right triangle as opposite over adjacent, the odd analog of
cosine.
ANSWER: Sine function [accept sine of x]
This function is the imaginary part of Euler's formula, and its hyperbolic version is equal to one-half of
the quantity "e to the x minus e to the negative x." This function's namesake law states that the ratio of this
function of one angle to the length of the side opposite that angle is equal for all three angles, and its
multiplicative inverse is the cosecant function. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function, which in a
right triangle is equal to the opposite over the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
The sinc (SINK) function is defined as this function of x divided by x. This function is equal to one
over two i multiplied by the quantity e to the i x minus e to the negative i x. It is the imaginary part of
Euler's formula. The law of this function can be used to find the remaining sides of a triangle when
two angles and a side are known. This (*) odd function is periodic over a period of two pi and is equal to
zero at zero. It lags the cosine function by pi over two radians. For 10 points, name this function that, for a
right triangle, is commonly defined as opposite over hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine function
The letter c is appended to the name of this function when it is divided by x. When solving a
triangle, the ambiguous case arises because this function isn't one-to-one. In triangles, this function of
an angle, divided by the side (*) opposite the angle, is constant. The y-coordinate of the unit circle is this
function of the angle. This function of pi over two radians, or ninety degrees, is one. For 10 points, name
this odd function defined in right triangles as opposite over hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
When converting from spherical to Cartesian coordinates, z is the only coordinate that does not contain this
function in its definition. When writing a complex number in polar coordinates, this function is used to
determine its imaginary part. Unlike its derivative, the Taylor series of this function utilizes the odd powers
of x. An eponymous law relates the side lengths and this function of the angles, though that law may
produce an ambiguous case. The derivative of this function is the cosine function. Name this function,
which can be defined in a right triangle as opposite over hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
This function is found in the functional equation for the gamma function, Euler's reflection formula, and the
discrete transform of this function operates on real data with odd symmetry. Its Taylor series only has odd
exponents, and its is multiplied by i in formulae named for Euler and DeMoivre. The law of this function
for triangles relates the ratios of side lengths to its evaluation on angles. Its derivative is cosine, and its
reciprocal is cosecant. For ten points, name this trigonometric function, whose value is equal to the opposite
side over the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
The hyperbolic version of this function is "e to the x, minus e to the negative x, all over two." Taking a side
length of a triangle and dividing by this function applied to the opposite angle gives the diameter of the
circle that circumscribes the triangle. In a triangle, for any angle the value of this function divided by the
length of the opposite side is a constant, a result known as this function's namesake law. For 10 points, name
this trigonometric function which is the reciprocal of the cosecant, and which is defined for an angle in a
right triangle as opposite over hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
This function of x is equal to e to the i x minus e to the negative i x all over two. This function is
multiplied by the imaginary unit in Euler's formula. Its Maclaurin series begins x, minus x cubed
over three factorial, plus x to the fifth over five factorial. The integral of this function is the negative
of the (*) cosine, and its reciprocal is the cosecant. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function that, for
an angle in a right triangle, equals the length of the opposite side over the length of the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
If an odd function is expressed as a Fourier series, all of its terms contain a type of this function. When
e is raised to the power of imaginary numbers, this function forms the imaginary part of the result. In any
triangle, this function of an angle divided by the opposite side is the same for all three angles, according to
the "law of" this function. This function over a similar one is the tangent function. For 10 points, name this
function which, for a given angle, is the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse of a right triangle.
ANSWER: sine function
Niven's Theorem concerns the values taken by this function on certain rational inputs. This
function is used to represent the imaginary part of a complex number when converting to polar
coordinates and is denoted with the hyperbolic function e to the x minus e to the negative x divided
by two. The Taylor series for this function is equal to zero when x equals zero and the inverse of this
function is the (*) cosecant function. For 10 points, name this function which for an angle alpha of a
triangle is equal to the ratio of opposite over hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine function
The values returned by this function are the subject of Niven's theorem, and as a function of z, this function
can be defined complexly as e to the i z minus e to the negative i z all over two i. This function's Maclaurin
series begins with x minus x-cubed over three factorial plus x to the fifth over five factorial. The ratio
between this function of a given angle in a triangle and the side opposite that angle is constant according to
the "law of" this function, and the derivative of this function is cosine. For 10 points, name this
trigonometric function computed as the opposite leg over the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: Sine
Dividing this function of x by x gives the sinc ("Sink") function, whose integral from 0 to infinity
is equal to pi over 2 according to the Dirichlet integral formula. In Euler's formula for e to the i x,
this function appears in the imaginary term of the expansion, and this (*) odd function has a fixed
point at zero. The Taylor expansion of this function has terms with odd exponents and divided by odd
factorials, and that expansion is used to show that for small x, this function is approximately equal to x. The
reciprocal of this function is the cosecant. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function which gives the
opposite divided by the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine or sin x
If x divided by pi and this function for a given value of x are rational, then those values for this
function are given by Niven's theorem. The approximation of any function with this function and its
derivative exhibits the Gibbs phenomenon in Fourier series. In general trigonometric form, it is (*)
multiplied by i. Its namesake law demonstrates that in a triangle the length of a side divided by the angle
opposite to that side is constant. The representative of the y-value in the unit circle, its value on the unit
circle at 90 degrees is one. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function that relates an angle's opposite
side to the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine [accept sin(x)]
In Euler's formula, this function is multiplied by i. This function's namesake wave is integral to Fourier
analysis and represents constant, periodic oscillations. On the unit circle, this function is positive in the first
and second quadrants. Additionally, this function is used to represent the y-value of a unit circle arc. For 10
points, identify this trigonometric function that is the inverse of cosecant and, for a right triangle, gives the
ratio of the opposite side over the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
Niven's theorem limits the cases for which the input and output of this function are both rational. The graph
of this function of r in polar coordinates is centered at the Cartesian point zero comma one-half, and is a
circle with its lowest point at the origin. This function also gives the imaginary component of a complex
exponential function. The law named for this function is helpful to find an unknown side length of a triangle
given one side length and the angles opposite those two sides. It is equal to plus or minus the square root of
the quantity one minus cosine squared of x, and it gives the y-coordinate of points on the unit circle. Name
this function that in right triangles is expressed as "opposite over hypotenuse".
ANSWER: sine function [accept sine (of) x, where "x" is any Greek, Roman, or other letter]
The derivative of the inverse of this function on x equals one over the square root of the quantity one minus
x squared. This function is used to build the Fourier [for-ee-ay] transform of odd functions. The magnitude
of a cross product is the product of the vectors- magnitudes times this function of the angle between them.
The derivative of this function is the cosine function. Name this trigonometric function that gives the ycoordinate on the unit circle, and that gives the ratio of the opposite side to hypotenuse length in a right
triangle.
ANSWER: sine (accept an additional variable such as sine x or sine theta, do not accept "cosine")
The first three terms to the Taylor Series expansion for this expression are x, minus x cubed over
three factorial, plus x to the fifth over five factorial (x - x3/3! + x5/5!). The hyperbolic form of this
function equals e to the x, minus e to the negative x, all over 2 ((e^x - e^x) / 2), and it is equal to the square
root of one minus cosine two theta, all over two Sqrt[1 - cos(2 theta) / 2], according to the (*) half-angle
formula. The square of this trig function is equal to one minus cosine squared theta (1 - cos^2(theta)), and it is the
reciprocal of the cosecant function. Equal to zero when theta is zero, for 10 points, identify this trig function
that, on a right triangle, is equal to the ratio between the opposite side and the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine [accept sine theta]
Wavefunctions of the particle in a box use this function because it can be made to meet the boundary
conditions. The Gibbs phenomenon occurs in a method that approximates any function using this function
and its derivative, which is called a Fourier (FOR-ee-ay) series. The magnitude of a cross-product is
proportional to this function of the angle between the vectors. This function's law is the equality, for a
triangle, of each side's ratio to this function of the side's angle. Its reciprocal is the cosecant. For 10 points,
name this function, equal in trigonometry to the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
With Gordon, this function names a partial differential equation with soliton solutions. Euler solved the
Basel problem using its series expansion, which only has odd powers. For small angles, this function can be
approximated by y = x. Its namesake law equates the ratios between this function of an angle and the length
of the opposite side in a triangle. This function is positive in the first and second quadrants, and corresponds
to the y-coordinate on a unit circle. This reciprocal of cosecant is defined in a right triangle as "opposite
over hypotenuse." For 10 points, name this trigonometric function often paired with cosine.
ANSWER: sine [accept sine of x, sine of theta, etc.]
The imaginary part of de Moivre's (day MOH-vray) formula contains this function. Its hyperbolic form is
equal to one half the difference of ex and e-x. The small angle approximation makes use of the similarity
between this function and its argument for sufficiently small angles. It is the multiplicative inverse of
cosecant (koh-SEE-cant) and its derivative is cosine. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function that
for a given angle in a right triangle is the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse.
ANSWER: sine
The smallest non-abelian group has this many elements, and the sum as n goes from one to infinity
of one over x squared equals pi squared divided by this integer. It is also the greatest number of
circles of radius r that can fit around an inner circle of radius r such that all of the outer circles touch
the (*) inner one, and the number of vertices on a tetrahedron. It is the coefficient on the x squared
term in the expansion of x plus one to the fourth power. For 10 points, name this integer equal to three
factorial, the number of faces on a cube.
ANSWER: six
This is the number of ways to place two indistinguishable balls into three bins. This is the number of size
two subsets of a set of four elements. Equivalently, this number is the coefficient of "x squared times y
squared" in the expansion of "quantity x plus y to the fourth power." This number is the number of ways to
order three distinct elements. This number is equal to four choose two, and it gives the number of possible
meal combinations if you have two choices of entree and three choices of dessert. For 10 points, name this
number that is equal to three factorial.
ANSWER: six
This is the number of convex regular polychora [pol-ee-KOR-ah], which are the four-dimensional versions
of the Platonic solids. The smallest non-abelian [ah-BEEL-yun] group has this many elements, and a circle
can be surrounded by this number of congruent circles. This is the greatest number of sides that a regular
polygon that tessellates the plane can have. This is the number of vertices of an octahedron, and it is the
smallest perfect number. Give this number equal to the product of the two lowest prime numbers.
ANSWER: six
The CONCOR algorithm is used to analyze these systems by putting the data into structurally
equivalent blocks. The DeGroot model is a Markov based approach for looking how consensus is
reached within these systems. The karate study attempted to apply the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm to
the dynamics of how these structures divide. Gaps in these structures are called structural holes.
Components of these that contain only two objects are called (*) dyads. Similarity attraction and selfcategorization are proposed mechanisms for why these structures seem to exhibit homophily. The lost letter
experiment demonstrated how large examples of these structures can have small world characteristics,
which gave rise to the idea of "six degrees of separation." For 10 points, name these structures composed of
people and the interactions between them, whose name is often applied to platforms such as Facebook.
ANSWER: social network [or actor network; prompt on interaction network; prompt on group]
The intro variety of one algorithm for this process switches to use of a heap in bad cases. The Spaghetti
algorithm for this process requires either specialized software or real spaghetti, and one algorithm for this
problem that works by randomly permuting elements may never halt and is called the Bogo algorithm.
Always choosing the first element as a pivot results in the worst-case run time of n squared for the best
known algorithm for this problem, and another algorithm which may take n squared time works by
comparing adjacent elements and is called the bubble algorithm. Recursive algorithms for this process
include merge- and quick-. For ten points, name this problem in computer science which seeks to place
objects in order.
ANSWER: sorting
One version of this process was evaluated using E. coli and is called the Burnt Pancake problem. A
variant of a popular method for doing this action uses a three way radix, while another uses the
median of three. One method of doing this removes the maximal element of its namesake data
structure, then rebuilds that structure and repeats. C.A.R. Hoare developed a variety of this process
that uses [*] pivot values. The bubble variety of this process compares and swaps pairs of items and its
worst case run time is big O of n squared. Coming in heap, merge, and quick varieties, for 10 points, name
this action by which an algorithm arranges a list of items in a specific order.
ANSWER: sorting
Little-used methods for performing this operation include a quantum algorithm which creates 2^N
universes to reduce the worst case run time of the original algorithm to Big O of N from Big O of
infinity. A popular method for doing this operation in parallel concats ascending and descending
sequences and is named for Batcher. Another way to perform this operation relies on gap sequences
and was formulated by Donald (*) Shell. When the data set is limited, certain algorithms can beat the Big
O of n log n average case runtime for a certain class of these; an example of such an algorithm sequentially
operates on the eponymous radices. One common way to perform this action partitions elements around a
pivot and can be improved by randomizing the input. For 10 points, name this type of algorithm that
includes the Quick and Bubble varieties.
ANSWER: Sorting Algorithms
One variant of this process used for parallel ascending and descending sequences is named the
bitonic type and was developed by Ken Batcher. Another example that has efficient run time divides
an array into namesake "buckets." Some more common varieties of this process include the (*)
insertion, selection, and merge methods, while another form of it makes use of "divide-and-conquer" and
operates in O (n log n) [pro. "big O of n log n]. Common outputs for these include placing elements in
lexicographical or numerical orders. Coming in "bubble" and "quick" types, name, for 10 points, this
process used in computer science to put elements of a list in a certain order.
ANSWER: Sorting Algorithm [accept word forms]
A fixed gap "h" is used in one variation of this operation, which improves upon a simpler version in which
"h" would always equal one. A variation of this operation that can compare least significant digits is called
the radix type, and another type of this process randomly places elements and checks if they are correct.
One type of this operation uses a pivot to flip elements larger or smaller than the pivot, and notable types of
this operation include the "bubble" and "quick" varieties. For 10 points, name this operation which puts
elements of a list in order.
ANSWER: Sorting Algorithms
John von Neumann invented one of these that has a two-way variant. One of these has "rabbits"
and "turtles" that lead to variability in performance. Another of these uses pivots and a
divide-and-conquer strategy and is named for its (*) speed. One approach is to go through the array and
if any element is less than the element one index lower than it, swap them. This procedure is repeated until
no more swapping is needed. Common ones include merge, quick, and bubble. For 10 points, name these
algorithms which order the elements of a list.
ANSWER: sorting algorithms
One of these procedures divides a list into n sublists of one element and then merges them. Tony Hoare
developed one of these procedures which recursively divides a structure around a pivot value. That one is a
divide-and-conquer algorithm aptly named "quick." One of the first examples of these algorithms compares
every bordering pair of elements and switches them if necessary; that is the bubble type. For 10 points,
name these algorithms used to order lists.
ANSWER: sorting algorithms
Methods that rely on additional key-value information include radix and bucket varieties of this
algorithm. Susan Merritt grouped these algorithms as either easy split/hard join or hard split/easy
join, but Knuth's tradition taxonomy of these algorithms is based on their fundamental operation-insertion, exchange, or selection. One inefficient algorithm of this type (*) compares every pair of
items, and another choose a pivot then calls itself recursively on each half--those examples are called
bubble and quick. For 10 points, name this class of algorithm which may use a comparator to order a list.
ANSWER: Sorting Algorithms [accept word forms and logical equivalents]
Compared to other types of this procedure, one type of it performs better the closer it is to completion,
scaling from big O of N squared to big O of N . The shell type of this procedure improves on that previous
insertion type. The last element of the partition is sometimes chosen as the (*) pivot position in a type of
this procedure that uses a "divide-and-conquer" and recursive algorithm; that type is named for its speed.
One of these procedures allows elements to "rise" to the top by comparing them and appropriately swapping
them based on their values. There are bubble and quick types of, for 10 points, what computer science
procedure in which a list is placed in order?
ANSWER: sorting algorithm
The radix and bucket variety of this algorithm can have better run time than other types, and the bogo
variety is of the order of n factorial. The selection and insertion varieties are worse in general than one that
is named after a data structure that always allows access to the smallest element, a heap. One type involves
the splitting of an array into two and then performing the titular operation recursively. For 10 points, merge
and quick name what class of algorithms that output an ordered list or array.
ANSWER: sorting algorithms
Fast methods for performing this function operate in O(n log n) (read: big "oh" of n log n) time, and
include the "merge" and "binary tree" methods. The most common method to do this steps through an array,
interchanging adjacent elements repeatedly until no changes are made on one full trip, called the "bubble"
method. For 10 points, name this common operation, the act of interchanging members of a list until they
are
in a pre-defined order.
ANSWER: sorting
The spread type of these algorithms was invented in 2002 by Steven Ross and is similar to both the bucket
and radix type. One of these algorithm has best, average, and worst case run times of n log n; that one
repeatedly removes the root of a heap. One of these methods divides an array in half recursively and utilizes
a pivot value, while another compares two adjacent elements and switches them if needed. Those methods
are, respectively, the quick and bubble types. For 10 points, name these algorithms, including the selection
and insertion varieties, that arrange elements in a specific order.
ANSWER: sorting algorithms [accept spreadsort, heapsort, quicksort, or bubble sort]
One of these uses a positional notation and processes individual digits, and is called "radix." Another one of
these uses a namesake data structure and the operations of insertion and root deletion, and is the "heap"
type. Another one repeatedly steps through a dataset, swapping adjacent pairs of elements if they are in the
wrong order, and is named "bubble," and a more famous one was invented by Tony Hoare and is called
"quick." For 10 points, name this class of algorithms, whose members order the elements of a given set.
ANSWER: sorting algorithms
Random permutations of the objects involved in this process are generated until the correct
permutation is found in the bogo type of this process. If the values of the elements involved come
from a known finite set like the integers, then the radix one of these processes is appropriate. Other
methods include a divide-and-conquer algorithm using a pivot value, and, in another type of this
process, "rabbits" are put in the correct place very quickly, while "turtles" find their way through the list
slowly. For 10 points, quick and bubble are types of which algorithms that arrange the elements of a list in
ascending or descending order.
ANSWER: sorting algorithms [accept bogosort before "bogo" is read]
In the programming languages Perl and Python, this process can be performed using the Schwartzian
transform. An algorithm for this process developed by Dijkstra [DIKE-stra] is named for the smooth
transition between its best and worst case performance. One type of this process can be performed from the
most significant digit to the least significant digit. Donald Shell developed a comparison algorithm to
perform this process, and Tony Hoare developed a divide and conquer algorithm to "quickly" perform this
process that involves selecting a pivot. For 10 points, name this process in which items are rearranged and
placed in a specific order.
ANSWER: sorting [or quicksort; or radix sort; or shellsort; or smoothsort, etc.]
One asymptotically optimal method for performing this in hardware is named for Ajtai, Komlos, and
Szemeredi, while Leonardo numbers underlie an adaptive method known as the "smooth" variety.
For certain kinds of data, algorithms like the "pigeonhole" and "bucket" forms can outperform the
otherwise-optimal big O of (*) n log n. One method for doing this named for the data structure which it
uses improves on one which involves scanning repeatedly for the next element; those are the "heap" and
"selection" varieties. Exemplified by algorithms like "insertion", "merge", "quick", and "bubble", for 10
points, name this task in computer programming in which a list is put in order.
ANSWER: sorting
In Perl, this process is helped along by the Schwartzian Transform. The "bogo" type of it will randomly
shuffle a set however many times it takes to successfully accomplish this action. C.A.R. Hoare invented a
way to accomplish it that involves a divide-and-conquer algorithm and the selection of a pivot element and
which runs in big O of n log n time. "Quick" and "bubble" are two algorithms that accomplish, for 10
points, what process in computer science that involves the ordering of items in a list?
ANSWER: sorting [accept word forms]
One particularly fast method for this process is called "radix." Another algorithm for it repeatedly finds
pivots to subdivide a set and was invented by Hoare ("HORE"). The time required by this process is judged
by how many times the values of two elements need to be compared. Less efficient methods require
n-squared steps; those include the "bubble" algorithm for this, which is named for the way elements rise
through a list. For 10 points, name this procedure, which puts the elements of a data structure in order.
ANSWER: sorting algorithms
Least significant digit and most significant digit are two examples of the radix instance in this class of
algorithms. One algorithm in this class constructs a heap, adds elements to it, maintaining the heap
property, and then removes them one by one. Many examples of this class of algorithms are
divide-and-conquer, including one that reorders an input around a pivot. That one is C.A.R. Hoare's "quick"
example. A commonly taught one compares two adjacent elements and switches them if necessary; that is
the bubble one. For 20 points, identify this class of algorithms that puts a list in order.
ANSWER: sorting algorithms
Geffert extended this theorem to show that there exist unary languages described by this theorem.
The original proof of this theorem used a language defined as the set of inputs that a Turing machine
does not accept before visiting a certain number of cells. One corollary of this theorem is that L is a
strict subset of the class that contains the quantified Boolean formulas problem. One form of it
applies to functions f for which there exists a deterministic Turing machine that halts after visiting a
number of cells on its tape equal to f of the size of the input. Those functions are constructible in the
sense required by this theorem. Formally, this theorem holds that (*) "SPACE of little-o of f of n" is a
strict subset of "SPACE of f of n". For 10 points, name this theorem that proves that a Turing machine with
access to asymptotically more space can decide more languages.
ANSWER: space hierarchy theorem [accept (non-)deterministic space hierarchy theorem; prompt on "hierarchy theorem"]
Golding and Ross created a very effective version of this type of application based on Winnow.
Simple versions of these programs make comparisons based on small Levenshtein distances. Jerrold
H. Zar created a "poem" called "Candidate for a Pullet Surprise" that lampoons these applications,
one of which was added to Firefox in version (*) 2.0 (two-point-oh). For 10 points, name this type of
application that flags writing errors and suggests changes, which in Microsoft Word is paired with a
grammar checker.
ANSWER: spell checker
One of these objects results from compactifying the union of infinity and the complex numbers; that
one, equivalent to the extended complex plane, is named for Riemann. The homeomorphic relation
between simply connected, closed 3-manifolds and a type of these was shown in Grigori Perelman's
proof of the Poincare conjucture. A lack of Lebesgue measure in fragments of these helps resolve the
(*) Banach-Tarski paradox, which considers the set of points bounded by one of these, cuts it into pieces,
and constructs two equivalent objects. Diametrically opposite points on these are called antipodes, and the
angle phi joins theta in their namesake coordinates, in which rho signifies distance from the origin. For 10
points, name these objects whose enclosed volume is four-thirds pi r cubed.
ANSWER: sphere [prompt on ball during and after the Banach-Tarski clues; accept extended complex plane until read]
A theorem regarding these objects deals with the presence of singularities in tangent vector fields
defined on their surfaces. The volume of an n-dimensional version of these objects is inversely
proportional to the gamma function of one-half. Triangles in a form of geometry named for these
objects can have three (*) right angles. The coordinate system named for these objects uses the
coordinates r, theta, and phi. These objects have a surface area to volume ratio of three r. For 10 points,
identify these objects that are the set of points equidistant from a given point in three dimensions.
ANSWER: spheres [or 2-sphere; or n-sphere; or ball; or circles]
The kissing number is used to solve problems involving the close-packing of these figures.
Repeatedly slicing and linking tori creates the Alexander horned type of this figure. The
Banach-Tarski paradox involves disassembling one of these figures in order to form two. The
coordinate system on these figures has a volume element equal to rho squared sin theta d-rho d-theta
d-phi, and triangles drawn on the surface of them have angles that sum to greater than (*) 180
degrees. Each point on these figures has an infinite number of great circles running through it. The volume
of one of these figures is equal to four-thirds pi r cubed. For 10 points, name these three-dimensional
figures which consist of all of the points equidistant from a center.
ANSWER: sphere [do NOT accept "circles"]
A conformal mapping from one of these objects to a plane can be carried out using a Wulff net and is called
the stereographic projection. Brouwer proved that at least one cyclone must exist on the earth at all times,
but that theorem does not hold on a hairy doughnut. One of these objects can be doubled in volume by
moving and rotating pieces in the Banach-Tarski paradox. The sum of interior angles of triangles on these
objects is less than 180 degrees, and their geodesics are segments of great circles. They are created by
revolving a semicircle around its radius. For 10 points, name these geometric entities whose volume is fourthirds pi times the cube of their radius.
ANSWER: spheres [prompt on balls]
When this shape is tangent to both a cone and a plane, it is named after Germinal Dandelin and can be used
to prove that the intersection of a plane and a cone can be an ellipse. This can be graphed in any of the three
common three-dimensional coordinate systems by setting the sum of the squares of the length coordinates
equal to a constant, and this can most easily be graphed by setting rho equal to a constant. This shape has
the smallest surface area for a given volume, and it can take up two-thirds of a circumscribed cylinder.
Name this three-dimensional shape equivalent to all points a fixed distance from its center.
ANSWER: sphere
These objects give their name to the harmonic functions which give the angular part of solutions to
Laplace's equation. A Schmidt corrector plate can be used to correct for an optical effect caused by these
objects, which is eliminated at aplanatic points. A solid one has a moment of inertia with a prefactor of twofifths, and a volume element proportional to the sine of the polar angle and consisting of a distance, a polar
angle, and an azimuthal angle make up the coordinate system named for these objects. The surface area of
this object is four pi times radius squared. For 10 points, name these round objects which consist of all the
points equidistant from a given point.
ANSWER: spheres [accept word forms such as spherical]
The Kepler conjecture states that a certain property associated with these objects equals pi divided
by the square root of 18. The Banach-Tarski paradox asks if one of them can be dissembled into two
identical copies. The coordinate geometry named for these figures includes an azimuthal angle and a
polar angle. This shape has constant (*) Gaussian curvature. It maximizes the volume-surface area ratio
for any three-dimensional shape. This shape is formed by the equation x squared plus y squared plus z
squared equals r squared, and great circles are found on them. For ten points, name these shapes with
volume equal to four-thirds pi times the radius cubed.
ANSWER: spheres
The Borsuk-Ulam Theorem describes continuous functions with one of these shapes as their domain. This
shape is the one-point compactification of a plane. The densest possible way to arrange these shapes is the
subject of Kepler's Conjecture. These shapes are mapped onto planes by stereographic projections, a
technique used in cartography. The surface area of this shape is four times the area of one of its great
circles, and its volume can be computed as four-thirds pi r-cubed. For ten points, name this shape consisting
from all points in three-dimensional space whose distance from the center is a fixed radius.
ANSWER: sphere
If a function satisfies Laplace's (luh-PLOSS-iz) equation, then its mean value on the surface of
this figure equals its value at this figure's center. The gravitational force exerted by a shell of this
shape on a particle inside the shell is always zero. The constant of proportionality for moment of
inertia of a (*) hollow one of these is two-thirds, while a solid one has constant two-fifths. This is the
shape of the orbital with azimuthal quantum number zero, known as the s orbital. For 10 points, identify
this shape which has volume four-thirds pi r-cubed.
ANSWER: spheres [or word forms, such as spherical]
The interior of this object is the traditional setting of the Banach-Tarski paradox. This object has constant
positive Gaussian curvature, and it has the greatest possible volume to surface area ratio. Triangles in this
type of geometry have angles summing to greater than three hundred sixty degrees. For 10 points, name this
three-dimensional shape, the volume of which is four-thirds pi times the cube of the radius.
ANSWER: sphere [or spherical]
Before the honeycomb conjecture, these shapes were the subject of Thomas Hales- proof of the Kepler
conjecture, which gives the most efficient way to pack these shapes into a space. A set consisting
of the complex numbers and a point at infinity is called the Riemann type of this shape. It can
be generated in cylindrical coordinates by setting r^2 + z^2 ["r squared plus z squared"] equal to a
constant, and this shape can be generated in a coordinate system named for it by setting rho equal
to a constant. Geodesics on this shape are called great circles, and the formula for its volume is
four-thirds pi times radius cubed. Name this three-dimensional figure.
ANSWER: (2-)spheres
One of these figures named after Riemann represents the complex plane using the stereographic projection.
The eversion of one of these objects is possible by Smale's paradox. One of these figures is homeomorphic
to a simply connected closed 3-manifold, according to the Poincare [pwan-ka-REY] conjecture. One of
these objects can be transformed into two, each the size of the original, by the Banach-Tarski paradox. The
volume of one of these figures is four-thirds pi R cubed. For 10 points, name this three-dimensional object
exemplified by a globe or ball.
ANSWER: sphere
The n-th homotopy group of a topological space X is the set of homotopy classes of maps from this
construct to X. The stereographic projection projects this construct onto a plane. There is no continuous
non-zero vector field on the surface of this construct. A technique called Ricci flow with surgery was
developed to solve a conjecture which stated that every simply connected, closed 3-manifold is
homeomorphic to one of these constructs. That conjecture was solved by Perelman and was proposed by
Poincare. The number of non-overlapping ones of these constructs that can touch a central one is the
kissing number. These constructs are the boundary of a ball. For 10 points, identify these geometric figures
whose three-dimensional form has a volume of four-thirds pi times radius cubed.
ANSWER: hyperspheres [or n-spheres; or 3-spheres; prompt on balls]
When solutions are found to Laplace's equation, the angular portion of the solutions is a set of harmonics
named for this. This type of aberration is inversely proportional to the third power of focal length. Lunar
orbits are stable in the Hill version of this. The efficiency of packing these to be at around 74% by Kepler's
Conjecture. For a perfect one of these, Stokes- Law gives the drag to be 6 pi times the viscosity times the
radius times the velocity. The total energy for a rolling one of these is (7/10)mr2, and the moment of inertia
for one of these is (2/5)mr2. Name this shape that is the three-dimensional analogue of a circle.
ANSWER: sphere
One theorem about them states that even dimensional ones have no non-vanishing continuous vector
fields. One conjecture about these objects states that simple connected three dimensional spaces are
homeomorphic to these objects; that conjecture was proven by (*) Perelman and is named for Poincare.
The coordinate system named for this object has a Jacobian of r squared sin theta. For 10 points, name these
round objects with surface area equal to four pi r and in which every point is equal distance from the center.
ANSWER: sphere (accept circle)
Stephen Smale discovered an eversion of this object, allowing self-intersection but not creases. Using the
axiom of choice, one of these objects is doubled in the Banach-Tarski paradox. The complex plane and a
point at infinity can be modeled as one of these named for Riemann. In the coordinate system named after
this object, points are determined by one length and two angles. This is the shape that maximizes volume
enclosed by a given surface area. For 10 points, identify this 3D generalization of a circle.
ANSWER: spheres
Unit quaternions form the four dimensional analogue of one of these. The Kepler conjecture is about the
maximum density possible in packing these. Like their two dimensional counterparts, they have antipodes.
The surface of one of these contains all points in three dimensional space that have a distance of r from the
center. The volume of one is equal to four thirds pi r squared. The cross sections of these are circles. For 10
points, name these shapes that looks like balls.
ANSWER: spheres
An odd mapping of this construct to Euclidean n-space maps a pair of points to the same point by the
Borsuk-Ulam theorem. Even-dimensional ones have no non-vanishing continuous tangent vector
field. The Mobius transformation is a stereographic projection from the plane to this construct and
back. This shape is packed optimally in twenty-four dimensions by the Leech lattice and in three
dimensions by a (*) hexagonal-close packed lattice. The sum of the angles of a triangle on one of these is
greater than 180 degrees, and the variables theta, phi, and r represent the coordinate system named for them.
For 10 points, name these figures whose volume is four thirds pi times radius cubed.
ANSWER: n-spheres (and word forms)
Kepler's Conjecture postulates that these objects can be packed with a density of approximately
74%. The Banach-Tarski paradox states that a solid one of these objects can be cut into finitely many
pieces and re-assembled into two copies of the same size as the original. For a non-Euclidean
geometry occurring on these objects, triangles have angle sum greater than 180 degrees. (*)
Archimedes derived the formula for the volume of this figure by noting that it occupied two-thirds of the
volume of its circumscribed cylinder. This figure has surface area equal to four pi times the radius squared,
and volume four-thirds pi times radius cubed. For ten points, name this three-dimensional analogue of a
circle, the outer surface of a ball.
ANSWER: sphere (accept ball before mentioned)
The densest possible method of packing of these objects is hypothesized to be hexagonal close packing
according to the Kepler Conjecture. A coordinate system named for these objects contains a zenith
angle and an azimuthal angle, and these entities also boast the greatest possible ratio of volume to (*)
surface area. The equation of this shape is given by r2 = x2 + y2 + z2 and its volume is found by using the
formula 4/3 pi r^3 [ four thirds pi r cubed]. For 10 points, name these three-dimensional shapes, examples of
which include globes and tennis balls.
ANSWER: spheres
While transforming one of these objects to a different type of one of these objects without creasing, one can
generate the Morin surface. Stephen Smale paradoxically showed that one can topologically evert one of
these objects into itself. A manifold of this shape can be formed by taking a square region and identifying
the two pairs of adjacent edges. Opposite points on these objects are called antipodes. The azimuthal angle,
the polar angle and the distance are the three variables in this shape's namesake coordinate system. For 10
points, name these objects that have volume equal to four thirds pi times the radius cubed.
ANSWER: spheres [or 3-spheres]
A uniformly magnetized object of this shape will have a magnetic field equal to two-thirds the
permeability of free space times the magnetization. Legendre polynomials are solutions to the Laplace
equation in this type of coordinate system. If an object of this shape is charged, the electric potential is the
same as that of a point charge. The moment of inertia for this shape is two-thirds the mass times the radius
squared. For 10 points, name these three-dimensional surfaces whose points are all an equal distance from
the center.
ANSWER: hollow sphere [or ball, or word forms]
In this coordinate system, the complete solution to the Helmholtz differential equation is a linear
combination of half-integral order Bessel functions of the first and second kinds. Solving Laplace's
equation in this coordinate system yields an orthonormal set of functions proportional to the Legendre
polynomials; those functions are known as this system's namesake harmonics. This coordinate system gives
the natural definition of the solid angle as the double integral of sin phi d-theta d-phi, and only one of its
three coordinates has dimensions of distance. For 10 points, identify this coordinate system in which
coordinates are given by a polar angle, an azimuth, and a radius, such that points of constant radius form a
ball.
ANSWER: spherical coordinates
A plot of the sine integral versus the cosine integral generates a shape of this type named after Nielsen. The
type of this shape named after Theodorus is generated by a series of right triangles. Jacob Bernoulli [berNOO-lee] labeled one of these as miraculous, and another type of this shape is named after either Cornu or
Euler [OY-ler] and has a curvature that varies with arc length. A common type named after Archimedes
[ARK-uh-mee-dees] is generated by the polar equation r equals theta, and this shape can be found in nature
in galaxy arms and mollusk shells. Name this shape formed by an object revolving as it moves outward.
ANSWER: spiral
The ancient Greeks figured out how to square a circle and trisect an angle by drawing one of these
figures. One of these shapes on the surface of a sphere is named for Seiffert, and plotting sine integrals
versus cosine integrals generates one of these shapes named for Nielsen. The logarithmic type of this
is equiangular and, like fractals, is self-similar. The class of these shapes that can be expressed by the
equation r equals a plus b theta is named for Archimedes [ar-kuh-MEE-dees]. Name
these curves generated by a point that consistently increases or decreases its distance from the center
as the point rotates around the center.
ANSWER: spirals
This language was originally developed by IBM for System R. The Data Manipulation Language is a
subset of this language used to create, modify and delete data. Common implementations of this language
include ones created by Microsoft, which uses a Transact version, while Postgre (post-gree) uses a
Procedural Language version, similar to Oracle. Data is retrieved in this language using a SELECT
statement. For 10 points, name this language used to manage data in a system of relational databases.
ANSWER: SQL [or Structured Query Language]
Van Aubel's Theorem states if you add four of these shapes around a quadrilateral, then connecting the
opposite centers of these shapes creates perpendicular segments. The circumradius and inradius of this
shape have a ratio of the square root of two, and this shape can be generated by the absolute value of x plus
the absolute value of y equals one. Its diagonals not only bisect its angles, they also bisect each other and
are perpendicular. Name this quadrilateral which has both four congruent sides and four right angles.
ANSWER: square
The symmetry of this quadrilateral is dihedral group D4, and its rotational symmetry is
order four. This shape is generated by the graph of the relation the absolute value of x plus the absolute
value of y equals a constant. This quadrilateral has diagonals that are
both congruent to each other and perpendicular bisectors. This regular quadrilateral is a rhombus with right
angles. Each of the faces of a cube is one of these shapes. Name this
shape that is a rectangle with congruent sides.
ANSWER: squares
If one of these figures is constructed externally on the hypotenuse of a right triangle, its center will be
on an angle bisector. The simplest, smallest finite set of lattice points with maximal lines of symmetry
is one of them. The graph of absolute value of x plus absolute value of y is less than or equal to one
forms one of these shapes, and the platonic solid with this shape as a face is the dual of the (*)
octahedron and has eight vertices. The area of these figures equals their diagonal raised to the second power
divided by two. For ten points, give this term for a regular quadrilateral, which has four equal sides and four
right angles.
ANSWER: square (accept regular quadrilateral, prompt on quadrilateral, don-t accept any other quadrilaterals like parallelogram/trapezoid/rhombus/rectangle)
The expectation value of this operation applied to a random variable X minus this operation applied to
the expectation value of X yields the variance. One of the simplest data fitting algorithms minimizes the
sum of this function of the error. Every number can be represented by a sum of four of these according to a
theorem of Lagrange's. A number is said to be this-free if it contains no repeated prime factors. For 10
points, identify this term that also applies to a shape with four equal orthogonal sides.
ANSWER: squares
The generating function for these numbers is x times quantity x plus one all over quantity one minus x
cubed. The sum of the first n of these numbers is equal to n times n plus one times two n plus 1 all over six.
The sum of the first n odd numbers is the nth of these numbers, and these numbers are congruent to 0 or 1
mod 4. These numbers are the only ones that return an integer when raised to the one-half power. For 10
points, name these numbers found by multiplying an integer by itself, whose first few entries are 1, 4, 9.
ANSWER: square numbers
Between any two successive examples of these numbers there exists a prime by Legendre's
conjecture, and every positive integer is the sum of four of these according to a theorem by Lagrange.
The larger number in Catalan's conjecture is one of these, and the sum of the first n odd numbers is one
of these. The sum of the first n of them is "n times n+1 times 2n+1 over 6." The sum of consecutive
triangular numbers is one, while "a+b times a-b" is equivalent to a difference between this function of a
and this function of b. For 10 points, name these numbers found by multiplying an integer by itself.
ANSWER: square numbers
The sum of the first n of these numbers is equal to n times quantity n plus 1 times quantity 2n
plus 1 all over 6. The cannonball problem asks whether one of these numbers of spheres can be
arranged into a pyramid. Lagrange showed that every number can be written as the sum of at most
four of these numbers, and the sum of the reciprocals of these numbers is equal to pi squared over 6.
They are congruent to zero or one modulo four, which is the basis of (*) quadratic reciprocity. The sum
of the first n odd numbers is equal to the nth of these numbers. Taking one of these numbers to the one-half
power returns an integer. For 10 points, identify these numbers beginning 1, 4, 9, 16, which are equal to
some number multiplied by itself.
ANSWER: square numbers [or perfect squares]
The sum of four of these numbers can represent any natural number according to a theorem of Lagrange. A
formula that gives the sum of successive numbers of this type from zero to N is N times the quantity N plus
one times the quantity two N plus 1, all divided by six. The product of two consecutive odd numbers is one
less than one of these numbers. Two consecutive triangular numbers sum to one of these numbers. For 10
points, multiplying any integer with itself yields what type of non-prime number, such as four, nine, and
sixteen?
ANSWER: square numbers [or perfect squares]
The value of the Mobius function depends on whether its argument is divisible by one of these numbers.
Lagrange proved that each positive integer can be written as the sum of no more than four of these numbers.
The sum of consecutive triangular numbers is always one of these numbers, and the nth of these numbers is
the sum of the first n odd numbers. In base ten the last digit of these numbers can only be 0, 1, 4, 5, 6, or 9.
Examples of these numbers include 441, 361, 196, 25, 4, and 1. For 10 points, name this kind of number
that is equal to another number times itself.
ANSWER: square numbers [accept perfect squares]
Any positive integer [IN-tuh-jer] can be expressed as the sum of four or fewer of these numbers according
to a theorem attributed to Lagrange [lah-grahnj]. Four of these are added together in an identity attributed to
Euler [OYlur], and two of them are added in a similar identity attributed to Brahmagupta [brah-mah-GOOPtah] and Fibonacci [FIH-boe-nahch-ee]. These numbers have an odd number of factors, and they are found
by adding consecutive odd numbers starting from one. When two of them add to give a third, the three
numbers correspond to a Pythagorean Triple. Give these numbers which include 1, 4, 9, 16, and 25.
ANSWER: perfect squares (accepts square numbers or squares of integers or squares of natural numbers)
The sum of two consecutive triangular numbers will always be one of these numbers, and
Lagrange proved that any number can be written as the sum of at most four of them. Numbers of
this type have an odd number of positive integer factors. Their difference can always be factored as
(*) a minus b times a plus b. For 10 points, name these numbers like 1, 4, and 9, which are equal to an
integer raised to the second power.
ANSWER: perfect squares
Exactly three of these numbers appear in the Fibonacci sequence. Lagrange proved that all positive
integers can be written as sums of four of them. They have an odd number of positive divisors, and
the nth one equals the sum of the (*) first n odd natural numbers. The prime factorizations of these
numbers have all even exponents. For 10 points, name these numbers found by multiplying integers by
themselves, such as 4, 9, and 16.
ANSWER: perfect squares (accept square numbers; do not accept "square roots")
According to the Brahmagupta identity, the set of sums of one of these numbers and an integral multiple of
another is closed under multiplication. The n equals two case of a class of Diophantine equations named for
Pell in these numbers yields a hyperbola. Fermat proved that a prime number congruent to 1 modulo 4 can
be written as the sum of two of these numbers. Adding two successive triangular numbers yields one of
these numbers, and the sum of the first n of these is equal to n times n plus one times two n plus one over 6.
Ending only in 0, 1, 4, 5, 6, and 9 for base-10 integers and including 1, 4, 9, and 16, for 10 points, name
these products of a number with itself.
ANSWER: square numbers [accept perfect squares]
These numbers can be found recursively with the formula f(n)=2f(n-1)-f(n-2)+2 ("f of n equals 2
times f of n minus 1, minus f of n minus 2, plus 2"). An integer cannot be written as the sum of two of
these numbers if it is congruent to 3 modulo 4, and Lagrange proved that any number can be written
as a (*) sum of four of these. The nth one of these numbers is equal to the sum of the first n odd numbers,
and the sum of two consecutive triangular numbers is equal to one of these. For ten points, what is this type
of number, equal to a number times itself, examples of which include 1, 4, 9, and 16.
ANSWER: Perfect Square Number (accept A Number to the power of 2 or equivalents)
The ratio of x to y obtained from Pell's equation gives an approximation of this function of n. This
function of x is equivalent to e to the quantity one-half times the natural log of x. The Babylonian
method, or Heron's method, is one way to compute this function. The first known irrational number
was this function of (*) two. This function of negative one yields i. The distance formula uses a sum of
squares and this function. For 10 points, name this function which yields y when y squared is input.
ANSWER: square root [do not accept or prompt on "square"]
An algorithm to compute this function pairs up digits and looks like long division. This function
is applied to 2 pi in the denominator of the standard normal distribution. If a complex number is
in polar form, one step in performing this function on the number is to divide the angle by two.
Applying this function to the variance of data gives the standard deviation. Its graph is the upper
half of a rightward-opening parabola. This function is applied to the sum of the squares of the legs
of a right triangle to calculate the hypotenuse. Name this function, equivalent to raising a number
to the one-half power, that is expressed using a radical.
ANSWER: square roots [accept raising to the one-half power before "raising"; prompt on radical]
Viete's formula for two over pi uses the iterated composition of this operation. The
Bhaskara-Brouncker algorithm and the Babylonian method compute this operation. Newton's
method applied to the formula "x squared plus c" finds this (*) function for c. The geometric mean of a
and b is this operation applied to a times b. When this operation is applied to negative one, the result is i.
For 10 points, name this operation on a number n, that returns the number m such that m squared is n.
ANSWER: square root
To apply this function to a complex number p+qi, set a2-b2 equal to p and 2ab equal to q. An algorithm to
calculate this function for decimal numbers pairs up digits in the input number, and evaluating this function
for a complex number represented as a vector involves dividing the angle of that vector by two. Applying
the squaring function to a real number and then this function has the net effect of finding the absolute value.
Its graph is half of a rightward opening parabola. Name this function which takes an input of two and gives
an output equal to approximately 1.414.
ANSWER: square root (accept raise to the 1/2 power or equivalent, prompt on "root" or "radical", do not accept "square")
The first proof that this number is irrational is believed to have been produced by Hippasus, a student of
Pythagoras, but it was thrown overboard by the Pythagoreans. Also known as Pythagoras' constant, it is the
geometric mean of one-half and four. It is also equal to the secant of forty-five degrees, which means it is the
length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle whose two legs each measure one unit. For 10 points, identify
this number, approximately equal to 1.414, and the only solution to the equation "x squared minus two
equals zero."
ANSWER: square root of 2 [or radical 2]
Two necessary but not sufficient conditions for one form of this property are that all coefficients of an sdomain characteristic equation have the same sign and be non-zero. If those were satisfied one would
compute a Routh-Hurwitz array, but, if not, one would know that there are roots in the right half of the splane. If the unit circle is in the region of convergence of a transfer function and all poles are inside the unit
circle, an LTI system has causality and this property. If the impulse response of an LTI system is absolutely
summable, then the system has its BIBO form. For a linear system described by the equation x-dot equals f
of x comma t, an equilibrium point x-star has one form of this property if all solutions starting near x-star
stay near x-star forever; that form is named for Lyapunov. For 10 points, name this property of systems
characterized by robustness to small changes in initial conditions.
ANSWER: stability [accept word forms]
Rbp stores a pointer to the base of one of these, and they can be exploited via buffer overflow. This data
structure is used to perform the depth-first search algorithm and variables are stored on either the heap or
one of these. It has a first in last out structure and in java, methods it has include push and pop. Only the last
element inserted can be retrieved from it. For 10 points, too many recursive calls can overflow what type of
data structure sometimes contrasted with a queue.
ANSWER: stack [accept call stack before "methods"]
In the shunting-yard algorithm, function tokens are inserted into this type of data structure. A
finite-state machine and this component comprise a push-down automaton. In contrast to heap-based
allocation, this type of memory allocation is quicker and usually automatic, though misuse of it can
lead to an overflow. A common way of debugging a program is to trace the callers of a subroutine
stored in this structure. The disks in the (*) Towers of Hanoi problem are stored in this type of data
structure. Elements of this container class can be inserted by pushing and subsequently removed by
popping. For 10 points, name this last-in, first-out data structure that is often contrasted with a queue.
ANSWER: stacks
The use of a computation model containing one of these elements allows one to prove the version of
the pumping lemma that replicates two sections of a string in parallel. A deterministic finite
automaton with two of these elements is equivalent to a Turing machine, while the set of context free
languages can be recognized by a DFA with one of these modifications, a model known as a PDA.
Allocating memory in a region with this name relies on its namesake (*) frames and is contrasted with
dynamic memory allocation, which uses the heap. The data structure of this name supports operations like
"peek", which looks at the top element without removing it. For 10 points, name this data structure which
uses operations like "push" and "pop" to support last-in first-out access.
ANSWER: stacks
In C, the alloca keyword allocates space on this thing, which is thus automatically freed when the
function returns to its caller. Every function call reserves a frame, or activation record, on this thing,
which is where the function's local variables are stored unless they are allocated using malloc, in
which case they are stored on the heap. Big O of n space is required on it by recursive functions -
with n the depth of recursive calls - but that can be reduced to big O of one by implementing tail
recursion, thus avoiding a common (*) "overflow". The first-taught way to make depth-first search
non-recursive is to use this data structure. Reverse Polish notation is conceptualized using it. Insertion and
deletion in it is called push and pop, respectively. For 10 points, name this last-in first-out data structure that
contrasts with the first-in first-out queue.
ANSWER: stack
The shunting-yard algorithm evaluates operators using this structure, which helps reduce memory
access by leaving operators at the end of operands, a format known as reverse Polish notation. The
x87 floating point architecture organizes 8 registers into this structure that uses FXCH instructions
to swap registers, although it may still encounter its namesake (*) "overflows" common to flat registers.
One method to inspect but not modify these structures is the peek operation, although they fundamentally
run by push and pop from the top. For ten points, identify these last-in-first-out data structures.
ANSWER: stack
Reverse Polish notation uses this data structure for memory storage. The language PostScript is said to be
oriented to these data structures, which are not found in Python because, in that language, two of this
structure's key operations can be implemented on any list. These restricted data structures, which were first
proposed by Frederich Bauer, are typically implemented through a singly linked list or through a to-do box.
To add or remove data to these structures, the "push" or "pop" operation can be used. For 10 points, name
this last-in, first-out data structure.
ANSWER: stacks
This structure is the form in which local variables, function parameters and other non-explicitly
allocated data are stored in memory. The call one of these structures contains frames that control program
flow; a common debugging method "traces" that one. A depth-first search uses this structure, unlike a
breadth-first search. The operations push and pop operate on this data structure. For 10 points, identify this
last-in first-out data structure.
ANSWER: stack
Languages that support continuation often employ the "spaghetti" form of these entities. Entities
of this name can use canaries to check for unexpected values. Attacks on those entities employ
smashing, and they can be both wound and unwound. Those entities of this name contain data like
the (*) return address and a function's local variables. A data structure of this name was used to store data
in calculators that used reverse Polish notation. Along with the heap, it's where data is stored. This is also
the name of a data structure that supports push and pop operations. For 10 points, give this name for a data
structure that, unlike a queue, operates on a "last in, first out" principle.
ANSWER: stacks
Donald Knuth showed that a permutation can be sorted with one of these data structures if and only if it
does not contain the pattern "two three one". In C-based languages, memory allocation at runtime takes
place in the heap and in this data structure, and they are implemented in reverse Polish notation for
calculations. Some variants of this data structure make use of an operation to "peek" at the top element,
although there are only two essential operations, one which adds an element to the top and the other which
removes the top element; those operations are push and pop. For ten points, name this last-in-first-out data
structure.
ANSWER: stack (accept last-in-first-out or LIFO before mentioned)
An algorithm that uses this data structure can be used to do a topological sort and has an iterative
deepening form. Divide and conquer algorithms can be implemented iteratively using one of these,
and the alternative to heap-based memory allocation is based on one of these. They are used to
implement Reverse Polish notation calculations as well as the aforementioned (*) depth-first search,
and their fundamental operations are push and pop. For 10 points, name this last-in, first-out data
structure, in which adds and removes both occur on the "top."
ANSWER: stacks
In C++, the keyword "this" is a pointer stored in a data structure of this type. An overflow for named this
type of data structure if the "call" one has its memory overused. The elements of it can be pushed and pop,
and they operate under the "last in, first out" paradigm. For 10 points, name this "vertical" counterpart to
the queue.
ANSWER: stack
Expressions in postfix notation can be evaluated using one of these structures, while infix
expressions require two of them. This data structure can be implemented with a linked list and a
pointer to one end of the list. Commands issued by a computer program are stored on the "call" type.
They may (*) overflow if too much information is stored in them. They use the "push" and "pop"
operations to add and remove elements. For 10 points, name this last in, first out data structure, often
contrasted with a queue.
ANSWER: stacks
Canaries can help detect smashing operations against an entity of this name. This type of data structure is
used to perform the backtracking steps in depth-first searches and can easily support operations on a reverse
Polish notation calculator. Infinite recursion can cause an entity of this name to overflow. When this data
structure is implemented with a singly-linked list, the head of the linked list is removed in the pop operation,
unlike a pop operation on a queue. For 10 points, name this last-in, first-out data structure.
ANSWER: call stacks
Inspection of this data structure is a security mechanism implemented by the JVM to accommodate
untrusted code. A data structure of this type is used to store information about subroutines of a process.
That structure can be subject to an overflow when recursion is used and is prefixed by the word call. This
data structure can be used to easily reverse the order of a set. The push and pop operations are performed
on this data structure. For 10 points, name this last in first out data structure contrasted with a queue.
ANSWER: stack
Activation frames are stored in this type of data structure. Adding and removing those frames is called
winding and unwinding, respectively, and this stores memory concerning a program's subroutines.
Programs such as Java have a "peek" function which allows the top value in one of these structures to be
accessed without being removed. The most basic operations on this structure are "push" and "pop." For 10
points, name this last-in-first-out data structure.
ANSWER: stack [or call stack]
A set of corporate practices developed by Motorola and practiced by 3M and Raytheon, among
others, is named for this, implying exceptional quality and almost no manufacturing defects. The socalled empirical rule, or 68-95-99.7 rule, relates area to distance, which is expressed in terms of this
quantity. The z-score is computed by subtracting mu from the individual raw score, then dividing the
difference by this (*) number, in a process known as normalization. For the Wechsler IQ test it is 15, while
for the Stanford-Binet it is 16. It is the root mean square of the differences between each data point and the
arithmetic mean. Also defined as the square root of the variance, it is denoted by the Greek letter sigma.
FTP, in statistics, this is a measure of the spread of values in a random variable or a probability distribution.
ANSWER: standard deviation (prompt on "sigma" before it is mentioned and prompt on "six sigma" before "empirical rule")
The probability of a random variable differing from its mean by more than this value is given by
Chebyshev's theorem. This quantity divided by the mean equals the coefficient of variation. Z-values are
expressed in units of this value from the mean. This quantity divided by the square root of the sample size
equals the standard error. For a normal distribution, around 68% of values lie within this value of the mean.
Symbolized by a lowercase sigma, this value is equal to the square root of the variance. For 10 points, name
this measure of variation in a distribution.
ANSWER: standard deviation
Mean difference is divided by this quantity to calculate Cohen's d, which measures effect size. This
quantity equals the square root of the quantity number of trials times probability of success times
probability of failure for a binomial distribution. It is squared in the denominator of Chebyshev's
inequality, which guarantees at least a certain number of values close to the mean of a distribution.
This quantity is multiplied by the square root of two pi in a denominator to normalize the (*)
Gaussian distribution. The difference between a score and the mean is divided by this quantity to calculate
z-scores. It equals the square root of the expected value of the quantity score minus mean, quantity squared.
For 10 points, name this square root of variance.
ANSWER: standard deviation
Chebyshev's inequality states that 1 divided by n squared, where n is this measure, will give the
percentage of values that exceed this quantity. The correlation coefficient times the y values of this
measure over the x values of this measure gives the slope of a regression line. The empirical rule
states that (*) sixty-eight percent of a normal data distribution will fall within one of these, while to find a
z-score one subtracts the average from a given value and divides by this quantity. For 10 points, give this
name for the square root of variance, a measure that indicates how spread out data is.
ANSWER: standard deviation
The slope of a regression equation is the correlation coefficient times the quotient of this value of the y
variables over this value of the x variables. This value for adding or subtracting the values of two samples
can be found by adding these values from the two samples in quadrature. A z-score for a finding the
likelihood of people at least a certain distance away from the mean can be calculated by taking the distance
from the mean over this value of the distribution. For ten points, name this measure of how separated the
data are, the square root of the variance.
ANSWER: standard deviation
An approximate unbiased estimator for this quantity is given by a "one over n minus 1.5" estimator.
It is invariant to change of location and scales directly with change of scale. Chebyshev's inequality
links the distribution function to this quantity for arbitrary distributions, and the stronger "empirical
rule" can be used for normally distributed data. Unlike a related measure of dispersion, it takes the same
units as the data it describes. For ten points, identify this quantity that for discrete distributions is the rootmean-square distance of values from the mean, the square root of the variance.
ANSWER: Standard Deviation
This statement provides the duality between the homology of chains and the de Rahm
cohomology. This statement can be used to show that the codifferential is the adjoint of the
exterior derivative when considering the Hodge dual on manifolds. This statement is used to
generate a contradiction when smoothly retracting a ball onto its boundary in the proof of the
Brouwer fixed point theorem. The most general form of this statement relates the integral of the
exterior derivative of a differential form over some manifold to its integral over the boundary of
the same manifold. For a planar curve, this result reduces to Green's theorem. For 10 points,
name this theorem from vector calculus, which states that the surface integral of the curl of a
function dotted with the normal is equal to the line integral of the function around a boundary of
the surface.
ANSWER: Stokes's theorem
Two answers needed. The Poncelet-Steiner theorem states that one is unnecessary if you can use the other
one, and the Mohr-Mascheroni theorem says one of them is unnecessary. One can be used, along with
dividers, to create the Pythagorean extensions of the rationals. Considered in algebraic terms, they can only
produce constructible numbers, and as a result one cannot construct every regular polygon with them, nor
can one double the volume of a cube with them. One also cannot use them to find a square with the area of
a given circle, but with a quadratrix, one can trisect a curve with them. For 10 points, identify these two
mechanical devices used in classical Greek geometry.
ANSWER: straightedge and compass [prompt on "ruler" for straightedge; accept answers in either order]
The set of all of these variables that can exist over a set of symbols V is given by the Kleene
(clean) Star of V, and regular expressions are commonly used to manipulate these variables. The
"literal" type of these variables is created using bracket delimiters, and the trim function is used to
remove whitespace from them. They commonly use UTF-8 or ASCII (ASK-ee) encoding, and several
of them can be (*) joined together in concatenation. For 10 points, name these variables that are often used
to store sequences of symbols, especially text.
ANSWER: string
The Kleene star is a superset of data of this type. In FORTRAN, Hollerith notation is used to identify this
type of data. Regular expressions are used to match this type of data. Splitting these up based on a delimiter
is called tokenizing. In C, these are classified as either "byte" or "wide." When these are placed directly into
source code, they are called "literals". In Java, a plus sign is used to concatenate two of these together. Data
of this type is often set off by quotation marks. This type of data can be represented as an array of char data.
Parsing is used specifically on this kind of data, which may include prefixes and suffixes. For 10 points,
name this type of data which represents text.
ANSWER: strings [or characters; prompt on "text" or same-knowledge equivalents before mention]
The C functions that "copy" and "cat" these objects are particularly vulnerable to security errors. Common
functions that operate on these objects include "left", "trim" and "split". They can be searched by the
Rabin-Karp algorithm. It's not a hashcode or a clone, but every object in Java contains a method that
converts the object "to" one of these data structures. They can be searched with regular expressions, and in
C are stored in an array of characters ending with a null-terminator. For 10 points, name these data
structures which can be used to store text.
ANSWER: strings
These structures make up the set resulting from the Kleene Star of a set, and in a regular language all ones
of sufficient length can be pumped. Searches in them can be accomplished by the the Boyer-Moore or the
Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm. C-style ones are arrays terminated by a null and encoding methods include
EBDIC, Unicode, and ASCII. They can be concatenated, reversed, or made all uppercase or lowercase. For
10 points, name these computer science constructs which are made from a series of characters and contain
text.
ANSWER: strings
One algorithm for searching these variables creates a pair of shift tables, while another one generates a
rolling hash. In addition to the Boyer-Moore and Rabin-Karp algorithm, another method that uses partial
matches to search them generates a failure table and is named for Knuth, Morris, and Pratt. Prolog and
Erlang lack these variables entirely, which in modern systems can use the UTF-16 encoding system. The
trim function cuts spaces from these variables, which can also be acted on by the uppercase and lowercase
functions. FTP, name these variables that store text.
ANSWER: string
The languages awk and sed were developed specifically to manipulate these data types. One
algorithm implements a rolling hash to search for multiple target patterns in data of this type; that
algorithm is named for Rabin and Karp. In the C language, these are null-terminated. When these
data types appear explicitly in source code, they are called literal and might require escape sequences to
access certain characters. Regular expressions can be used to match these types of data, and each element
of one of these could be expressed in unicode. For 10 points, name this data type which represents a list of
characters, such as a name or phrase.
ANSWER: String [prompt on "patterns"]
Finite state automata accept languages, which are a set of these constructs. Regular expressions
work on these constructs. In Java, these constructs can be concatenated with a plus symbol. They are
terminated with a null character in C. Their printf format is a percent sign followed by a (*) s. They
are most often surrounded by double quotes when declared. For 10 points, identify this data type that
consists of a sequence of characters.
ANSWER: string
The Myhill-Nerode relation is defined on sets of these and a set of them is called a formal
language. C style ones are null terminated and search algorithms on them include Boyer-Moore and
the KMP algorithm. Combining two of them is called (*) concatenation and in some cases matching
them can be accomplished by regular expressions. Common encoding methods used include Unicode and
ASCII. For 10 points, name these sequences of characters used to store text on computers.
ANSWER: strings [prompt on words]
The size of the minimal description of one of these objects is known as its Kolmogorov complexity. In
C, these entities can be copied with a fixed size to prevent buffer overflow. They can be prefixed with their
length, or stored with a special terminating character at the end in the "null-terminated" variety present in
C. Operations on these data types include concatenation and checking whether they're empty. For 10 points,
name this data type that represents a sequence of characters.
ANSWER: strings
The number of changes needed to convert from one of these objects to another one is measured by
the Levenshtein distance. A set of these objects is generated by the Kleene star operation. These
objects are the inputs to the Knuth-Morris-Pratt and Rabin-Karp algorithms. P-examples of these
variables are length prefixed, while C-style examples of these variables are (*) null-terminated. Two of
them can be joined into one via concatenation. In C these variables are enclosed in double quotes during
declaration. In Linux, these variables can be searched using the "grep" operation. For 10 points, name this
data type consisting of a sequence of characters, which is often used to store text.
ANSWER: strings [prompt on "str"]
Definite finite automata accept a language, or set of these things. In C, these things are null-terminated,
and they are operated on by regular expressions. The most well-known example of an immutable object is
an instance of the class in Java known by this name. The constitutive elements of these things can be
encoded with ASCII or UTF-8. These things are joined end-to-end by concatenation. For 15 points, identify
this data type often implemented as an array of characters.
ANSWER: strings
On UNIX systems, sed and grep tools are used to work with files as if they were instances of this data
type. In programming languages like Java, the split method will break apart one of these into an array of
these. In C, these structures are null terminated. These objects can be matched or searched using regular
expressions. Individual units in this data type are encoded in ASCII (ASS-kee) or Unicode. For 10 points,
name this data type that is a sequence of characters.
ANSWER: string [or text until it is read]
The Weierstrass type of this process uses the function the tangent of the quantity x over two, and this type
of cipher is exemplified by the monoalphabetic cipher. This word refers to a type of integration method that
often uses hyperbolic or circular trigonometric functions depending on the integrand, though any function
can be used. This word also refers to a method for solving systems of equations that is easy to use when one
of the equations is in slope-intercept form. Name this term, sometimes referring to a type of transformation,
that is synonymous with replacement.
ANSWER: substitution
One statement proved in this construct is that any given set undergoing pairwise intersection with
other sets containing XYZ, XZ, or YZ must not contain Z. If, in this construct, each set in a collection
is reduced to two elements per set, then the collection is inconsistent, which results in a prohibited
Bivalue Universal Grave. In this construct, the Swordfish can be utilized as an extension of X-wing
elimination. The assumption of uniqueness in this construct leads to the application of locked sets in
the Unique Rectangle method. Every singleton in this construct has exactly (*) twenty buddies, eight of
which always reside in a "house." This, when completed, forms a special kind of Latin square. For 10
points, name this puzzle where the challenger must fill a nine-by-nine grid with digits so that each column,
each row, and each of the nine three-by-three sub-grids contains the digits from 1 to 9.
ANSWER: Sudoku puzzle
Shrake and Rupley introduced a rolling ball algorithm to calculate a form of this quantity applied to
biomolecules that had been developed earlier by Lee and Richards. The polar form of this quantity
should be limited to sixty square angstroms for molecules intended to cross the blood-brain barrier.
Schwarz demonstrated that different methods of approximating this quantity, unlike (*) arc length, as
using limiting polyhedra can give different values. This quantity is infinite in Gabriel's horn, and the folds
formed by the mitochondrial inner membrane exist to maximize this quantity. Its ratio to volume is
minimized for the sphere. For 10 points, name this measure of a solid, equal for a sphere to four times pi
times the radius squared.
ANSWER: surface area
For a unit hypercube of dimension d, this quantity equals two to the d minus two times d choose
two. For many shapes, the derivative of volume with respect to inradius is equal to this quantity. The
cylindrical shell method finds volume by integrating this quantity for the cylinders. This quantity
equals six times the side-length squared for a (*) cube and four pi radius-squared for a sphere. For 10
points, identify this quantity, equal to the area of all exposed faces of a figure.
ANSWER: surface area
For a parameterized region, this quantity is equal to the double integral of the square root of the
quantity one plus the squares of partial derivatives for x and y. Another formula for calculating this
quantity is equal to the double integral of the cross product of the vectors Tu and Tv over the region
D. For a cone, this quantity is pi times the radius times the quantity of the radius plus the slant height.
For a sphere, this quantity equals 4 times pi times the radius squared; for a square, this quantity is equal to
six times the side length squared. For 10 points, name this quantity equal to the exposed area of an object.
ANSWER: surface area
The solution to these objects may be represented as a determinant of a square matrix divided by another
determinant. One way to obtain a solution to them involves rewriting a matrix in reduced row echelon form.
In addition to Kramer's Rule and Gaussian Elimination, another method of solving them involves
substituting a variable for elimination. The point of intersection of their graphs is another representation of
their solution. For 10 points, give the term for a group of linear equations using the same variables.
ANSWER: systems of linear equations [prompt on linear equations]
A relation is said to possess the "anti" type of this property when it implies A and B are equal if the relation
holds for A to B and B to A. This property also gives its name to a set theory operation which takes as
inputs sets A and B, and returns the difference of elements that are found in either set, but not both sets.
This type of function, such as f = x+y, produces the same output when the order of the inputs are altered. In
linear algebra, this type of matrix is equal to its own transpose. In order for a relation to be an equivalence
relation, it must possess transitivity, reflexivity and this other property. For 10 points, name this common
mathematical property, which for a polygon, implies that an axis can be drawn through the polygon to
create two mirror images.
ANSWER: symmetric [accept word forms]
This term can describe a differential equation transformation that does not change the solutions. Emmy
Noether's first theorem states that every example of this phenomenon in a system corresponds to a
conserved quantity, and this term can be used synonymously with invariance in mathematics. This type of
relation maps y to x whenever it maps x to y, and functions of this type are classified as even or odd. This
property of equality says that if a equals b, then b equals a. Give this term that can be classified as
rotational, translational, or reflection.
ANSWER: symmetry (accept word forms such as symmetric, accept invariance before it is mentioned)
The set of all of these for a field extension has the structure of a Galois group. The coefficients of a monic
polynomial are described by elementary polynomials with this property. A physical system with this
property has a corresponding conserved quantity, according to Noether's theorem. The 17 wallpaper groups
describe this property for two-dimensional patterns like wall tilings. Odd functions have this property
relative to the origin, and even functions have it relative to the y-axis. For 10 points, name this property
whose reflective form is possessed by shapes that look the same as their mirror images.
ANSWER: symmetry or automorphism [accept word forms, prompt on permutability]
The person who developed this technique poked holes in the findings of the Lanarkshire milk
experiment. Nonparametric alternatives to this technique include the Mann-Whitney U test and Wilcoxon
signed rank test. Welch's version of this technique assumes that the two populations being compared have
unequal variance. A "paired" version of this test is often used to analyze data taken from "matched pairs"
samples. This test was first developed to measure the quality of Guinness beer by William Gosset, who
published its description under the pseudonym "Student." For 10 points, name this statistical test typically
used when the data is assumed to be normally distributed but the population mean and standard deviation
are unknown, a common alternative to a z-test.
ANSWER: Student's t-test
The caption element must be a direct child of this element, which used to be popular for web page
layout but has been superseded for that purpose by CSS with div tags. Zebra striping may be used
to make these parts of web pages easier to read. Its children, which can be grouped into thead ["T
head"], tbody ["T question"], and tfoot ["T foot"], are tr ["T R"] sections; they in turn contain th ["T
H"] and td ["T D"] tags that produce cells. Name this HTML tag that creates a grid with rows and
columns.
ANSWER: table tag
Asymptotes of the graph of this non-reciprocal function are separated by an interval of pi and
centered at the origin. Unlike some closely related functions, the graph of it and its reciprocal do not
have defined amplitude. The slope of a line can be found with this (*) trigonometric function. In a right
triangle, it is equal to the length of a leg opposite an angle divided by the length of the leg adjacent to the
angle. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function, the ratio of the sine and cosine functions.
ANSWER: tangent
Johann Lambert expressed this function as the continued fraction "x over one minus x-squared over three
minus x-squared," and so on. The hyperbolic type of this function is equal to "e to the two x minus one over
e to the two x plus one." The parametric equations "x equals secant of t" and "y equals this function of t"
describe an east-west opening hyperbola with semi-major and semi-minor axes of one. The Maclaurin series
for this function begins "x plus x-cubed over three plus two x to the fifth over fifteen," and this function's
derivative is secant-squared. For 10 points, name this function defined as sine over cosine, or the ratio of
opposite to adjacent sides in a right triangle.
ANSWER: tangent [accept addition of "of x" or any other variable]
The Weierstrass substitution uses a half-angle input to this function to simplify complex
trigonometric integrals to integrals of simple rational functions. The hyperbolic form of this function,
of z, is equal to the exponential of two z, minus one all over exponential of two z, plus one. The
half-angle formula for this function is commonly given as the difference of cosecant and cotangent.
The integral of this function of x is equal to the negative natural log of cosine of x. One (*) plus its
square yield secant squared. From the left, this function approaches positive infinity - a vertical asymptote
- when its input is an odd integer times pi over two. For 10 points, name this function that is the ratio of
sine and cosine, or opposite and adjacent sides.
ANSWER: tangent
This function gives the length of a segment perpendicular to the terminal side of an angle going from
the unit circle to the x-axis, and it also equals the length of a vertical segment from the terminal
side to the point (1, 0) ["one comma zero"]. The antiderivative of this function includes the opposite
of the natural log of the absolute value of the cosine function, and the derivative of this function is
always positive. The domain of this function is the same as the domain of the secant function since
it is all numbers whose cosine is not zero. Name this function given by the ratio y divided by x on
the unit circle, and the ratio "opposite leg over adjacent leg" on a right triangle.
ANSWER: tangent
The coefficients in this function's Taylor series can be found in the Bernoulli numbers. This
function's hyperbolic variety appears in the expression for the scalar boost function in special
relativity. Its derivative is secant squared, which is also related to the square of this function by a
transformed version of the Pythagorean identity. This function is (*)discontinuous at odd half-integer
multiples of pi such as pi over two and three pi over two. For 10 points, name this trigonometric function
equal to sine over cosine, or the length of the opposite side of a right triangle over its adjacent side.
ANSWER: tangent
This function's Taylor series begins x plus one-third x cubed plus two-fifteenths x to the fifth, and its
derivative is secant squared. Its Pythagorean identity says that it squared plus one equals the secant
squared. Like its reciprocal, this function has period (*) pi and equals 1 for an input of 45 degrees. For
10 points, name this trig function equal to sine over cosine, or in a right triangle, the opposite side over the
adjacent side.
ANSWER: tangent function (accept answers like tan(gent) of x or tan(gent) of theta)
Substitutions of this function can help integrate functions that contain the square root of the quantity k
squared plus x squared, and a ratio with this function in both its numerator and denominator is used to find
the ratio of the difference of two side lengths in a triangle divided by the sum of the same two side lengths.
The graph of the hyperbolic version of this function has horizontal asymptotes at positive and negative one,
and the graph of the inverse of this function has horizontal asymptotes at positive and negative pi over two.
The square of this function plus one equals the square of the secant function, and the name of this function
is used to describe a line that touches a curve at one point. Name this trigonometric function that equals sine
divided by cosine, and which for an acute angle in a righttriangle equals the length of the opposite leg
divided by that of the adjacent leg.
ANSWER: tangent function [accept tangent of x, etc.; do not accept "cotangent"]
A Olshanskii managed to prove that one mathematical object named for this figure exists, and that
object is used as a counterexample to Burnsides problem and is a group with every subgroup being
cyclic with prime order. His namesake plank problem looks at coverings of convex objects in ndimensional Euclidean space, and one problem posited by him asks whether the real numbers with
the exponential function is decidable. This man created an axiomatization of the real numbers, and
attempted to resolve the liar paradox by distinguishing an object language from a metalanguage,
known as his namsake truth definition. A more famous concept named for this man was originally derived
from the Vitali set, and shows that bounded subsets of 3-D Euclidean space with non-empty interiors are
equidecomposable. For 10 points, name this Polish mathematician who names a paradox about breaking
apart and reassembling a sphere with Banach.
ANSWER: Alfred Tarski
Some versions of the theorem named for this person have the Radius of Convergence Theorem built into
them. His namesake theorem applies to functions that are smooth at x=0. Additionally, some versions have
a term attributed to Lagrange or Cauchy to account for errors. His theorem develops polynomials from
repeatedly differentiable functions. Name this person whose namesake polynomials, a specific case of
which are MacLaurin series, use derivatives and factorials to approximate a function.
ANSWER: Brook Taylor
One property of these functions can be calculated by taking the limit supremum of an associate
sequence to the one over n, according to the Cauchy-Hadamard theorem. Another important property for
them can be rewritten into Schlomilch form. These functions are used to define matrix exponentials. For
complex holomorphic functions, these functions will always converge. Laurent names an object that
generalizes them. Using their namesake's theorem, one can calculate an appropriate term for these items
with a radius of convergence. An analytic function is equal to its this function at every points in an open
interval. The exponential function can expressed in terms of these by a power divided by a factorial. For 10
points, name these infinite sums named for an English mathematician, used to approximate functions.
ANSWER: Taylor series [accept Maclaurin series I guess; prompt on power series]
An algorithm for solving differential equations in terms of a specific type of one is called the ParkerSochacki method. For an analytic function whose derivatives are all zero in some circular radius, one of
these can be used to show that the function is explicitly zero within that radius. Laurent expanded on this to
include negative degrees, and one is commonly used to prove Euler's formula. For 10 points, identify this
expansion of a function in terms of its derivatives at a point, a type of which is the Maclaurin series.
ANSWER: Taylor series
Performing this operation on the Riemann zeta function yields the Stieltjes constants. For a static
charge distribution, the multipole moments can be found by performing this operation over the potential
function in terms of Cartesian coordinates. A second-order approximation of this procedure is used to
mathematically prove the small angle approximation. Complex functions are represented with an alternate
procedure named for Laurent. The term obtained from the n+1 iteration of this procedure is used to find the
R sub n of x, or its remainder. When centered at zero, the Maclaurin series is obtained. For 10 points, name
this way to use a function's derivatives to represent it as an infinite sum of terms.
ANSWER: Taylor expansion [or Taylor series]
The Vegas version of it was developed by Peterson and Malley and tries to improve performance based on
measured speed rather than correcting for failures. It uses an AdvertisedWindow field, which prevents too
many unacknowledged bytes being sent. Tahoe and Reno are two techniques for congestion avoidance
developed at AT&T; it also uses a SequenceNum in its header to reorder shuffled sliding window
messages. A three-way handshake initiates a connection between ports; 80 is the standard used for
webpages. Often paired with the Internet Protocol for the transport layer, for ten points, name this protocol
used to transmit data between computers.
ANSWER: Transmission Control Protocol or TCP
The comma and semicolon derivatives act on these. Absolute ones are relative ones of weight zero. One
manipulation technique of these is called index gymnastics. Antisymmetric ones change sign upon
changing the order of two components. In Lorentzian spaces, the covariant and contravariant order of them
are not the same, unlike in three-dimensional space. These can be contracted to produce vectors. The
product of two of these is in general a new one with rank equal to the sum of their ranks. For 10 points,
name these generalizations of scalars and vectors; mathematical objects generally representable as matrices.
ANSWER: tensors [prompt on matrices]
One type of this procedure is a triply-eponymous method that counts how many times somebody from a
stronger sample beats somebody from a weaker sample, quantified as capital U. In addition to the
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney type, the Wald type of this procedure determines whether or not a parameter
exists, and the Yates type corrects the Pearson chi-square type, which, like the type that uses the Student's tdistribution, requires finding the degrees of freedom to calculate the p-value necessary to reject the null
hypothesis. Give the name common to these procedures which determine whether or not a result is
statistically significant.
ANSWER: statistical hypothesis testing of significance
Finding an optimal one of these procedures for two normal distributions is known as the Behrens-Fisher
problem. Wilks- theorem gives a general way to construct one of these procedures based on the likelihood
ratio, which is the optimal one according to the Neyman-Pearson lemma. Their typical goal is to maximize
power while controlling Type I error below a threshold called the significance level. Inverting the
acceptance region of one of them gives a confidence interval, and they produce a p-value that describes the
probability of obtaining some result under the null hypothesis. For 10 points, name these statistical practices
that come in z, t, and chi-square varieties.
ANSWER: hypothesis test
This object can be rotated into itself and reflected into itself in 12 distinct ways each, for a total of 4factorial isometries. This object is the convex hull of four mutually equidistant points, and is thus the 3simplex. These objects have one-sixth the volume of their enclosing parallelepiped. This self-dual object
makes up the 3-dimensional Sierpinski gasket. An octahedron can be stellated by gluing one of these objects
to each face of the octahedron. Root 3 times edge length squared gives the surface area of this simplest
Platonic solid, a variety of triangular pyramid. For 10 points, name this regular polyhedron with four
triangular faces.
ANSWER: regular tetrahedron [or regular tetrahedra; or regular 3-simplex before "simplex" is read; prompt on "triangular pyramid"]
The dihedral [die-HEED-rul] angles for this shape have a cosine equal to one-third, and the angle between
an edge and an opposite face has a cosine of one over the square root of three. Its volume can be found by
cubing an edge length and multiplying by the square root of two over twelve, and its surface area can be
found by squaring an edge length and multiplying by the square root of three. This is the three-dimensional
simplex. Name this Platonic figure for which each vertex is the vertex of three triangles and that has four
faces.
ANSWER: tetrahedron (accept trianglebased pyramid or triangularbased pyramid, prompt on "pyramid" or "simplex")
The Mobius configuration consists of two of these figures mutually inscribed, the projection of one of
which onto the plane gives a complete 4-graph. They have volume equal to one-sixth of a vector triple
product, and, when one of these shapes is inscribed in the non-adjacent vertices of a unit (*) cube, it
has volume one-third. Regular ones have volume equal to side-length-cubed over 6 times the square root of
2, and surface area root-three times side-length-squared. For ten points, identify this 3-dimensional figure
whose regular variety is the simplest Platonic solid, consisting of 4 triangular faces.
ANSWER: regular tetrahedron (prompt on "triangular pyramid")
These objects cannot tile space exactly, but a 2010 paper by Chen, Engel, and Glotzer shows that they can
pack at least eighty-five percent of space. Hilbert's Third Problem asked whether two of these objects with
the same volume could be sliced and rearranged into each other. Any polyhedron can be decomposed into
copies of this shape. The vertices of an icosahedron can be partitioned into five copies of the vertices of this
shape, whose regular version has symmetry group S4. For ten points, identify this smallest Platonic solid, a
polyhedron with four triangular sides.
ANSWER: tetrahedron (do not accept "regular tetrahedron" after the second sentence)
Behind Samsung and Intel, this company is the third largest manufacturer of semiconductors in the
world. Patrick Haggerty was integral to this company's success as he brought onboard Gordon Teal and
Willis Adcock. Their development of the 7400 series of TTL chips resulted in the popularity of integrated
circuits being used for computer logic. For 10 points, name this company famous for its graphing calculator
series that include the 83 and 83-Plus.
ANSWER: Texas Instruments
Virtual machines may make use of a green variety of these constructs, while misordering of these can
cause priority inversion. An Intel technology to implement these transparently in hardware was first
introduced in the Xeon, and lC-slowing of these constructs can mimic "barrel" devices that use them.
Instances of these that access I/O may be blocking, so that these are manipulated by a scheduler.
These constructs are necessary to take advantage of (*) multi-core CPUs and to switch between them the
OS must context switch. Many of these implement semaphores to avoid race conditions. For 10 points,
name sub-processes created by a fork command that can run concurrently.
ANSWER: Threads [prompt on "process" until mentioned]
The proto types of these are more lightweight because they do not contain a stack, while the break
and squeeze operations are used in micro ones. Solutions to get around one of their problems can be
found in Peterson's and Dekker's Algorithms, both of which are examples of (*) mutex
algorithms. Functions that interact well of these, such as reentrant functions, are characterized by not
returning static pointers and by protecting shared variables. In C, the posix type of them is usually used, and
semaphores and locks help avoid race conditions and help synchronize them. For 10 points, name these
programming constructs which allow for concurrently executing processes.
ANSWER: Execution Threads (or Threads of Execution)
Removing the open middle fraction with this number in the denominator is how one forms the
Cantor set. Tartaglia communicated a method for solving polynomials of this degree to Cardano.
This is the minimum number of points needed to uniquely define a (*) plane. Like nine, a natural
number is divisible by this number if the sum of its digits is divisible by this number. For 10 points, name
this smallest odd prime which is also the number of sides of a triangle.
ANSWER: three
A now disproven paper by Petrovsky and Landis claimed that a system of two quadratic differential
equations could have at most this many limit cycles. Twice-continuously differentiable functions of two
variables have this many distinct second-order partial derivatives, and this is the lowest number of
dimensions in which the cross product of two vectors is defined. It is the standard deviation of a random
variable with variance 9, and-provided they are not collinear-the number of points necessary to define a
quadratic function or a plane. Identify this second smallest prime number, which is also the degree of a
cubic function.
ANSWER: three (3)
This number is lucky in China because it sounds like the word alive, while in Vietnam taking a photo
with this many people is unlucky. Georges Dumezil divided prehistoric Indo-European society into
this many number of classes, and any number that is not of the form 4^n times quantity 8m+7 can be
written as the sum of this many squares. Platyhelminthes possesses this many (*) germ layers and
alkynes have this many bonds between two carbon atoms. It is the first Fermat prime and the first Mersenne
prime, as well as the first odd prime number. For ten points, name this number that is the sum of the first
two positive integers.
ANSWER: three (3)
The Seifert-van Kampen theorem in the algebraic subset of this branch of mathematics describes a property
of the unions of groups. One connection between this area of mathematics and number theory is
Furstenberg's proof of the infinitude of primes. Closure under arbitrary union and finite intersection is a
requirement of spaces in this branch. Properties of spaces in this field of study include metrizability,
compactness, and connectedness, and pairs of objects cannot represent homeomorphisms if they have
different numbers of holes. Name this branch in which a torus and a coffee cup are considered equivalent
because it is not concerned with properties changed by deformations of objects.
ANSWER: topology
Furstenberg's proof of the infinitude of primes defines one of these using arithmetic sequences as a
basis. Alternative definitions for these can be given by the Kuratowski closure axioms or in terms of
interior algebras. Urysohn's lemma is used to construct continuous functions on normal ones.
Neighborhood, convergence, and openness are generally defined using these objects, which consist a
set and a (*) namesake subset of the power set of that set that includes both the empty set and the complete
space and that is closed under arbitrary unions and finite intersections. Metric spaces are examples of these
that satisfy the T2 separation condition also named for Hausdorff. For 10 points, name these mathematical
objects, named for the branch of mathematics to which they are central, the study of properties preserved in
deformations.
ANSWER: topologies [or topological spaces]
Applying an inversion to this figure gives the Dupin cyclide, and the systole and area of one of these
figures is related by Loewner's inequality. The Weyl group can be defined as the normalizer of a group
isomorphic to one of these figures, modulo the centralizer of said group. A compact Lie Group has a
maximal one of these, and the standard one of these requires seven colors to color according to the
Heawood conjecture. Double and triple ones of these have more than one handle, and N-dimensional ones
are the direct product of a circle with itself n times. FTP, name this shape important in topology which is
homeomorphic to the coffee cup and is shaped like a donut.
ANSWER: Torus
This term refers to a knot which is defined in cylindrical polar coordinates by the equations "r equals 2 plus
cosine of p theta over q", and "z equals sin of p theta over q", where p and q are relatively prime integers.
The fundamental group of one of these objects is equal to the cartesian product of the integers with
themselves. The Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser theorem concerns quasiperiodic orbits described by
trajectories moving on the surface of one of these objects, which can be viewed as the cartesian product of
two circles. By the Heawood conjecture, 7 colors are needed to color this genus one surface, which can be
obtained by gluing opposite edges of a rectangle together with no twists. For 10 points, identify this kind of
three-dimensional surface with a single hole, whose name describes the shape of a donut.
ANSWER: torus [accept word forms like toroidal before "objects"]
Two of the four circles that can be drawn at any point on this shape are named for Villarceau. An integrable
Hamiltonian system can only move on a surface with this shape according to the Kolmogorov-ArnoldMoser theorem. Like the Klein bottle, it has an Euler characteristic of zero. At most, seven colors are used
be used to color a map of this shape, according to the Heawood conjecture. Its surface area equals four pi
squared times the product of the inner and outer radii. It is topologically defined as the product of two
circles. For 10 points, name this three-dimensional surface shaped like a doughnut.
ANSWER: torus [or tori; or toroidal]
Lawson's conjecture states that one of these objects named for Clifford is the only one that is
minimally embedded in S-3. The rank of a compact Lie group is equal to the dimension of the
maximal one of these entities in G. The n-dimensional one of these entities is defined by finding
the product space of n circles. Seven colors are required to color the surface of one of these
entities, and the volume of one of these entities is equal to 2 pi squared times outer radius times
inner radius squared. For 10 points, name this surface that is famously homotopic to a coffee
cup, since both have a single hole, a surface of revolution generated by rotating a circle through
an axis not intersecting and co-planar with it.
ANSWER: torus [prompt on "donut"]
This shape is a a Dupin cyclide of characteristic one comma one. Like the Klein Bottle and
cylinder, it has an Euler characteristic of zero, and the ordinary one has a genus of one. According to
the Heawood conjecture, it can be colored with seven colors. It can be described as the (*) Cartesian
product of two circles. It can be constructed by gluing the opposite edges of a rectangle together with no
twists. For 10 points, name this donut-shaped mathematical surface.
ANSWER: torus
It takes at most seven colors to fill in a map drawn on this surface. This shape, which consists of all
points a given distance from a given circle, can be mapped to a rectangle whose left and right edges
and top and bottom edges are adjacent. It can be obtained by rotating a (*) circle around a
non-intersecting axis. This shape has genus 1 because of the hole in the middle, which is why people joke
topologists can't tell it apart from a coffee cup. For 10 points, identify this geometrical figure shaped like a
donut.
ANSWER: torus
One type of this shape in four dimensions is named for William Clifford, and the type in three dimensions
that intercepts itself is the spindle type. One way to form this shape is to connect both pairs of opposite ends
of a rectangle without twists, and the calculation of their surface area and volume is a straightforward
application of Pappus- theorem. Other than the spindle type, these can be of the horn or ring type, and these
are generated by moving a circle in three-space through a circular path. Name these shapes that look like
doughnuts.
ANSWER: torus or toroid
Hilbert's seventh problem asked to prove or disprove whether two numbers were of this type.
The Gelfond-Schneider Theorem, which states that a to the b is this type of number if a is neither one
nor zero and b is irrational, generalized the proof that two to the square root of two was this type of
number. Joseph Liouville demonstrated the first proof that a number was of this type, and other
numbers of this type include the (*) base of the natural logarithm and the ratio of a circle's circumference
to its diameter. For 10 points, name these numbers that are not the roots of a polynomial equation with
integer coefficients, examples of which are e and pi.
ANSWER: transcendental
The set of numbers with this property was divided into S, T, and U varieties by Kurt Mahler. If A does not
have this property and B is irrational, Hilbert's seventh problem asks whether A raised to the B always has
this property. A man who proved that this property is possessed by "e to the a," when a has this property, is
the first namesake of the Lindemann-Weierstrass theorem, which used Euler's identity to show that e and
another number possess it. For 10 points, the non-algebraics, such as pi, have what property, meaning they
are not the solution of any polynomial?
ANSWER: transcendental numbers [accept word forms like transcendence]
One of this type of operation is used to effect a time-step on a temperature distribution on an infinite
rod and employs a Gaussian with exponent coefficient one over four t; that one is named for
Weierstrass. These operations employ a function of two variables, one a dummy, called the "kernel
function" or "nucleus"; the kernel is two t over square root of t squared minus u squared for the
Abel one. One of these operations is unitary according to Parseval's theorem and moves from the time
domain to the frequency domain. For 10 points, name this type of map which uses its namesake operation to
take a function to another function, one example of which is named for Fourier.
ANSWER: integral transforms [accept Abel transform, Weierstrass transform, Fourier transform where appropriate]
A group action has this property if it is possible to find an element of the group that takes any element of the
set to any other. This adjective precedes the word "closure" to describe a graph that contains edges between
any two vertices that are connected. Like reflexivity, this property of binary relations is an essential quality
to both preorders and partially ordered sets. One of the three properties of equivalence relations, it also
applies to relations such as implication, set containment, and inequality; the other two properties of
equivalence relations are reflexivity and symmetry. Name this property, an example of which is the
statement that if x equals y and y equals z, then x equals z.
ANSWER: transitive property [accept word forms, e.g. transitivity]
In modal logic, this property is instituted by the "4" axiom, which reads "box P implies box box P." This
term denotes sets with the property that each non-atomic element is a subset of the set. By using the FloydWarshall algorithm on a graph, one can construct a closure of this type over the graph. This type of closure
also names a method of constructing large and unwieldy regular expressions from automata. A complete
digraph with this property is a strict partial order. This property is shared by the "less than" and "implies"
relations, and by the thermal equilibrium relation, according to the zeroth law of thermodynamics. Any
reflexive, symmetric relation with this property is an equivalence relation. For 10 points, give this term that
describes a relation in which "A is related to B" and "B is related to C" implies "A is related to C".
ANSWER: transitive [or word forms]
The conservation of linear momentum is derived from the fact that a system's Lagrangian is invariant for
this kind of transformation. A Lorentz transformation of this type is called a boost. A matrix for this kind of
transformation has ones along the diagonal and appropriate values on the rightmost column. This kind of
transformation is calculated by adding a displacement vector to the position. For 10 points, name this type
of transformation, a move without rotation that preserves orientation.
ANSWER: translation
If taking the conjugate of each entry in a matrix and performing this operation equals the original matrix,
then the original matrix is classified as Hermitian (her-MISH-un). If this process gives the additive inverse
of a matrix, then the matrix is skew-symmetric, and if this process does not change the matrix, then the
matrix is symmetric. This matrix operation changes rows into columns and vice versa, flipping all entries
over the main diagonal. Name this operation denoted by a superscript T.
ANSWER: transpose or transposition
Performing this operation on a cofactor matrix generates a classical adjoint matrix. For an orthogonal
matrix, this operation is equivalent to inversion. One method of least squares regression uses this operation
twice along with inversion and multiplication. A dot product can be computed by applying this operation to
one vector and then multiplying. This operation gives the additive inverse of a skew-symmetric matrix, and
it has no effect on a symmetric matrix. Name this operation that reflects a square matrix across its main
diagonal, represented by a superscript T.
ANSWER: (matrix) transposition [accept word forms]
This is the least restrictive quadrilateral in which the product of the areas of the triangles formed by one
diagonal equals the product of the areas of the triangles formed by the other diagonal. This shape is used to
derive a formula in which the first and last y-coordinates from a set of points are multiplied by one, while
the others are multiplied by two, used to approximate an integral. Name this quadrilateral in which two pairs
of adjacent angles are supplementary and in which one pair of opposite sides is parallel.
ANSWER: trapezoid (prompt on "trapezium")
In calculus, this shape names an alternative to Riemann sums and Simpson's rule for approximating definite
integrals. James Garfield famously proved the Pythagorean Theorem with one of these shapes divided into
three triangles. One of these can be isosceles when both legs are of equal length, and the area of one of
these figures is equal to the height times the average of the two bases. FTP, name this quadrilateral with
one pair of parallel sides.
ANSWER: Trapezoid
This shape's namesake numbers are also known as polite numbers, and when this figure's diagonals break it
down into four triangles, the result is exactly one pair of triangles with equal areas; dividing that equal area
by the areas of the other triangles gives reciprocals. Approximations using this shape generally give a worse
result than Simpson's Rule but a better result than Riemann sums when approximating integrals. Its area is
usually given by the formula half the sum of the bases times the height, and it has a median which is parallel
to its bases and whose length is the average of them. Name this quadrilateral with one pair of parallel sides.
ANSWER: trapezoid [or trapezium]
The lateral faces of a frustum are all this shape. This shape names a method which takes the
product of the length of an interval and the average of the values of a function at the interval's
endpoints; that is this shape's namesake "rule" for approximating integrals. This shape can be
broken down into a rectangle and two right (*) triangles. Its area is equal to the average length of its
parallel bases times the height. For 10 points, name these quadrilaterals with a pair of parallel sides.
ANSWER: trapezoids [prompt on quadrilaterals]
Dagan, Golumbic, and Pinter defined the class of graphs that generalize interval and permutation graphs
and correspond to this shape. Romberg's algorithm recursively uses a technique named for this shape that is
the two points Newton-Cotes formula. That technique uses small line segments to approximate the definite
integral. It's not a triangle, but the isosceles version of this shape has diagonals equal to the square root of
the sum of the square of the leg length and the product of the bases. The area of this figure is equal to its
height times the length of the central median, which is the average of the bases. For 10 points, name this
quadrilateral with a pair of parallel sides.
ANSWER: trapezoid
Dagan, Golumbic, and Pinter provided an optimal coloring algorithm for graphs named for this shape. A
class of numbers whose members are the sum of at least two consecutive positive integers greater than one
is named for this shape. It's not a triangle, but the isosceles type of this shape is cyclic. Along with the
rectangle, this shape names a method for approximating integrals. The area of this polygon is equal to half
the product of its altitude and the sum of its bases. For 10 points, name this quadrilateral that has two
parallel and two non-parallel sides.
ANSWER: trapezoids [or trapeziums; prompt on "quadrilateral" or "polygon"]
This geometric figure's namesake numbers are positive integers that can be expressed as the sum of two or
more consecutive integers, also called polite numbers. This shape names a technique less useful than
Gaussian quadrature for non-periodic functions, which approximates a curve as many line segments. That
"rule", which is generally more accurate than Riemann sums, approximates definite integrals. Although not
triangles, they can be right or isosceles, and the area of this polygon is its height times the average of its
bases. For 10 points, name this quadrilateral with one pair of parallel sides.
ANSWER: trapezoid [or trapezium]
The n equals one case of the Newton-Cotes formula corresponds to using this shape. That method is
equivalent to averaging the left-hand and right-hand Riemann sums, and uses this shape to approximate the
area under a curve. Like a triangle, the area of one of these shapes can be calculated as the midsegment
times the height. These shapes have adjacent angles which sum to 180 degrees. For 10 points, name these
quadrilaterals with one pair of parallel sides.
ANSWER: trapezoids
The triangles created by the diagonals of this figure include one pair with equal areas, and the product of the
areas of those triangles equals the product of the areas of the other two triangles. While these shapes-
diagonals do not necessarily bisect each other, they must divide each other into segments of the same ratio.
They must have two pairs of adjacent supplementary angles, and they are used for approximating integrals
in a technique that is less accurate than Simpson's rule but more accurate than simple Riemann sums. The
area of one of these can be calculated as height times median. Name these quadrilaterals that have at least
one pair of parallel sides.
ANSWER: trapezoids [or trapeziums]
Although not a rectangle, this polygon names a rule of numerical integration that is usually less
efficient than Simpson's rule. Lateral faces of a pyramidal frustum are of this shape. James Garfield used
the area formula for this figure to prove the Pythagorean theorem. An isosceles one of these figures has
congruent diagonals. The area of one of these polygons is half the product of its height and the sum of its
bases. For 10 points, name these quadrilaterals that have one pair of parallel sides.
ANSWER: trapezoids
Arora's PTAS uses quadtrees to attack a restrict case of this issue, which is the target of the Christofides
algorithm. A historical bound on it is given by the Held-Karp algorithm. If the triangle inequality holds,
then the restricted case is known as metric; further constraints yield the Euclidean version of this problem.
One solution to this problem is the "nearest neighbor" algorithm, though that solution is only optimal in
certain cases. An early description of this problem included hypothetical routes through towns in Germany
and Switzerland. For 10 points, name this optimization problem in computer science in which a merchant
must determine the shortest path that will take him to each city in a route exactly once.
ANSWER: traveling salesman problem
In 2004 the largest one of these to be computed was done so by a research team consisting of David
Applegate, Robert Bixby, Vasek Chvatal and William Cook, and for completing this they were awarded the
2007 Lanchester prize. It was first defined in the 1800's by Thomas Kirkman and William Hamilton, who
used it in his recreational Icosian game, and this problem is considered to be a more simple version of a
Hamiltonian circuit. For 10 points, name this NP-complete mathematical problem used to find the shortest
route in which someone may go while visiting all of a given list of cities only once.
ANSWER: Traveling Salesman Problem
A metric version of this problem is the subject of the Christofides algorithm. This problem may be solved
by a generalization of 2-opt that involves pairwise exchange, the Lin-Kerninghan method. Yet another
solution can be derived using the elastic net method, where a circle is repeatedly mapped and stretched in
the plane. One solution to it is the Nearest Neighbor algorithm, which involves going from the current point
to the adjacent edge with the lightest weight. It is equivalent to finding a Hamiltonian cycle in a graph, and
the Chinese postman problem is a dual of this problem. For 10 points, name this NP-hard problem that
involves minimizing the path that a person takes to visit every city on a given map.
ANSWER: Traveling Salesman problem
A metric version of this problem is the subject of the Christofides algorithm. One method of solving this
problem is the Lin-Kerninghan method, which is a generalization of 2-opt and 3-opt and relies on pairwise
exchange. One solution to it is the Nearest Neighbor algorithm, which involves going from the current point
to the adjacent edge with the lightest weight. The Chinese postman problem is a dual of this problem, and a
recent exact solution to one instance was done on a group of fifteen thousand German towns. FTP, name
this NP-hard problem that involves minimizing the path that a person takes to visit every city on a given
map.
ANSWER: Traveling Salesman Problem
The shortest superstring problem is reduced to this problem by considering overlaps between
pairs of strings. A blind method of solving this problem would search through n minus one factorial
over 2 possibilities. Dorigo originally tested his ant colony optimization method on this problem,
which can also be solved using insertion heuristics and k-opt methods. A greedy algorithm to solve
this problem simply (*) moves to the nearest neighbor with smallest weight. This NP-hard problem is the
equivalent of finding a Hamiltonian cycle on a complete weighted graph with minimum weight. For 10
points, name this optimization problem which seeks the minimum distance that the namesake figure would
have to go to visit every city on a given map exactly once.
ANSWER: travelling salesman problem [or TSP]
This problem was solved by Applegate, Bixby, Chvatal and Cook using the LKH implementation of
the Lin-Kernighan heuristic; they also created the Concorde solver, which has obtained optimal
solutions to over 100 of its namesake library of problems. Dantzig, Fulkerson and Johnson's cuttingplane method was the first algorithm that could solve large-scale versions of this problem, and (*) kopt is the most widely used heuristic for solving this problem. This problem has important applications in
X-ray crystallography and VLSI design, and a solution to this problem is a Hamiltonian cycle of minimum
total weight. For 10 points, name this problem which involves the namesake person finding the shortest
route through a number of cities.
ANSWER: travelling salesman problem
If the central structure of this problem is Euclidean, then the Christofides algorithm can be applied to it. The
Lin-Kernighan heuristic is used on this problem, and solutions can be improved using the 3-opt or 2-opt
algorithms, a refinement of which is simulated annealing. In general, one method to find good, if not
optimal, solutions is based on insects depositing pheromones as they walk; in addition to the ant colony
optimization, one can start with a random cycle and trade adjacent pairs. Name this NP-hard problem of
finding a minimum-total-weight Hamiltonian cycle on a weighted graph, analogized to a certain type of
person visiting many cities while going the least distance.
ANSWER: traveling salesman problem [accept shortest tour problem]
The one dimensional cutting stock problem is a special case of it and Applegate and Bixby designed
the CONCORDE program to solve it. A 3/2 approximative algorithm to solve it is the Christofides
algorithm. One heuristic often used for it is a generalization of the 2-opt and 3-opt methods, the (*)
Lin-Kernighan algorithm. Sometimes simplified by requiring the triangle inequality, it's inefficiently solved
by the nearest neighbor algorithm, and it's equivalent to finding the Hamiltonian cycle with least weight
given a complete weighted graph. For 10 points, name this NP-hard problem of finding the least cost round
trip if a namesake merchant visits each city once.
ANSWER: Traveling Salesman problem (or TSP)
The Held-Karp algorithm is a very inefficient dynamic programming way to perform this task. When the
edges of the graph in question satisfy the triangle inequality, this task can be done approximately with the
Christofides algorithm. A setup can be constructed such that the greedy approach to solving this problem,
the nearest neighbor method, is actually the worst possible. This problem seeks to find the minimum length
of a Hamiltonian cycle on a graph with given edge weights. For 10 points, identify this problem in computer
science, which asks what the shortest possible route a roving vendor can take so that he visits every city
once.
ANSWER: solving the Traveling Salesman Problem [or TSP]
The "B" type of these objects was discovered by Rudolph Bayer, and a greedy algorithm named for
Djikstra generates the "minimum spanning" type of these objects. One special case of this data
structure with a namesake 'sort- algorithm, in which child keys are always smaller than parent keys,
is called the [*] heap. Other types of this acyclic data structure include the red/black, a self-balancing
subtype of the binary search kind, and all finite ones have exactly one root node. For 10 points, name this
data structure in computer science, whose childless nodes are known as "leaves".
ANSWER: tree
One type of these objects that can be used to determine the longest palindrome in a string is
referred to as "suffix". A version of this structure in which all the vertices are connected is a
minimum spanning one. Another variety allows each node to have a maximum of (*) two child nodes
with all nodes on the left being less than the value of the parent and all on the righter having a greater value
than the parent. That is the binary search one. For 10 points, name this data structure whose lowest nodes
are referred to as leaves.
ANSWER: trees
One type of these uses zig-zig and zig-zag steps to perform a splay operation, and a set of strings can be
stored in the radix type. The minimum element of another type can be removed in big O of log n time, a
property utilized in a namesake algorithm, the heap sort. Kruskal's algorithm finds the minimum spanning
type of this structure. The AVL and Red-Black types are self-balancing. Each node has at most two children
in the binary type, a subtype of which is very efficient to search. For 10 points, name this data structure with
a root at the top and leaves at the bottom.
ANSWER: trees [prompt on heap before mentioned] <
Lamport signatures are stored in one variety of this data structure, and another variety of this structure is
self-balancing and is called red-black. They come in hash and ordered varieties, and the number of nodes in
a complete binary one is equal to one less than two raised to the quantity h plus 1, where h is the height of
it. A complete one has all ends equidistant from the origin, and a free one lacks a first node. They have a
root node which is the parent or ancestor of all subsequent nodes. For 10 points, identify this data structure
consisting of branches that terminate at leaves.
ANSWER: Trees [prompt on Graphs or Networks]
A recently developed one of these with a good proven competitive ratio is called tango. One of these that
operates on a restricted key set with log log n performance is named after van Emde Boas (vahn EM-dah
BOH-az). The zig-zag step is one of the steps which can be used in creating the splay type of these. A set of
coloration rules are used in the red-black type, which is an example of the balanced binary search class of
these. Their topmost nodes are known as root nodes. For 10 points, name these data structures whose
terminal nodes are called leaves.
ANSWER: trees
The Huffman variety of these is integral to a common form of compression. Arne Anderson invented the
AA types of these, which are similar AVL types. Heaps are based on these, and other named types include
the Scapegoat, which has a better worst-case lookup time than the related Splay variety. The B variety
specifies how many children a node can have, and red-black ones are another type of a self-balancing form
of these. For 10 points, name this data structure, whose binary search type is self-balancing and which
consists of a root node and branches.
ANSWER: Tree
Path finding problems containing differential constraints and obstacles can be solved efficiently with the
rapidly-exploring random type of these data structures. Two-dimensional problems can be solved with the
polygonal map or point region flavors of a certain type of these objects, while Arne Andersson lends his
initials to a type of these that are similar to the 2-3 ["two three"] type. Another type of these can perform
insert and delete operations in big O of n log n time by enforcing rules on the color of nodes. A popular
form of these was invented by Rudolf Bayer and is often used for implementing databases; this is the B
variety. Self-balancing forms of a particular type of these data structures are exemplified in the AVL and
red-black types. For 10 points, name this data structure which also comes in a binary search type.
ANSWER: tree [accept Quadtree before "2-3"]
In addition to lists, these data structures that use pointers can be recursively defined. The simplest
versions are binary, but in the event that an ordered list is turned into one a heap works better. The height of
them is the maximum number of nodes that must be traversed to get to the farthest data from the root.
Pruning and grafting algorithms respectively remove and add sections to them. For 10 points, what data
structure organizes information into roots, nodes and leaves?
ANSWER: trees
A flag and two fields are necessary to perform the FindNext algorithm in the van Emde Boas version of this
structure. Galperin and Rivest invented the deletion-easy scapegoat version, and another invented by Bayer
assigns each of its subunits the two namesake colors. Frequently used are its Splay, and Red-Black varieties,
and adding a new section to it is known as "grafting."It assigns "height" and "depth" to all elements, and it
features relations between siblings, parents, and children. Forests are collections of, for 10 points, what data
structures of connected nodes?
ANSWER: trees
The AVL type of this structure requires operations to be preceded and followed by rotations, which
change the structure of these entities without changing the order of their elements, while the red-
black type of these structures are self-balancing, and can search, insert, and delete in O(log n) time.
A (*) binary type of this data structure requires that each node have at most two child nodes, with a root
node that has no parents, and leaf nodes that have no children. For ten points, name this widely used data
structure that uses linked nodes to emulate the hierarchical structure of its namesake plant.
ANSWER: Tree
The B variety of this structure forms the backbone of NTFS and btrfs [butter-eff-ess]. Red-black and
splay are binary self-balancing varieties of this data structure. Kruskal's and Prim's algorithms find
a minimum-spanning one of these structures. An example of this where all(*) children are smaller than
their parent is called a heap. They consist of nodes that point to exactly one other node. For 10 points, name
this class of undirected, acyclic, connected graphs that also name a data structure with a root, branches, and
leaves.
ANSWER: tree
Search ones of these facilitate range queries, while ones used in database engines have a very high fan-out
of around 200. One type of them can achieve amortized O(log n) ["big O of log n"] lookup; that is the selfbalancing search variety, while classical examples of these structures are typically binary. For arbitrary
graphs, Prim's Algorithm finds the minimum spanning one of these structures. Any connected graph with a
unique path between any two vertices is this type of graph. Name this type of recursive data structure in
which the number of edges is one less than the number of vertices, because they have no cycles.
ANSWER: trees
"R-" ones are used for storing spatial data based on minimum bounding rectangles. A "rotation" on
these objects increases the height of one substructure while decreasing the other; that operation is
useful for rebalancing and is carried out automatically by AVL ones. These objects can be traversed
preorder, inorder, or postorder, and rotations can be used to implement the "splay" operation that moves an
element of a namesake type of this structure to the root. Heaps are generally implemented using this data
structure, and in the average case O (log n) time is needed to search a binary one. For 10 points, name this
data structure, whose terminal nodes are called leaves.
ANSWER: trees
One type of these structures maintains rough balance when data is added or removed by using rules
involving the two namesake colors of nodes, red and black. In special varieties of these structures,
each parent element has a larger value than its children; those structures are heaps. Ones where each
node has at most two children are known as binary ones. For 10 points, name these computer science
structures that have a single root and childless leaves.
ANSWER: trees
The "dancing" type of these objects is similar to the B+ type, and is used in the Reiser filesystem. In one
type of these structures, the minimal element can be found in constant time and deleted in O(log n) ("big O
of log n") time, a property utilized in the heap sort algorithm. In another type of these structures, each entry
is assigned a color, either red or black. The AVL type is self-balancing, and in the binary type, each node
has at most two children. For 10 points, name these hierarchical data structures with root and leaf nodes, a
collection of which is called a "forest."
ANSWER: trees [prompt on heaps until it is mentioned]
The Polish notation developed by Lukasiewicz can be practically treated by representing operations by
these mathematical entities. These entities can be represented numerically by Prufer codes, and Cayley's
theorem states that for a given n, there are exactly n to the n-2 of these. The subset of those n vertices that
are pendant in on of these objects is equal to two plus the sum of the degree of each vertex minus two. The
zig, zig-zag, and zig-zig steps create the "splay" variety of these entities, while Prim's algorithm is useful
for determining the minimum spanning kind. For 10 points, identify these acyclic, connected graphs which
consist of a series of roots and leaves.
ANSWER: trees
The Day-Stout-Warren algorithm decreases the height of one type of these structures in order to
balance them. There are AVL and B types structures, while Djikstra, Prim, and Kruskal all name
algorithms that find their minimum spanning variety. The radix type of this structure stores a set of
strings such as IP addresses and another is the binary search variety. Zig-Zig and Zig-Zag are both
steps involved in generating the self-balancing splay variety, while yet another type is the Red-Black
type, which is also a self-balancing one. For 10 points, name these data structures that start at their roots and
have nodes that branch off from there until they terminate at the leaves.
ANSWER: Trees
In mathematics, these structures are undirected graphs in which any two vertices are connected by a
single path. In computer science, these structures can be searched breadth-first or depth-first. These
structures are traversed or "walked." Removing and adding sections is known, respectively, as pruning and
grafting them. For 10 points, identify these data structures that whose nodes are leaves, that are attached to
branches that meet at a root.
ANSWER: tree
Konig names a lemma laying out the conditions for which these structures are infinite. A class of
these objects named for Andersson abstract the B variety of order three. Kruskal names a theorem
about these structures, and his algorithm computes the minimum spanning variety of these
structures. They are defined as acyclic directed graphs, and one implementation as a data structure
has a big O of log of n lookup time and is named (*) binary search. Every node in these simple recursive
data structures has one parent node, except for the root. For 10 points, name this data structure whose
branches terminate at leaves.
ANSWER: Trees [accept "graph" until "Andersson"]
These structures are "graceful" according to the Ringel-Kotzig conjecture. In-order, pre-order, and postorder are ways to traverse these structures. The height of these structures can be decreased by the DSW
algorithm. Sleator and Tarjan invented a self-adjusting type of this structure that changes its shape based on
access frequency. A self-balancing type of this data structure named for two colors is quicker than the AVL
type. Solving the traveling salesman problem involves constructing the minimum spanning type of this data
structure. For 10 points, name this data structure that makes up a forest, and has terminal nodes called
leaves.
ANSWER: trees [or binary (search) trees; or red-black trees; or splay trees, etc.]
A maximum independent set for this data structure can be found in linear time by adding alternating
levels. In this structure, any two vertices or nodes must be connected by a single simple path, and
thus it is connected and acyclic. By using (*) union-find with disjoint sets, one type of this structure
containing all the vertices of a connected graph can be constructed. One variety of this data structure can be
used to easily implement a binary search. This structure also comes in red-black and self-balancing-binary
varieties. For 10 points, identify this data structure from computer science, a hierarchical graph in which
"leaf" nodes ultimately flow from a "root" node.
ANSWER: tree
A type of this data structure used for storing two-dimensional data can come in a polygonal map
variety. Data with multi-dimensional keys are sometimes stored using the k-d type of these objects.
Another type of these data structures uses left-rotate and right-rotate to maintain balance following
insertions and deletions and is named for the (*) two types of nodes allowed within it. These data
structures are not arrays, but can be used to store heaps. Databases and file systems often use the "B"
variety of these data structures. The top elements in these data structures are called roots, while the bottom
elements are called leaves. For 10 points, name these data structures that come in a Binary Search variety.
ANSWER: Trees [accept more specific answers like Binary Search Trees or Red Black Trees or B-Tree s]
A common use for this data structure is storing an expression, which can be viewed using a preorder,
postorder or inorder traversal. A roughly symmetrical one is known as balanced, while a complete one is
perfect until the last level, where paths may end at different levels. One of these structures in which the left
path contains lesser values is abbreviated BST. In these structures, all elements are descendants of a root
node, while a node is either a parent to daughter nodes or a leaf. FTP, name these data structures, a
collection of which comprise a forest.
ANSWER: Binary Trees
A Tamari lattice is a poset of a type of this structure ordered with rotations, and the isometry of the AA
variety of these structures is the 2-3 type. Lookup takes O (log n) ("Big O of log n") time in the AVL type,
which is similar to a variety in which each vertex is painted one of two colors. If h is the height, at most two
to the h + 1th power minus 1 nodes are contained in the binary type of this structure, and in the red-black
variety, black is the default color of the root node. For 10 points, name this hierarchical data structure
whose childless nodes are known as leaf nodes, as opposed to branch nodes.
ANSWER: tree [accept binary tree before mention]
The absolute value of any cofactor of a graph's Laplacian matrix is equal to the number of a certain
type of this object. That theorem is a generalization of Cayley's theorem, which says there are n to
the n minus two of these objects on n vertices. An algorithm that uses the union-find data structure to
merge these objects in increasing order of edge weights is known as Kruskal's algorithm and, like
Prim's Algorithm, finds the (*) minimum weight one of these that spans a set of vertices. Syntax analysis
in a compiler involves the parser building one of these structures. The red-black and AVL variations of this
data structure are both self balancing binary search examples of these structures. For 10 points, name this
data structure in which each node can have a number of children and childless nodes are called leaves.
ANSWER: tree [accept minimum spanning tree or spanning tree early, accept specific types]
The symmetry group corresponding to this operation is Thompson's group F. Given two of one of the
objects that this operation acts upon representing the same set, an important open question is the existence
of a polynomial time algorithm to determine how many of these operations are required to convert one into
the other; that number is known as this operation's namesake distance. Given an n-item example of the data
structures that use this operation, deletion requires big-o of log n of these operations to maintain a log n
height bound, though insertion requires only one of these operations, at the root, to do the same. This
operation is used in the way just discussed to maintain balance in self-balancing binary trees. FTP, name
this binary tree operation in which the positions of a parent and child node are switched.
ANSWER: a tree rotation
The Heilbronn Problem is to find the set of points on the edge of a unit-area shape that maximizes the
area of the smallest of these thus formed. The construction of one of these objects is the subject of a
problem posed by Lemoine whose solution is the Kiepert hyperbola. These objects have two points defined
by a certain angle all three of which are named for Brocard. Whether or not three lines in these objects will
be concurrent can be determined using Ceva's theorem. One method of finding the area of these objects
uses the semiperimeter and side lengths and is called Hero's formula. For 10 points, name these planar
figures, the area of one of which is half its base times its height.
ANSWER: triangles
Ceva's theorem deals with lines constructed in these polygons, and Apollonius' theorem also deals with
these polygons. The Euler line of one of them passes through several significant points, including the center
of the nine-point circle. Their area can be calculated using Heron's formula. A fractal named for Sierpinski
is based on these polygons, which have centroids, orthocenters, and circumcenters. For 10 points, name
these polygons which may be scalene or equilateral.
ANSWER: triangles
The distances between an arbitrary point to one of these figures sides and vertices is given by the ErdosMordell inequality. The relationship between the sides of one of them cut by a segment is given by
Stewart's Theorem. A particular condition for collinearity in these figures is called Menelaus- Theorem,
which is the dual of Ceva's Theorem. A method of finding the area of these figures is a special case of
Bramagupta's formula, and relies on finding the difference between each side and the semiperimeter; this is
Heron's Formula. Also containing the incenter, circumcenter, and orthocenter, FTP, name these polygons
whose area can be found by the formula 1/2 times b times h.
ANSWER: Triangle (Accept 3-gon or Trigon)
The area of this polygon equals the square root of the product of the semiperimeter and the differences
between the semiperimeter and each side length according to Heron's formula. Radical three divided by
four multiplied by a side length squared equals the area for the equilateral variety of this polygon. For 10
points, name this polygon defined by three vertices and three sides.
ANSWER: triangle
The minimum total distance from a point to all the vertices of one of these objects is the Fermat point.
Ceva's theorem describes the condition in which lines from all of the vertices of these objects intersect at a
single point. In Euclidean geometry, the sum of the angles of one of these objects is pi radians. The area of
these objects can be found using Heron's formula, as well as the formula one half base times eight. For 10
points, name these shapes divided into scalene, isoceles, and equilateral types.
ANSWER: triangles
Napoleon's theorem concerns the use of four of these figures to construct a fifth with special properties, and
a similar method is used to locate the Fermat point for this shape. Nine significant locations on it are
traversed by the nine-point circle, the center of which lies on an Euler line in this shape. Ceva's theorem
concerning this shape states that lines drawn from a vertex to a side meet under certain conditions, and
another statement about it allows its area to be determined from side length and semiperimeter alone. For 10
points, name this simple shape, whose area is calculable by Heron's formula and whose angles add up to
180 degrees.
ANSWER: triangle
One unsolved problem in finding the number of these shapes is named for Kobon Fujimura. This
shape is commonly used to represent the first iteration of a Koch snowflake or a Sierpinski gasket.
The sequence of numbers named for this shape is generated by adding consecutive natural numbers.
The area of one of these shapes can be computed using Heron's formula, and its side lengths and
angle measures can be found using the Law of Sines or Law of Cosines. Two of these can be proved
to be similar by showing that two corresponding angles are congruent. Name these shapes whose
interior angles add up to 180 degrees and which have three vertices.
ANSWER: triangles
Ceva's theorem gives the condition for the concurrency of certain lines in this polygon. The sides of this
polygon divided by sines of the angle opposite them are equal to each other according to the law of sines.
The medians of this polygon form the centroid, and Heron's formula can be used to find the area of this
polygon. The right form of this polygon obeys the Pythagorean Theorem. For 10 points, name this polygon
with three sides.
ANSWER: triangle
The Lucas circles can be drawn by inscribing a square in this other geometric shape. Clark
Kimberling has catalogued over three thousand centers of this shape, some of which include the
Nagel point and the nine-point center. Kimberling center X1 refers to the point at which the angular
bisectors intersect; that point does not necessary lie on the Euler line, unlike the (*) circumcenter,
orthocenter, and centroid. For 10 points, name this geometric shape whose angles add up to one hundred
eight degrees and has three sides.
ANSWER: triangle
One point on these figures can be determined by drawing lines from extouch points to vertices; that point is
the Nagel point. One formula describing these figures is a special case of Brahmagupta's Formula where
one side is set to zero. Whether points lying on the sides of one of these figures are collinear can be
determined by Menelaus- Theorem, which is paired with Ceva's Theorem. The Euler line passes through
several points on one of these that isn-t a regular polygon. The semiperimeter of one of these figures may be
used to calculate the area in Hero's formula, though it may be easier to use one half times base times height.
Name this polygon that has three sides.
ANSWER: triangles
The Euler line passes through several distinctive points of one of these objects, while Ceva's
theorem also applies to these objects. The area of one of these objects can be found by taking the
square root of the (*) semi-perimeter times the difference of the semi-perimeter minus each side. That
calculation is known as Heron's formula. A nine point circle can be drawn around one of the objects while
the laws of sines and cosines also apply to these objects. For 10 points, name this polygon whose "right"
variety conforms to the Pythagorean Theorem.
ANSWER: triangles
The Erdos [EHR-dish]-Mordell inequality applies to these entities, and in one of these, the Nagel point is
the isotomic conjugate of the Gergonne point. Kimberling also cataloged the Spieker center and the
Feuerbach point for one of these. The de Longchamps point for one lies on the Euler line, along with the
nine point center, orthocenter, and circumcenter. Their area can be calculated using Heron's formula, and in
non-Euclidean geometries, the sum of their angles differs from the usual 180 degrees. In ones with a right
angle, the side-lengths can be calculated with the Pythagorean theorem. For 10 points, name these threesided polygons.
ANSWER: triangles
The group of symmetries of a regular one of these is isomorphic to the smallest non-Abelian group.
Thales's theorem describes the angles of these polygons when inscribed in a circle. Three of the platonic
solids have these as faces. When a norm is applied to vectors that form the edges of one of these, the norms
must satisfy this object's namesake inequality. A special case of Brahmagupta's formula named for Heron
gives the area of these figures. Squares, hexagons, and these are the only regular polygons that can tile the
plane. The law of cosines relates the lengths of their sides. For 10 points, name these simplest polygons,
which come in scalene and isosceles varieties.
ANSWER: triangles
Ceva's theorem governs concurrency of cevians in these shapes, and nine specific points derived from
one of these shapes lie on the same circle. With respect to one of these shapes, Euler's line contains de
Longchamps point, the center of the circumscribed circle, the centroid, and the orthocenter. The area
of one of these shapes is the square root of four specific terms involving the semiperimeter according to
Heron's formula, and the Pythagorean formula is used to find the hypotenuse of the right type of these
shapes. For 10 points, name these three-sided polygons.
ANSWER: triangles
Thales's (THAY-leez's) theorem describes this shape inscribed in a circle, with one side as a diameter to
the circle. According to the exterior angle theorem, any exterior angle of this shape is greater than any
remote interior angle. Two of these shapes may not be congruent in the ambiguous case, but they are
congruent if they have side-angle-side or angle-side-angle equivalence. They can have at most one obtuse
angle, since their internal angles sum to 180 degrees. For 10 points, name this polygon with three sides.
ANSWER: triangle
Each of these figures corresponds to an extouch version. A theorem relating the length of a segment in one
of these figures to its side lengths is named for Apollonius, while ratios involving a directed
line through this figure multiply to give negative one according to Menelaus- Theorem. Their areas can be
calculated using Heron's Formula, and attempts to solve these figures can lead to the ambiguous case,
though they often can be solved based on knowing two sides and an angle. Name these shapes whose
interior angles add up to one hundred eighty degrees.
ANSWER: triangle
One important point in this figure can be found by taking the isotomic conjugate of the Gergonne
point; that point is the Nagel point. The Euler line connects the center of the nine-point circle, the (*)
circumcenter, the orthocenter, and the centroid, and this figure's angles always add up to 180 degrees.
Acute, obtuse, and right are varieties of, for ten points, what three-sided geometrical figure?
ANSWER: Triangle
According to Turan's Theorem, one of these entities is necessarily formed if four times the number of
edges in a graph is greater than the number of vertices squared. Every two-coloring on a complete 6graph forms two monochrome examples of these entities. Three lines concur in one of these figures if
the conditions for Ceva's ["CHAY-va-s] Theorem are met, and the areas of these figures can be
found using (*) Heron's formula. The laws of sines and cosines hold true for these shapes, whose areas are
equal to base times height over two. For ten points, name these three-sided figures, which come in
equilateral and isosceles varieties.
ANSWER: triangles (prompt on "complete graph", accept complete 3-graph or complete graph on 3 vertices)
Two of these polygons are the subjects of Pedoe's inequality, for which equality obtains only when
the two polygons are similar. The unique ellipse that can be inscribed in one of these polygons is
named for Jakob Steiner. Their side lengths are related to the length of another line segment by (*)
Stewart's theorem, while a theorem giving a concurrency condition for certain lines in this shape is named
for Giovanni Ceva. The area of this polygon is given by Hero's formula, and the laws of sines and cosines
describe this kind of shape. For 10 points, name this polygon whose interior angles sum to one hundred
eighty degrees and that has three sides.
ANSWER: triangles [accept three-sided polygon or other equivalent complete definitions before mention]
Half the sum of the side lengths times the inradius gives this quantity. This value is equal to half the
product of two side lengths with the sine of the opposite angle. It is also given by the square root of
the (*) semiperimeter times the difference between the semiperimeter and each side, which is called
Heron's formula. The most common formula to find this value uses an altitude of the shape. For 10 points,
name this quantity equal to one-half base times height.
ANSWER: area of a triangle (both parts required; prompt on area; accept logical equivalents including both underlined parts)
This theorem is reversed in Minkowski space, and in Euclidean geometry it is sometimes confused with a
statement involving inner products which can be used to prove it. When applied to vectors, this theorem is
equivalent to the statement that the sum of the lengths of two vectors is greater than the length of the sum of
two vectors. Simplistically, it guarantees that there are no shortcuts between two points in space, that
instead the shortest path between two points is a straight line. This theorem can be used to show that the
number of non-congruent three-sided figures with integer side lengths and perimeter less than five is one.
Name this statement, sometimes confused with the Cauchy-Schwarz (koh-SHEE SHWARZ) inequality, that
the sum of the lengths of any two sides of a three-sided figure must be larger than the third side.
ANSWER: triangle inequality [accept answers augmented by anything similar to "theorem" or "rule"]
This statement is used to prove that the packing number is equal to or less than the intrinsic
covering number. Along with non-negativity, the identity of discernibles and symmetry, metric
functions on topological spaces must satisfy this statement. This statement was extended to L-p
spaces by Minkowski. Assuming that the inner product is a norm in an inner product space allows
the derivation of this statement from the (*) Cauchy-Schwarz theorem. For polygons with ninety degree
angles in them, this statement is a consequence of the Pythagorean theorem. For 10 points, the sum of the
lengths of any two sides must be greater than the length of the third side of the namesake polygon
according to what inequality?
ANSWER: triangle inequality [accept Cauchy-Schwarz inequality until mentioned]
The generalization of this statement to Lp spaces is called the Minkowski inequality, and this
statement is reversed in Minkowski spaces. Part of the definition of a metric space is that the metric
obeys commutativity and this other statement, and this statement is used to define the norm of a
vector space. It can be proven by reduction from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality on an inner product
space, or by considering the Law of Cosines and (*) removing the cosine term. This statement can be
used to show that the shortest distance between two points in Euclidian space is a straight line. For 10
points, name this inequality, which states that the sum of the lengths of two sides of the namesake figure is
greater than the length of the third side.
ANSWER: triangle inequality [prompt on "Cauchy-Schwarz inequality" due to ambiguities]
The p-adic numbers satisfy a strong version of this statement, and a reversed form of it holds for non-
positive definite metric spaces, such as a Minkowski space. A more general version of this statement was
discovered by Bunyakovsky in its integral form. It is not obeyed by the L-0 norm, but it is a special case of
the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality for the Euclidian norm. For 10 points, identify this statement, also known
as subadditivity, which says that the length of any side of an eponymous shape must be less than or equal to
the sum of the other two sides.
ANSWER: Triangle Inequality [prompt on Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality before mentioned]
One generalization of this statement provides bounds in the Absolute
Convergence Theorem. A positive-definite symmetric function satisfying this
condition is called a metric. This statement for inner products is a direct
result of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. One version of this theorem is that
the absolute value of a sum is(*) at most the sum of the absolute valuesm, and this
theorem implies that the shortest path between two points is a straight line. For ten points,
name this inequality which states that the sum of the lengths of the shorter two sides is
larger than the longest side of its namesake polygon.
ANSWER: triangle inequality
One method accomplishing this task marks two parallel lines above a ray, creating equal spaces,
then folds the paper they are on so that a corner touches the middle line. Another method for this
task uses a semicircle with two perpendicular segments called a tomahawk. Using classical tools, it
can be approximated by infinitely alternating sides with a process that involves drawing three arcs.
The function four x cubed minus three x equals a constant is used to determine whether the classical
version of this task can be done. That equation was used by Pierre Wantzel to prove that this task,
like (*) doubling the cube, is impossible using only a straightedge-and-compass. Identify this task that
involves dividing the space between rays into a certain number of equal parts.
ANSWER: angle trisection [accept any answer that indicates dividing an angle into three equal parts or dividing an angle by three]
Along with Alonzo Church, he gives his name to a hypothesis about computable functions. One
construct named for him includes a head which can read and write symbols on a strip of tape. This man,
who helped to crack the Enigma machine, also gives his name to an experiment in which a machine tries to
convince a human that it is itself a human. For 10 points, name this computer scientist with a namesake
"machine" and a namesake "test."
ANSWER: Alan Mathison Turing
This scientist built on Godel's (GER-dul) incompleteness theorem to show that the halting problem is
undecidable. He co-names names a theorem with Alonzo Church which states that a function is
algorithmically computable if and only if it is computable on a device named for this man. That device
manipulates the symbols on an infinitely long tape. He also devised a test to distinguish between humans
and machines. For 10 points, name this English computer scientist who likely died after eating a
cyanide-laced apple.
ANSWER: Alan Mathison Turing
This thinker developed the process of banburismus, which incorporated a frequency estimation named for
him and I. J. Good. Late in life, he hypothesized that stationary waves influenced phyllotaxis in his paper
"The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis". He is the second namesake of the claim that any effectively
calculable function can be computed by a certain object named for this computer scientist; he names that
"thesis" along with Alonzo Church. This computer scientist worked with Dilly Knox and Gordon
Welchman at Bletchley Park during World War II to break the Enigma cipher, and his namesake machines
manipulate symbols on an infinite tape. Identify this namesake of the Imitation Game in which interrogators
try to figure out whether their questions are being answered by another person or an intelligent machine.
ANSWER: Alan (Mathison) Turing
Along with Welchman, this scientist names a "bombe" that would test rotor settings using a "crib."
One formulation named after this man was used to demonstrate that the halting problem is
undecidable. He devised a test in which a person converses with both another person and a (*)
machine impersonating a person, in order to determine whether the machine can effective act human. For 10
points, name this mathematician and computer scientist who helped the Bletchley Park team break the
Enigma code, who names an artificial intelligence test, and whose "machines" can be adapted to simulate
the logic of any computer algorithm.
ANSWER: Alan Mathison Turing
This man proved that the halting problem is not generally solvable except in cases of fewer than four states,
and Tibor Rado developed a type of an object named for him that finds the most work one can do, the busy
beaver. This man names a thesis about the equivalence of the lambda calculus and another system along
with Church. For 10 points, name this British computer scientist who helped break the Enigma cipher and
whose namesake test is a benchmark for artificial intelligence and whose namesake machines are abstracted
computers.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
This man showed that it is not possible to determine whether a finite input and program will
eventually terminate. When one object named for this scientist features a set of rules calling for only
one action in any given situation, then it is called deterministic. In addition to working with a halting
problem, this man names a (*) thesis along with the developer of lambda calculus, about the existence of a
namesake machine for every algorithm. For 10 points, name this man that names a thesis along with Alonzo
Church, whose namesake machine consists of an infinite tape and is often used to simulate computer
algorithms.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
This man formulated a doubly-eponymous thesis, that every effectively com- putable function is formally
computable, with Alonzo Church. He published a solution to the Entscheidungsproblem by reducing it to
his earlier-solved Halting Problem. He developed a namesake * test for machine intelligence in the years
after World War II, during which he had worked in Bletchley Park to break the codes of the German
ENIGMA machines. FTP, name this British computer scientist who died in 1954 after reportedly eating a
cyanide apple.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
This man explored non-uniformity arising from reaction-diffusion systems in The Chemical Basis of
Morphogenesis. This man proved the unsolvability of Hilbert's Entscheidungsproblem [ent-SHYdungs-probe-lame] at the same time as Alonzo Church, with whom he names a thesis. The(*) halting
problem is undecidable over an instrument that uses a finite set of instructions to manipulate symbols on a
tape, this man's namesake machine. For 10 points, name this mathematician who proposed having human
judges try to distinguish between a human and a machine in an eponymous test for artificial intelligence.
ANSWER: Alan Mathison Turing
One paper by this man illustrates "the universe as a whole" by relating the displacement of a single electron
by a billionth of a centimeter to a man being killed by an avalanche. This man and Gordon Welchman, who
devised the diagonal board, are the namesake of a bombe. The halting problem is undecidable by a device
named for this man. A thesis named for this man and an American states that no realizable computing
device can be more powerful than this man's namesake hypothetical machine. For 10 points, name this
English computer theorist who is also the namesake of a test designed to assess if a computer is capable of
human-like thought.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
Shortly after an American did so, this man proved that Hilbert's "Decision Problem" was unsolvable.
With that same American, he hypothesized that every "effectively calculable" function was also
computable, a "thesis" named for him and Alonzo Church. This man also names a device that consists of a
finite state machine that runs along an infinite tape, reading, erasing, and writing symbols on the tape. For
10 points, name this British computer scientist whose namesake "machine" is a model of computing.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
Along with one co-developer of lambda calculus, this man names a statement based on Hilbert's
Entscheidungs-problem, which relates calculable and computable functions. One of his proposals was
challenged by John Searle, who said that programs like Weizenbaum's ELIZA are akin to a non-Chinese
speaker using a dictionary. He developed the bombe to solve the Enigma cipher. A busy beaver is an
example of a hypothetical device named for him, consisting of an infinitely long tape and a head which can
read and write to the tape, his namesake machine. For 10 points, name this British computer scientist whose
namesake test evaluates a machine's ability to appear intelligent.
ANSWER: Alan Mathison Turing
This man's paper on Hilbert's Entscheidungsproblem proved that no algorithm exists which can decide
whether or not a mathematical assertion has a proof, a conclusion he arrived at independently of Alonzo
Church. This man proved the impossibility of a general solution to the halting problem, and he proposed
criteria for artificial intelligence in his namesake "test". The theorizer of a device which operates with
symbols on a strip of paper, For 10 points, name this British computer scientist known for his namesake
"machines".
ANSWER: Alan Turing
The alternating form of a construct named for him has existential and universal states and is non-
deterministic. With an American, he lends his name to a theorem expanded on by Stephen Kleene
that concerns the universality of using simple mechanical methods to solve any "effective" problem.
One construct proposed by this man comes cannot answer the (*) halting problem and consists of a
head reading and writing symbols on a tape. The reverse form of a test named for this man can be
demonstrated with CAPTCHAs, although the regular form of that test asks a human to decide if he's
speaking to a machine or not. The co-namesake of a theorem with Alonzo Church is, for 10 points, which
British computer scientist?
ANSWER: Alan Turing
This man developed a technique for factorizing a square matrix into a product of upper and lower triangular
matrices, and this man proved the central limit theorem independently by using the Gaussian error function.
This man proved that no algorithm could determine whether or not a program would run forever or stop,
finding that the halting problem is undecidable. A hypothesis named for Church and this man states that no
possible computing device can be more powerful than his namesake machine. For 10 points, name this
British computer scientist whose namesake test determines whether or not computers can behave like
humans.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
This man showed that Lie groups could be approximated by finite groups and independently proved the
central limit theorem using the Gaussian error function. His namesake "degree" is the level of unsolvability
of a set of natural numbers, and this man posited that there is no way to determine whether a given program-
input combination will terminate, thus showing the halting problem is undecidable. Computable functions
can be computed by constructs like the "busy beaver" in a certain thesis named for Church and this man.
For 10 points, name this British computer scientist, the namesake of a test of computer intelligence and a set
of machines on which that test can be applied.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
Post's problem deals with the existence of intermediate value's of this man's namesake degrees. This
man's namesake tarpit refers to the inability to get past the equivalence of processing systems. His work on
the Entscheidungsproblem lead to his notion of computable numbers. That work also lead to his discovery
of the undecidability of the halting problem. The construct with which he's most associated has an infinite
tape and is used as a model of computation. For 10 points, name this English computer scientist whose
namesake test is designed to determine if humans can successfully mimic human behavior and the inventor
of a namesake type of machine.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
In a dissertation, this man independently proved the central limit theorem using the Gaussian error function
and later showed that Lie groups could be approximated from finite groups. He determined that no solution
exists to determine whether a given program-input combination will terminate, thus deeming the halting
problem undecidable. Any computable function can be computed by constructs like the "busy beaver" and
other such machines in a certain thesis named for Church and this man. For 10 points, name this British
computer scientist, who lends his name to a test for computer intelligence applicable to his namesake
machines.
ANSWER: Alan Matheson Turing
One of the less appreciated contributions of this man was the reaction-diffusion model that laid the
foundation for studies of morphogen gradients in developmental biology. He introduced a technique for
factorizing a square matrix into a product of lower and upper triangular matrices. With an American thinker,
he showed that there is no definite method to test whether a mathematical problem is provable in a solution
to the decision problem. The Chinese Room argument is a hypothetical object capable of passing a test
named for him which determines the intelligence of machines. For 10 points, identify this thinker whose
namesake machine which consists of an infinite tape and is simplified model of a computer.
ANSWER: Alan Turing
One construct that has an equivalent function to this mathematical model, but is governed by the Cohen-
Kung theorem and makes uses of a two dimensional grid is called Langton's Ant. Penrose's The Emperor's
New Mind discusses the language-accepting capabilities of this model, which is often specified using a 7-
tuple. This model is equivalent to an unrestricted grammar, a pushdown automaton with two stacks or one
queue. It is also specified in the same way as a linear bounded automaton, but there is no space constriction
requirement. This model consists of a state control, a read and writing head and a sequence of blank infinite
cells used for writing. For 10 points, name this hypothetical device that is believed to be able to simulate all
modern computers, named for an English mathematician.
ANSWER: Turing machine
Hao Wang used the letter "B" to indicate a simplified variety of these objects, while Martin Davis appended
Emil Post's name to another reduced variety of them. One version of these objects features a black box with
the capability to decide any problem in a single operation called an oracle, while Tibor Rado developed a
function to determine the maximum operational time of one of them called the "busy beaver." They are
formally defined as seven-tuples that contain a partial "transition" function that directs their heads right and
left on their tapes. For 10 points, identify these theoretical devices used to represent computational logic,
named for a computer scientist who also names a test for artificial intelligence.
ANSWER: Turing machines
Emil Post modified one of these constructs to use a symbol space and a two-way infinite sequence of boxes,
while another modification of these constructs use an oracle to tell it when to go after stopping at state o.
One that reads a blank symbol and halts after a time is known as the busy beaver, and one of these
constructs exists for every terminating algorithm according to the thesis of their namesake and Church.
Consisting of a table, a read head, and a tape, FTP, name these simple constructs, named for the guy who
decoded the German Enigma cypher and killed himself with a poisoned apple.
ANSWER: Turing machine
A class of these that uses the most resources possible given some constraints and eventually stops is known
as a busy beaver. They were posited to examine the so-called Entscheidungsproblem, which is reducible to
the question of whether a given one will eventually halt given some input, a question that their namesake
showed to be un-decidable. There exists one of these to calculate each computable function according to a
thesis named for Alonzo Church and their namesake, so any computer may be modeled as one of these. For
10 points, name these theoretical models of computers consisting of a tape, a read/write head, and a state
register and that are named for an English computing pioneer.
ANSWER: Turing machines
This theoretical construct was first described as a response to Hilbert's Entscheidungs-problem 
[en-CHYEduhngs-problem], which asked if mathematical propositions were in general decidable. Its answer, a
negative, was demonstrated through a diagonal argument similar to Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. To
answer it, the concepts of decidability and computation had to be formalized, and in doing so its namesake
first described it. In its most basic form, it can be visualized as a head moving along a tape, reading and
writing symbols. FTP, name this device, theorized by a British mathematician in 1936, that is equivalent to
any computer.
ANSWER: Turing machine
A two-dimensional variant of this model found in the game of life is known as Langton's ant.
Savitch's theorem guarantees that adding non-determinism to these entities does not improve their
ability to save space. For partial functions, Rice's theorem states that these items cannot find their
non-trivial properties in a finite amount of time. Their namesake showed that the halting problem
for them is undecidable. A thesis partially named for Alonzo (*) Church states that all reasonable
models of computation can be simplified to this one. Consisting of a read-write head and a finite state
machine, it is able to manipulate symbols on an infinite tape. For 10 points, name this model of
computation developed by a namesake British computer scientist.
ANSWER: Turing machines
By Rice's Theorem, all nontrivial properties of the set of languages accepted by these objects are
undecidable. They are 7-tuples that include a transition function that maps a state and input symbol pair to a
triple consisting of a new state, a new symbol, and a direction. Modifications to these objects include multi-
track and multi-tape versions. They can be visualized as a read/write head moving along an infinitely long
input/output tape. They cannot decide the halting problem, but all computable functions can be computed
by one according to a thesis co-named for Church. For 10 points, what are these theoretical machines
named for a British mathematician and code-breaker?
ANSWER: Turing Machines
The Wang encoding links these constructs to the class of recursive functions, which Godel had earlier
proved to be equivalent to the lambda calculus. For a given number of states, the one that produces the most
ones is known as a busy beaver. Their theorizer determined that it is not possible to know in advance
whether one of these will run forever. They consist of an infinite tape, a read/write head, and a finite list of
instructions. For 10 points, name these theoretical primitive computers, named for the cracker of the
Enigma code, which can compute anything that is computable.
ANSWER: Turing machines
Hennie and Stearns proved more complex forms of these mathematical constructs were at most log
T more efficient. The "o" variant of these constructs rely on an outside oracle. These constructs
correspond to type 0 grammars, and they were put forth in a paper about the Entscheidungsproblem
(ent-SHY-dungs-proh-blem). When they can have more than one rule at each stage, they are called
(*) non-deterministic. The question of whether an arbitrary one of these objects ever stops in called the
halting problem. These objects have a read-write head and an infinitely long tape, while universal ones can
run any known algorithm. For 10 points, name these models of computation devised by a British computer
scientist.
ANSWER: Turing Machines
Robert French proposed the Category Rating Game as an alternative for this entity, and another researcher
criticized this entity using another entity known as Blockhead. John Searle developed the Chinese Room
Experiment to question the validity of this entity, while the Loebner Competition rewards programs such as
ELIZA and ALICE that attempt to meet this criterion. An entity can pass this test if an interrogator believes
that it is human 70% of the time while performing a five-minute imitation test. For 10 points, name this test
developed by its namesake British computer scientist that determines if a machine is intelligent.
ANSWER: Turing test [or Turing machine]
The tangent of the quantity pi over this number equals two minus the square root of three. The Platonic
solid with this number of faces has twenty vertices, and of all the Platonic solids, the one with this number
of faces has the faces which each have the most sides. This is the number of edges on a cube, and this is the
smallest whole number that is evenly divisible by all of the numbers one through four. Identify this number
equal to the number of sides of a dodecagon.
ANSWER: twelve
This number is the lowest allowed branch label for Dynkin diagrams. This number is the order of the
smallest finite field. The continuum hypothesis states that there is no cardinal number between aleph-null
and this number raised to the power of aleph-null. An idempotent matrix raised to this power equals itself.
The zeta function for this value converges to pi squared over six. The Gauss-Markov theorem shows under
certain conditions that minimizing the sum of residuals raised to this power gives the best linear unbiased
estimator. For convex polyhedra, the number of vertices minus edges plus number of faces is equal to this
number. For 10 points, identify this degree of polynomials that can be solved with the quadratic equation.
ANSWER: two
For a Mobius transformation onto the sphere, there are this many fixed points. For the function
at the center of the Collatz Conjecture, inputting the value of four will yield this result. Disjoint
neighborhoods exist for any pairs of distinct spaces according to the separability axiom of this
number. This is the smallest known Sophie Germain prime. A vertex in the simple, but complete "K
sub 3" graph will have this many edges that (*) connect it to another vertex. The Euler characteristic of a
convex polyhedron is this value; that's because the number of vertices plus faces minus edges must equal
this value. A prime number that is one less than a power of this number is a Mersenne prime. For 10 points,
name this only even prime number.
ANSWER: two
This is the number of variables that the Ackermann function takes. Euler's formula states that the number
of vertices, minus the number of edges, plus the number of faces of any convex polyhedron is equal to this
number. This is the only number for which the reciprocals of its powers sum to the number itself. This is the
highest number x at which a to the x plus b to the x can equal c to the x, according to Fermat's Last
Theorem.
It is the third number in the Fibonacci series. For 10 points, name this number, the only even prime.
ANSWER: two
A mathematical ring consists of a set and this many operations. This is the smallest positive exponent in the
Taylor series expansion of cosine. Mersenne primes are one less than a power of this number. This number
is the sum of the infinite series one plus one-half plus one-fourth plus one-eighth and so on. The
multivariable function f equals x times y plus one has this degree, as do all quadratic polynomials. For 10
points, identify this prime number, the base of the binary system, which divides all even numbers.
ANSWER: two
This number appears as the exponent in Legendre's Conjecture, which states that there is always a prime
number between this power of n and this power of n + 1. Chebyshev proved that there is always a prime
number between n and this number times n, a statement known as Bertrand's Postulate. Primes which are
one less than a power of this number are of the (*) Mersenne type, and primes differing by this amount are
referred to as twins. This is the number of positive integer factors that any prime number has. For ten points,
identify this smallest prime number.
ANSWER: two (2)
Bertrand's Postulate claims that there is always a prime between a positive integer and this number
times that integer. The Euler characteristic of planar graphs and polyhedra is this number, meaning
the number of faces plus vertices minus (*) edges is this number. An n-dimensional cube has this number
to the power of n vertices, and Mersenne primes are one less than a power of it. This is the largest number
equal to its own factorial, and the square root of this integer is the hypotenuse of an isosceles right triangle
with side length one. For ten points, what is this only even prime number?
ANSWER: Two
Primes of the form this number to the nth minus one power are known as Mersenne primes. This
is the highest integer that satisfies the equation in Fermat's last theorem. It is the Euler characteristic
of all the Platonic solids. Polynomials of this degree have a discriminant of (*) b squared minus four a
c. The sum of cosine to this power and sine to this power is equal to one.It is the third Fibonacci number
and is the base of the binary number system. For 10 points, name this only even prime.
ANSWER: two
This number is the output of the third and fifth terms in the sequence of Perrin numbers. An
equation of this degree discovered by Euler's first 40 inputs are all prime. For all convex polyhedra,
this number is the polyhedron's Euler characteristic. A prime number that is one less than the square of a
power of this number is the definition of a Mersenne prime. X equals negative b plus minus the square root
of b squared minus four A C is part of a formula to find the roots of a polynomial of this degree. For 10
points, name this number that is the number of dimensions of planes in R-3, the degree of a quadratic, and
the first even number.
ANSWER: two
This is the Nakamura number of a game with seven players where the subsets of size at least three are the
coalitions. It is the largest number of chips one can bet in a round of Kuhn poker. The product of the
unitless Paasche and Laspeyres price indices gives this power of the Fisher index. The Bertrand and
Cournot models govern behavior of this many actors, while a classical Edgeworth Box includes this many
types of goods and also this many individuals. At most this number of fairness criteria are satisfied at once
by a rank-order voting system according to Arrow's impossibility theorem. In his second Prisoner's
Dilemma tournament, Robert Axelrod used a strategy responding with a "tit" for this many "tats." It is the
number of pure strategy Nash equilibria in Chicken, as well as in Battle of the Sexes. For 10 points, identify
this number, the amount of players in the Prisoner's Dilemma.
ANSWER: two
This is the number of variables that the Ackermann function takes. Euler's formula states that the number
of vertices, minus the number of edges, plus the number of faces of any convex polyhedron is equal to this
number. This is the only number for which the reciprocals of its powers sum to the number itself. This is the
highest number x at which a to the x plus b to the x can equal c to the x, according to Fermat's Last
Theorem. It is the third number in the Fibonacci series. For 10 points, name this number, the only even
prime.
ANSWER: two
Mersenne primes are one less than powers of this number. If taking the derivative of a function this
many times at a point gives a result of zero, and the first derivative changes signs, the point is an
inflection point. For a convex polyhedron, this is the Euler [OY-lur] characteristic, which means
that it equals the number of vertices minus edges plus faces. In graph theory, this is the number of
vertices connected by an edge. Polynomial equations with this degree are called quadratics. Name
this smallest prime number, multiples of which form the set of even numbers.
ANSWER: two
A curve that has torsion zero everywhere lies in this many dimensions. The Hilbert and Peano curves
have a Hausdorff dimension of this. A trivial statement about spheres of this many dimensions is also
true for the dimension one greater than this one by the Poincare conjecture. An Argand diagram
requires this many dimensions, since the (*) complex numbers are a vector space of this many
dimensions over the reals. A manifold of this many dimensions is called a surface. Polygons and polar
coordinates exist in this many dimensions, and objects of this many dimensions have a volume of zero, as
they have no depth. For 10 points, give the number of dimensions of a plane.
ANSWER: two dimensions
One problem in this computational complexity class is the problem of determining the triviality of a
fundamental group of a finite simplicial complex. This is the complexity class of the problem of
determining the minimum number of bits needed to encode a string; that value is the Kolmogorov
Complexity. One problem in this decision class imagines two lists of words over an alphabet and asks
if a sequence of values from the lists can be made using the same indices. (*) Yuri Matiyasevich
determined that the problem of solving Diophantine equations is in this complexity class. This complexity
class contains the post correspondence problem and the problem of determining whether a Turing machine
will halt given an arbitrary input. For 10 points, name this kind of problem exemplified by the halting
problem, for which no problem is guaranteed to produce a yes or no answer.
ANSWER: undecidable
One problem in this class involves determining if dominoes can be configured so that the
concatenation of strings along their tops matches the one along their bottoms and is known as the
Post correspondence problem. One problem in this class is related to Chaitin's constant and asks
whether a given Turing machine, given an input, will ever return a definite answer, known as the halting
problem. Objects with this property can be framed as subsets of natural numbers that can't be reproduced by
an algorithm. For 10 points, name this kind of problem such that no single algorithm can give the correct
binary answer for all possible inputs.
ANSWER: undecidable
The expected value for the kth order statistic for this distribution is equal to k divided by quantity n
plus one. The problem of estimating an extremum of this distribution using sampling is called the
German Tank problem. This distribution is the maximal entropy one among all that are supported
within a particular interval. The Pareto distribution is the conjugate prior of this distribution. If the
null hypothesis is true for a continuous test statistic, the (*) p value follows this distribution. The
variance of this distribution is equal to one-twelfth times the square of the quantity b minus a, and its
probability density function is equal to one over the length of the interval within the interval and zero
outside of it. For 10 points, name this distribution followed by a single dice roll or coin flip, in which every
value within the range is equally likely.
ANSWER: uniform distribution
Maximum-cardinality matching was one of the intended applications of Gabow and Tarjan's linear
time algorithm for doing this when the pattern of application is known ahead of time. The time of
doing this can be decreased in a series of m operations including n make-set operations to n log n by a
weighted heuristic of this for one type of linked list based collection of sets. By creating a new (*) start
state and then using epsilon transitions to link the new start state to the old ones, one can create a non-
deterministic finite state automata to prove that regular languages are closed under this operation. This is
often paired with the find operation for disjoint dataypes. A set is unchanged when this operation is applied
to it and the empty set. For 10 points, name this set operation that for sets A and B returns a set with all
items that are inclusively in A or B and therefore contrasts with intersection.
ANSWER: union
The axiom of this concept states that for any set there exists a set whose elements are the elements of the
elements of the first set. The unsorted and usual types of this operation remove repetition from a list, while
the discriminated or disjoint type of this create an index giving information about the source of each
element. The symmetric difference gives a subset of the result of this operation. When this operation is
applied to two sets, the resulting cardinality is at least the higher cardinality of the two original sets and at
most the sum of the cardinalities. The inclusion-exclusion principle states that the cardinality of this is the
sum of the cardinalities of the inputs, minus the cardinality of the intersection. Name this operation that
gives all the elements that are in either or both of the two input sets.
ANSWER: union
Devices that use this standard are grouped into classes such as human interface device and mass
storage. Variants of this standard include "mini" and "micro." In 2008, this standard was updated
to version 3.0. The symbol used by this standard, which resembles (*) Neptune's trident and ends in a
circle, triangle and square, must be embossed on the top of its connectors. For 10 points, identify this
interface standard commonly used by keyboards, mice and flash drives.
ANSWER: USB [or Universal Serial Bus]
A recent upgrade to this specification added SuperSpeed mode. The connector types include type A and
B along with mini and micro connectors. Hubs for this allow a computer to connect to at most 127 devices.
Along with data, Power can be transfered to devices through this. Most computers made today have the 2.0
version of this, and 3.0 is starting to be deployed. For 10 points, name this type of communication port and
specification that is used to connect computers to peripherals such as printers, flash drives, and MP3
players.
ANSWER: USB [Universal Serial Bus]
On this type of port devices can use bulk, interrupt, or isochronous (eye-SOCK-row-ness) data transfer
modes. For standard connectors its first and fourth pins are used for power while the other two are used for
data. The maximum transfer speed is four-hundred eighty megabits per second for the 2.0 standard and
nearly five gigabits per second for the 3.0 standard. For 10 points, name this standard that defines
connections used by peripherals such as flash drives and mice.
ANSWER: USB [or Universal Serial Bus]
The keyword auto is used with these things. These things can be passed to functions using the strategies
call-by-value or call-by-reference. Camel case and Hungarian notation are two ways to name these things.
When they are only available inside certain functions, instead of globally, their scope is said to be local.
Statically typed languages require that these things have their type identified when they are declared; those
types include int and float. Identify these storage locations for data that have a symbolic name.
ANSWER: variables
Apps Hungarian was a system used mainly for these things. These things can be shadowed if they
have the same designation. They can be passed by reference so that the original is changed, even
outside of its scope. Static ones extend across the lifetime of a program. Although they are not
functions, many languages require that the (*) data type of these things be specified when they are
declared. For 10 points, identify these symbols associated with a storage location that stand in for values in
a computer program.
ANSWER: variables
The Bienayme [byen-ae-may] formula states that two values of this quantity can be added to find the new
value when two uncorrelated random variables are added or subtracted. In the central limit theorem, this
variable is divided by the number of samples. This quantity is equal to the expected value of the quantity
variable squared, end quantity, minus the expected value squared. In a Poisson [pwie-sone] distribution, this
quantity equals the expected value. The units of this quantity are found by squaring the units of the variable.
Name this measure of spread whose square root equals standard deviation.
ANSWER: variance
In factor analysis, the sum of the squares of the common factor loadings for a variable, or communality,
is how much of this value is shared with other variables. An assumption about the homogeneity of this
measure can be evaluated using Hartley's F-max test. This measure is conventionally defined as the
expected value of the square of a random variable minus the square of the expected value of a random
variable, or the second moment of the distribution minus the square of the mean. The coefficient of
determination, or R2, is the percentage of this value for one variable that is accounted for by this value for
another variable. For 10 points, identify this statistical measure represented by sigma squared that is the
square of standard deviation.
ANSWER: variance
The square of this quantity is used in the denominator of classical calculations of kurtosis, which is
supposed to measure the peakedness of a distribution, and this quantity is known as the second moment
about the mean. In a Poisson (pwah-SOHN) distribution, this quantity is equal to the mean. For a set of
numbers, this quantity is equal to the expected value of the squares of the numbers minus the square of the
expected values. If all of the numbers in a list are multiplied by a constant, this quantity gets multiplied by
that factor squared. Name this quantity, the average of the squares of the deviations, whose square root
equals the standard deviation.
ANSWER: sample variance [accept second moment or second cumulant before "moment"; do not accept or prompt on word forms]
A set of these objects is the input to the Gram-Schmidt process. A set of these objects can be a "basis" if
all elements of the set are linearly independent. In Cartesian (car-TEE-shun) space, i, j, and k are used to
represent the "unit" variety of these objects. They can be thought of as one-dimensional matrices
(MAY-truh-sees), and the dot product and cross product are defined over these objects. For 10 points, name
these mathematical objects that consist of a magnitude and a direction and are contrasted with scalars.
ANSWER: vectors [or linearly-independent vectors; prompt on matrices before it is read]
This description is applied to bosons with a spin of 1, since their spin states transform like one of these
things. One class of these objects is classified as either spacelike, timelike, or null. One operation on one of
these things is set equal to zero in Gauss's law for magnetism; that operation is called "divergence", or "del
dot". A basis for these things is typically denoted "i hat, j hat, k hat" in rectangular coordinates. The cross
product of two of these things yields another one of these things, and addition on them is performed "tip to
tail". For 10 points, give this name for a mathematical object with a magnitude and a direction, often
expressed as tuples of scalars.
ANSWER: vectors [or vector fields; or three-vectors; accept four-vectors; accept unit vectors]
In x86, a table of these of interrupts is stored starting at address zero. In the Flynn classification, the
instructions operating on these are of the SIMD type. In the C++ STL, the class by this name is essentially
a dynamic array. This type of graphics is contrasted to raster or bitmaps images and the standard for this
type of graphics is called SVG. For 10 points, name this word that also describes mathematical entities that
have direction and magnitude, thus contrasting with scalars.
ANSWER: vectors
In distributed systems, this type of clock is an array of logical clocks passed between the processes.
Cortes and Vapnik first created a way of orienting a hyperplane to maximize the margin,
implementing a binary linear classifier referred to as "machines" of this type. SIMD instructions are
usually used to operate on data in these data structures. In C++, this is a template for a dynamic
sequence that can efficiently add or remove elements (*) only from its end. They are used to define paths
in the EPS and SVG formats, allowing them to be scaled without losing quality, thus naming a type of
graphics contrasted with raster graphics. For 10 points, identify this computer science term often applied to
one-dimensional arrays.
ANSWER: vectors [or support vectors]
Performing the triple product on three of these entities gives the volume of a parallelepiped. The
right hand rule can be used when performing an operation on them, and these entities can be added
using the (*) parallelogram rule. Two of them are perpendicular if their dot product equals zero. For 10
points, name these mathematical entities that have both magnitude and direction and are contrasted with
scalars.
ANSWER: vectors
The set of these mathematical entities defining a space is called a "basis." These entities can be treated
as rank one tensors or as one-dimensional matrices. Two of these are orthogonal when their product is 0.
Operations performed on these objects include the dot product and cross product. For 10 points, name these
mathematical objects that have both magnitude and direction and are contrasted with scalars.
ANSWER: vectors
The Gram-Schmidt process applies a series of projections to these objects. A certain operation on three of
these gives the volume of a parallelepiped. One operation on these objects is anti-commutative, and two of
these are orthogonal if another operation yields zero; those operations are the cross and dot products.
Sometimes written as a one-column matrix, the sum of two of these can be represented as the diagonal of a
parallelogram. Contrasted with scalars, for 10 points, name these mathematical objects that have both
magnitude and direction.
ANSWER: vectors [accept vector quantities, do not accept "vector fields"]
One of these objects is coordinate system invariant if its components contra-vary with the change of
basis. Three of them form the standard basis for a three-dimensional Euclidean space. They can be added
using the parallelogram rule, and the right-hand rule is used to determine the direction of the cross product
of two of them. They also have a dot product, the result of which is a scalar. For 10 points, name these
objects which have both magnitude and direction.
ANSWER: vectors
In the Frenet-Serret [freh-nay sair-ay] formulas, a matrix containing curvature and torsion is multiplied by a
matrix containing three of these, the last of which is the binormal [bye-NOR-mul]. The binormal type is
found by using the tangent and normal types. The spaces named after these are defined by a basis consisting
of a set of them. These can be normalized by dividing them by their length, resulting in one of these that has
a magnitude of one. These are used to represent several basic physical quantities such as force, velocity, and
displacement. Name these structures that have a magnitude and direction, often contrasted with scalars.
ANSWER: vectors
In mathematics, spaces associated with these objects are modules over a field, and may have inner products.
In computer programming, these are C++ data structures which function as dynamic arrays. The subset of
computer graphics named after these objects uses mathematical primitives to render objects, while in
biology they are hosts which carry and transmit an infectious agent. Impulse, momentum, and force, but not
speed are physical examples of, for ten points, these objects, which in mathematics commonly have both
direction and magnitude and may be drawn as arrows.
ANSWER: vectors
The quotient of these constructs can be defined using quaternions (kwa-TER-nee-uhns), and a linearly
independent collection of these objects that spans a space forms a basis. These have tensor rank one, and
operators named after these-also called differential operators-are represented by the del symbol. A triple
product combining three of these is used to find the volume of a parallelepiped (paar-uh-LEL-luh-pai-ped);
that triple product combines the two common methods of their multiplication, one of which is
anticommutative and the other of which outputs a real number. Name these entities combined using dot or
cross products, which represent a magnitude and a direction.
ANSWER: vectors
In the study of graphics, an object with this name functions as the complement to a raster. The CauchSchwarz inequality concerns the multiplication of two of these objects. The triangle inequality concerns the
addition of these objects. These objects sum is found by the parallelogram rule. These generalizations of
numbers are the inputs of a cross product and a dot product, and many of them feature x,y, and z
components. For 10 points, name these quantities with a magnitude and direction, distinguished from
scalars.
ANSWER: vectors
Four-dimensional versions of these objects make up a Minkowski space. The parallelogram rule is used
for adding these objects. One operation involving them is only valid in three or seven dimensions, and
another operation involving them uses the product of the lengths of two of them and the cosine of the angle
between them. Those operations are the cross product and the dot product. For 10 points, name these
objects which have both magnitude and direction, unlike scalars.
ANSWER: vectors
According to one theorem, the Radon-Hurwitz numbers govern how many of these that are non-zero
can be mapped to an n-sphere. For a Riemannian metric, critical points are where these vanish when
mapped from a smooth function. For a symplectic manifold, one can define the Hamiltonian type of
these constructs from an energy function. It is impossible to define a continuous and non-zero one of
these constructs tangent to an even dimensional (*) n-sphere according to the hairy ball theorem. Ones
with vanishing curl are said to be irrotational and conservative; such ones can be derived by taking the
gradient of a scalar potential function. For 10 points, name these topological constructs that assign a length
and direction over all points of a subset of Euclidean space.
ANSWER: vector fields [prompt "fields."]
This mathematical construction when of order seven can be drawn in a rosette figure called "Victoria". The
version of order three can be constructed with circles so that the central region is a Reuleaux triangle. In
general, the construction of order n will partition the plane into 2^n (2 to the n) unique regions. Used in a
season four episode of Numb3rs to narrow down a list of suspects, name this mathematical construction
used to illustrate unions and intersections of sets.
ANSWER: Venn Diagram
A closed curve has at least four of these entities, at which the derivative of curvature equals zero. In
graph theory, edges begin and end at these entities, which are also called (*) nodes. A hyperbola has
two of these points on its major axis, while a parabola has one of these points on its axis of symmetry. For
10 points, give this mathematical term for a point at which the sides of a polygon intersect.
ANSWER: vertex or vertices (prompt on nodes before "nodes" is read)
If a line with this property is tangent to a curve at point A, the curve is not differentiable at A. The
tangent function's asymptotes are this type of line. If a line of this type passes through the graph of a
relation twice, the relation is (*) not a function, which is called the namesake "test" of this type of line.
For 10 points, give this term that describes lines like x=3, which have undefined slope and are perpendicular
to horizontal lines.
ANSWER: vertical line(s)
Denali makes use of a process termed para this to run x86 architecture on certain machines advanced by
Popek and Goldberg. Examples of those machines described by this adjective include Java Runtime
Environment, which sends commands and receives outputs from the Java software, and the memory of this
type frees up RAM by moving unused physical memory to the hard disk. Certain entities described by this
adjective are formed by reflections in all convex mirrors, and, when an object is within the focal length,
converging lenses also lead to those images described by this adjective. For 10 points, identify this
adjective, which contrasts with real images in optics and names a type of technology that simulates the feel
of a fake alternate world called its namesake reality.
ANSWER: virtual [accept word forms like virtualization]
ATM uses this type of circuit where a path is setup ahead of time and packet sequence is
preserved. Multiprogramming is made easier through a system using address translation through
page tables, which is called this type of memory. That system abstracts the physical memory of the
system. Programs written for computer architectures not physically present can be executed by this
type of (*) machine. That type of machine is used by Java. For 10 points, name this word that when
combined with reality means a world that exists only within a computer.
ANSWER: virtual
Fred Cohen proved in 1984 that no algorithm exists to detect these entities. Veith Risak created an
assembly language variant of this entity that was based on theories put for in a 1966 paper by John von
Neumann. That paper introduced the theory of self-replicating automata. In the 1980s, a proof-of-concept
version of this entity notably displayed the message "catch me if you can!" In addition to "Creeper", a more
recent type of this entity has affected over one million computers and is called "Gozi". For 10 points,
identify these computer programs that are targeted by Kaspersky Lab and McAfee, and which behave in a
manner similar to their biological counterparts.
ANSWER: computer viruses [or computer worms; or malware; or malicious computer programs ; or other types of malicious "ware"]
This programming language originated as a drag-and-drop shell prototype called Tripod, which did not
feature a programmable language. The company that now owns it bought Tripod from its designer, added a
simple language, and renamed it Ruby and later Thunder, the direct predecessor to this language. The
heading of a method in this language may include Sub or Function after the more standard Public and
Private. For loops are declared using the keywords "For" and "To," or alternatively "For Each," and "If"
statements must terminate with an "End If." For 10 points, name this easy-to-learn programming language
originally designed by Alan Cooper and owned by Microsoft, which is not to be confused with similarly
named Dark, REAL, and Pure languages.
ANSWER: Visual Basic
Cavalieri's theorem in three dimensions lays stipulations for two regions having equal values for this
quantity. The doubling of this quantity is the subject of the Banach-Tarski paradox. This quantity
for a parallelepiped can be calculated by taking the cross product of two vectors and then taking the
dot product with a third vector. This quantity for a (*) Klein bottle is zero, and Gabriel's horn has a
finite value for it. This quantity can be computed for solids of revolution by the shell and washer methods,
and it is equal to 4/3 pi r^3 for a sphere. For 10 points, name this quantity, the amount of space enclosed by
some boundary, which can be measured in meters cubed or liters.
ANSWER: Volume
One way to combat this structure's namesake problem, first identified by John Backus as "pushing words
back and forth" is to have separate pathways and storage for instructions and data; this fix is named for the
institution that designed the Mark I implementing it, Harvard University. That namesake bottleneck results
due to speed limitations of transfer between storage and processing. Designed as an alternative to fixed
computing, name this computing architecture that involves a memory unit to store instructions and data, an
arithmetic logic unit to perform operations, a control unit, and input/output units, and is, for 10 points, the
basis of most modern-day computers.
ANSWER: Von Neumann architecture [or Stored-program computer]
With an Italian, this mathematician names the result that the image of a subset of a complex plane under
a function with an essential singularity in that subset will be dense in the complex plane. This
non-American mathematician partially names a theorem which states that every continuous function on a
closed interval can be uniformly approximated, arbitrarily closely, by a polynomial. He is the second
namesake of a theorem stating that a bounded and closed subset of R-n is sequentially compact. He used
the concept of uniform convergence to create the rigorous definition of continuity and revised Cauchy's
imprecise epsilon-delta definition of a limit. For 10 points, identify this German who names a theorem with
Bolzano and discovered a function that is everywhere continuous but nowhere differentiable.
ANSWER: Karl Weierstrass
To manage the intentions of subprocesses, Dekker's Algorithm for mutual exclusion uses this command,
first introduced in the ALGOL language. Its indefinite termination can be used to create an infinite program,
as when its test condition is set to "true". This can be made into a pre-test structure by combining it with
"do", and in Perl it can be replaced with "until". A conditional control structure that executes a block of code
as long as its test condition holds, FTP, identify this loop, a complement to "for".
ANSWER: while loop
PMD and PLCP are two sublayers of this technology's physical layer. This technology's IBSS mode
allows for the creation of ad-hoc systems, but most implementations are based on infrastructure mode.
Security for this technology can be provided by WPA. SSIDs are used to differentiate individual structures
in this technology. The standards for this type of connection include a, b, g, and 802.11n. For 10 points,
name this wireless local area network technology used in homes and coffee shops.
ANSWER: Wi-Fi [or Wireless Fidelity; or 802.11 until it is read; prompt on wireless local area network; prompt on WLAN]
This person and Richard Taylor co-authored the article "Ring-Theoretic Properties of Certain Hecke
[HECK-eh] Algebras." Helped by a paper on the Eisenstein ideal by Barry Mazur [MAY-zur], this person
matched modular forms to elliptic curves. That work was noteworthy because of a proof of the epsilon
conjecture by Ken Ribet [RIH-bet], which increased the notoriety of the Taniyama-Shimura [tah-nee-yahmah 
shee-muh-rah] conjecture. Name this man who proved that there are no integer nonzero solutions to
a^n+b^n=c^n [a to the n plus b to the n equals c to the n] for n greater than two, which is Fermat's [fehr-mah-s]
Last Theorem.
ANSWER: Andrew Wiles
Gabe Newell called this platform's store a threat to Steam, and it was announced at Computex 2011.
Gadgets were removed from this platform, and this product is the first of its kind to implement universal
searching from anywhere within an application, true inter-program multitasking, and a built-in file system
explorer. USB 3.0 is natively supported on this platform, as is 3D Printing. This platform allows its users to
see a graph of file transfer speed, and clicking a monitor's corner in this operating system allows users to
switch between apps and activate a "Charms" bar. For 10 points, name this operating system whose Start
screen features live tiles, recently created by Microsoft.
ANSWER: Windows 8.1 [or Windows NT 6.2; or Windows NT 6.3; prompt on "Windows" or "Window NT" or "Windows RT"]
Peter Gutmann published a paper about a cost analysis of content protection in this software product. The
effect of negative perceptions of this software was measured when this software was rebranded as Mojave.
A new feature in this software product operates under the principle of least privilege and prompts the
administrator to perform certain actions; that feature is known as User Account Control. Originally
codenamed Longhorn and released in 2007, name this predecessor to version 7 of an operating system
produced by Microsoft.
ANSWER: Microsoft Windows Vista (prompt Vista or Microsoft Windows; accept Windows Longhorn and prompt Longhorn before read; accept Windows Mojave and prompt Mojave before read)
The n-sample location test can be built up as a series of tests of this type because the one-sample
location test is always exactly of this type. A priori, this procedure requires knowledge of the
population variance, an assumption relaxed in a similar procedure in which the central statistic is
different by a factor of root sample size from the central statistic in this test. The statistic central to
this test is equal to the sample mean minus the assumed true mean all over the standard deviation; it
is used as a parameter in the standard normal cdf to generate a p value, the probability that the (*)
null hypothesis holds. For 10 points, name this simplest type of statistical test that is similar to the more
general t-test.
ANSWER: a z-test [prompt on significance test before "population variance"]
Bolzano's Theorem guarantees that this value is output by certain continuous functions. Rolle's Theorem
assumes that this number is the difference in the function values at the endpoints and concludes that the
derivative at some point is equal to this number. Newton's Method can be used to find points where a
function takes this value. This real number divided by itself creates an indeterminate form, in which case
L'Hopital's Rule can be used. In a definition of a derivative, h approaches this value. Local extrema occur
where a function's derivative is equal to this number. For ten points, name this number that is the slope of a
horizontal line.
ANSWER: zero
The Grothendieck pretopology named after this value posits the existence of fibered products. The
separation axiom named after this value holds for a topological space if for all pairs of distinct points,
there exists an open set containing one but not the other. That separation axiom is sometimes named
after Kolmogorov. The sphere S2 and the disc both have this genus and Euler characteristic. All
countable sets have a (*) Hausdorff Dimension equal to this value. For a well-defined metric function to
be equal to this value, both of the inputs must be the same element of the topological space. This value is
also the dimension of a point. For 10 points, identify this value, which when added to a number equals said
number.
ANSWER: zero or 0
In C and C++ (C-plus-plus), the empty string is denoted by a backslash followed by this symbol. In the
one's complement system, it has both positive and negative versions. In Java, arrays are indexed starting
with this number, and this number fills every entry in a newly instantiated array of ints. Dividing by this
number sometimes returns "NaN," or "not a number." For 10 points, identify this number which
corresponds to "false" in binary, a system which uses only it and the number one.
ANSWER: zero
In the MIPS ("mips") architecture, many ALU ("A"-"L"-"U") operations, such as add, have this as their
opcode. In "one's complement" notation there are two of these. In Unix, slash dev slash null has a
counterpart that produces these. In C++ this is equivalent to false. Arrays usually start with this index. In
digital circuits, this number corresponds to a low voltage. A common programming error, or exception, is
dividing by this number. For 10 points, name this value, which is contrasted with "one" in the binary system
used by computers.
ANSWER: zero
This is the value of a closed path integral of work in a conservative vector field. The only function whose
domain is the reals and that is both even and odd only gives this number as an output. This number is used
in the name of a game in which the total gains equal the total losses. If the product of two numbers equals
this number, then one of those numbers equals this number. This is the value of the dot product of two
perpendicular vectors, and this number is the additive identity. Name this real number that is neither
positive nor negative.
ANSWER: zero (accept equivalents)
The von Mangoldt function returns this value if the input is not a power of a prime. The Legendre
symbol returns this value if the numerator is a multiple of the prime denominator. The Mobius function
returns this value if the input is not square-free. This value is used to denote the absorbing element of a
semigroup or semiring. The Riemann zeta fuction takes this value at all negative even integers, though it is
an open question whether all of the other such values all have real part one-half. This value is returned
when a number is added to its additive inverse. For 10 points, name this only non-positive and non-negative
integer, the additive identity.
ANSWER: zero
The kernel of a linear transformation T is the set of all vectors v such that T sends v to this value.
This many odd perfect numbers have currently been discovered, and it is the value of the
determinant of a singular matrix. This is the probability of two mutually exclusive events occurring.
This number is its own (*) additive inverse, but it has no multiplicative inverse, because it is impossible to
divide by this number. This number is contained in the set of whole numbers but not in the set of natural
numbers. For ten points, what is this neither positive nor negative number which is equal to four minus
four?
ANSWER: zero (or additive identity before mention)
In the set-theory construction of the natural numbers, this number is a subset of all other natural
numbers. This number is the sum for n greater than one of the n-th roots of unity. Odd functions
always intersect the line y equals x where x has this value. Roots of a polynomial are inputs such that
the polynomial's (*) output equals this number. When positive numbers are raised to the power of this
number, the result is one. For 10 points, give this additive identity, division by which is generally
forbidden.
ANSWER: zero [or the empty set until "roots of unity" is read]
This property does not hold in the rings of integers modulo a composite number, and whether it holds
distinguishes integral domains with respect to rings. A short proof by contradiction of this property consists
of multiplying both sides of an equation by the multiplicative inverse of any factor on one side of the
equation. Often used to find solutions to polynomials of degree greater than one, this property makes the
solutions obvious once the polynomial has been factored. Name this property that states that if quantities
multiply to the additive identity then at least one of the quantities is equal to the additive identity-that is,
zero.
ANSWER: zero product property [accept logical equivalents for "property"; accept answers logically equivalent to nonexistence of zero divisors]
In the Bellare-Rogaway formulation of these techniques, which employs the random oracle model, it
can be completed in a single round because deniability does not exist; in the standard model, oneround protocols are only possible for languages in BPP. Languages for which "Las Vegas", or
perfectly-sound versions of this protocol exist are necessarily in RP, as are languages for which there
exists a deterministic verifier. This protocol was first applied to the problem of identifying quadratic
nonresidues by Goldwasser et al, who showed that one of these exists for every problem in NP. In
these protocols, there must exist a polynomial-time non-interactive simulator that is indistinguishable
from any (*) cheating strategy. For 10 points, name this cryptographic technique in which Peggy asserts the
truth of a statement to Victor without conveying any other information.
ANSWER: zero-knowledge proof [or zero-knowledge protocol; prompt on "interactive proof"]
